LOK~ABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE PUBLIC SEC'IDR IRON AND STEEL COMPANIES (RES'lRUCTORING) 
AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS BILL, 1977 
I-To be/As introduced in 10k Sabba. 7 
1. Page (1), against clause 7,-
(a) m ''property'' ~ ''properties'' 
(b) t!2.I. "tnd " ~ "and" 
2. Page (i), against clause 10,-
for "Transfer to" ~ "Transfer of" 
3. Page (1), against clause 13,-
2.!n11 "the" 
4. Page 3, in the marginal heading to clause 4,-
after "certain" j.ilsert "companie·: in" 
,. Page 4, in the marginal heading to clause 7,-
for "property" ~ ''properties'' 
6. Page 5, in the marginal heading to c1. a use 13,-
om! t "tr.e II 
7. Page 5, line 42,-
" tel:.. "a.n~ ~ "as" 
8. Page 6, in t~ marginal heading to clause 17,-
lQ.r. . "provisions " n.a4. ''Provision'' 
AgrahaYa.na 28, 1 99 (Saka) 

.. As IN'l'RODUCBD IN Loa: SABRA oM 
~, DEC lSU·, ... , 
Bill No. 152 of lIri 
1'HE PUBLIC SECTOR IRON AND STEEL COMPANIES (RESTRUC-
.1 , .. ~G),~ ,MISC;ELLANEOUS ~ROVISIONS BILL, 1977 
" ..... ., .... (.,. .. .. 
CLAVSIB 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PllJI:LlMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. "UndertakiDi,'~-lI?-ean~g of. 
CHAPTER II 
DIssoLl1TION, TRANSFER AND VESTING. OJ: UNDERTAKINGS OF CERTAIN COIDAlIDII 
" Dissolution, transfer and vesting of un~ertak.ings of certain companill 
in Integral Company... . 
5. Transfer and vesting of Kiriburu Iron Ore Mine., etc., in' Intearal 
Company. 
6. Transfer and vesting of Refractory. Plant, etc., in Bharat ReIir.c-
tories Limited.. 
7. Transfer. of immovable property of Hindustan Steel Limited to 
MetaUUl"~cal tnd 'Enitneering Consultants (india) Limited.'· 
CHAPTER III 
TRANSFER OF SHARES 
8. Transfer of shares held by Bokaro Steel Limited to Central Govem. 
ment. 
II. Transfer of ahares held by Integral C'ompany to Centra:: Govern· 
ment. 
10. Transfler to shares held by Integral Company to Bh.rat Refractori-
.. Limited. 
11. Transfer of shares held by Central Government to Integral Com-
pany. 
12. Central Government, etc., deemed to be registered iR the regilter 
of members of companies. 
13. Power of Central Government to modify the amount of paid-up 
ahare capital of Integral Company, etc., and issue of abareI. 

CHAPI'ER IV 
14. Provisions relating to oftlcers and other employees of diSIolved 
.eompani4a. 
15. Provisions relating to officers and employees of tr.Dierftc:J unit.. 
18. Provisions rela~g to direc~. 
1'1. Provision relating to auditors. 
18. Compensation for tra~er.AAt~ble. 
U~. Provident fund. 
20. GratUity. welfare and other funds. 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCIAL PaoVISJONS 
21. Provisions with respect to income-tax and IUrtax. 
22. Taxes, fees and other .char,. not payable. 
CHAPTER VI , 
.~Sa~ •. f#. ,~~, .e~ . 
. 24. Saving of legal proceedings. 
15. Power to remove dtftlcu1ttes. 
2S. Act to override the provisions 01 other lawi. 
27. P.4':"" ~ ,Ql8Ild ,~r~\,ffil.~~~ •. !o' .. ¥lQq.M!4. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SBCOND SCHEDtn..E. 

I fIlleD8. 
BlIlIi'O.'Ib of 1m 
'2' t"'r"'~ 
THE PUBLIC SJl'CTOR IRON AND STEEL COKPANlra (RESTRtTC-
'~r Alit'S MJ~totrs'PROmtbNs SILL,,1977 
A 
.BILL 
• ~ I_ t"8It1-ucNri,.., 0/ the iron. and IWfi eGM""'''' the public 
_ector ;0 CJ8 &0 .. ~ bette!' m&M~ ~- "....,. ~ in 
their working And for matters connected thereW'£th M' iftCideR.tal 
~;' 
Bs it ~ted - by Parliament in tae Twenty-e1fhth' Y_r of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
JllMPfttnrlll'l' 
j 1. (2)-1'111 Aft lllar _.~ till" PubUe _tor Ii'in' aIld Steel Com-
panies (RestructurilqJ) -and'~ Pro"",'· Act, 1"': 
1(; 
crt' It sIUdl ~ iJltG ~ on' web d'_ as' tlur Central Government 
-"i bY Jibtfff~tldti tn'the OlWferal Gazette; appoint: 
I. (J) In· w. Act" UIIl_ te .. oonWxt' ot.bentiIe reqa,iIw~-~ 
(.,' "~ day'" mean. tle' date' on \\'btcb thia Act comes 
into force; 
(b) ·'toriipahies Act'" means the Compania Act, 1.; 
(c) "corresponding unit" , in relation to,-
<i) tbe'lnteFal Company., me .... tlIat LIIlit. of the ~ 
IS' CcDpqy' which co~ to the uait of the diIIol~~­
:".17 W , uae- U'aUferrW' COmpaJlr iii whieb tht' ecmeeraeci ~ 

2 
or other employee was holding oftice beJlore the tranJfer of till· 
said unit; 
(ii) a transferee company, means that unit of a transferee 
company which corresponds to the unit of the dissolved company 
in which the concerned ofticeT or other employee was holding S 
office, before the transfer of the said unit; 
(d) "dissolved company" means a company specified in the 
First Schedule; 
(e) "Integral Company" mean'S the Steel Authority of India 
Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies 10 
Act having its registered office at New Delhi; 
(f) "transferee company" means the company to which the 
undertakings of a dissolved company or o~ a transferred unit, u the 
cue may be, stand transferred by virtue of the provisions of this Act: 
(g) "transferred company" means,-
(i) Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) 
Limited, a company formed and registered under the Compania 
Act having its registered office at Ranchi in the State of Biharj 
(ti) National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, • 
company formed and registered under the Companies Act having ao 
ita relistered oftlce at Hyderabad in the State of Andhra Pradesh; 
(iii) Hindustan .Steelworks Construction Limited. a cOmpany 
formed and registered under the Companies Act having its regis. 
tered oftlce at Calcutta in the State of West Bengal; 
(tv) Bharat !te!ractories· Limited, a company formed and 2$ 
registered under the Companies Act having its registered oftlce 
at Bokaro Steel City in the State 011 Bihar; or 
(v) India Firebricks and Insulation Company LimiteeJ, .: com· 
pany formed and registered under the Companies Act having ita 
registered office at Bombay in the State of Maharashtri; 30 
(h) "transfelTed unit" means,-:-
(i) Kiriburu Iron Ore Mines, a unit of the National Mineral 
Development Corporation Limited; 
(U) Meghabatuburu Iron Ore Project, a unit of the ·Natlonal 
Mineral Development Corporation Limited; . 35 
(iii) Ramgarh Refracwry Plant; a unit of the Hlnclustan 
. Steel Limited (situated near Ramgarh in the State of Bihar); 
, . . . 
(tv) Refractory Project, a unit of the Hindustan Steel Limit· 
ed (situated at Bhtlaf in the State of Madhya Pradesh); or' 
(v) Sillimanite Mines, a unit of the H.tAdustan Steel Limited 40 
.. (situated in the State of Meghalaya)". 
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but deftned 
In the CompanieS Act bave the meanings respectively assigned to them 
in that Act. 
S. For the purposes 01 this Act, the undertaking of a dissolved com· 45 
plJiyor of a transferred unit shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, 
leaseholds (inclUding mining leases, if any), :industrial or other Ucences, 
poWers, authorities and privileges and all ~ property. movable 6hd fmmov. 

able, including lands. buildings, works, mines, workshops, projects, smel-
ters, stores, instruments, machinery, automobiles and other vehicles, cash 
or bank balances, cash in hand, investments and book debts and all other 
rights and interests in, or ariSing out of, such property as were immedi-
~ ately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or 
control of the dissolved company or the transferred unit, as the case may 
be (whether within or without India), and all books ofi account, registers, 
maps, drawings, records of survey and all other documents of whatever 
nature relating thereto, and shall also be deemed to include all borrow-
10 inga, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind of the dissolved com-
pany or the transferred unit. 
Explanaticm-Reference in this section to an undertaking of a trans-
ferred unit shall be deemed to be a reference to the undertaking of the 
company of which that f()rms a unit as is relatable to it as if it were a 
ISleparate company. 
CHAPTER II 
DIssoLUTION, TRANSFER AND VESTING ()IJI' UNDERTAKINGS OF CERTAIN COMPANJI!'.S 
,. On the appointed day, the companies specified in the First Schedule 
Bhall stand dissolved and subject to the provisions of sections 6 and '7, all 
JOtbe undertakings of such companies shall stand transferred to, and vest 
In, the Integral Company. 
5. On the appointed day, the undertakings of the following transferred 
units shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Integral Company, 
namely:-
25 (4) Kiriburu Iron Ore Mines, a unit of the National Mineral" 
Development Corporation Limited, and 
(b) Meghahatuburu Iron Ore Project. a unit of the National 
Mineral Development Corporation Limited. 
I. (1) On the appointed day, the undertakings of the following trans-
30ferred units shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Bharat Refrilctories 
LImited, namely:-
(4) Ramgarh Refractory Plant of the Hindustan Steel Limited 
(situated near Ramgarh in the State of Bihar), 
(b) Sillimanite Mines o~ the Hindustan Steel Limited (situated 
3' in the State of Meghalaya), and 
(e) Refractory Project of the Hindustan Steel Limited (situat-
ed at Bhtlai in the State of Madhya Pradesh). 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, as 
from the appointed day, the registered office of the Bharat Refractories 
~Limited shall stand transferred from Bokaro Steel City in the State o' 
Bihar to Bhilai in the State of Madhya Pradesh. 
DillOlu-
non. 
traufer 
anel v.t-
tn, of 
unclertak· 
too Of 
eertaln 
Int8l!'al 
CompaJl7. 
TraaIfer 
and veat-
m. of 
Kiriburu 
Iron Ore 
Min .... te 
in inte,-
ralCom-
pan),. 
TrIDlfer 
aDd. vMt-
jD' of 
Refrac-
toJ7Pluat, 
etc., in the 
Bbarat 
Hefrae. 
tori. 
LtmltecL 

'fl'ans!Cl' 
of immov-
able pro-
perty of 
Hlndustan 
Steel 
Limited, 
to 
Metallu-
l'gical and 
Engineer-
ing Con-
sultants 
(India) 
Limited, 
Transfer 
of shares 
held by 
Bokaro 
Steel 
Limited 
to Cen-
tral'Gov-
Cl'nment, 
Transfer 
Of shares 
held by' 
, Integral 
Company 
to Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment. 
Transfer 
of shar .. 
held by 
Integral 
Company 
to Dharat 
Refrac-
tories 
Limited. 
Transfer 
of shares 
held by 
Central 
Govem-' 
ment to 
Intetrll 
. CompanY-
Central 
GOVel'll-
men~.etc .• 
deemed 
to 'be 
register-
ed in the 
register 
of mem-
bers ot 
compa-
nies. 
7. On the appointed day, the right, title and interest oj the H1,nd~ 
Steel Limited in the immovable properties owned by it in Ranchi Diatriot 
of the State of Bihar, togather with liabilities and obligation. in ~ 
thereto. shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Metallurgical 'IJUi 
Engineering Consultants (India) Limited. 5 
CHAPTER III 
TRANSFER 0 .. SHARIS 
8. On the appointed day, all the shares held by the Bakaro Steel LtMt-
ed in the share capital of the Bharat Refractories Limited shall ~. 
transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government. 10 
9, On the appointed day, all the shares held by the Integral CctftireY': 
in the share capital of each of the companies specified in the ~orift 
Schedule shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government. 
10. On the appointed day, all the shares held by the Integral Company 
in the share capital of the India Firebricks and Insulation cOmpany IS 
Limited (a company fanned and registered under the Compaldel .Mt 
having its registered office at Bombay in the State o£ Maharashtra) -.u 
stand transferred to, and vest in, the Bharat Refractories Limited. 
11. On the appointed day, all the shares held by the Cdntral a.vern-
ment in the shar·e capital of the Indian Iron and Steel Company Limited 20 
(a company under the Companies Act having its reg1Jtered· Qftlae at 
Calcutta in the State of West Bengal) shall stand. transferred to, and Wit 
in, the Integral Company. 
12. The Central Government, the BharatRefraetorie. Ltm1.ted. ·or the 
Integral Company, as the case ~ay be, shall b~ deeme~, as from the 25 
appointed day, to have been regtstered in the regtster of members of the 
companies concerned as the holder of each share which· stan. tnIn8Ier-
red to, and. vested'in each of them by virtue of the provisions of aections 
8, 9, 10 or 11, as the case may be. 

U. (J) The Cen~ Government may,' from time to time, by orcler 
Jlllblilbedm the Oftlcial Gazette, specify the amount by which the paid~ 
19·share capital of the Integral Company, the Bharat Refractories Limit-
ed, the .MetallUl'gical and Engineering Consultants (India) Limited, and 
S the National Mineral Development Corporation Limited shall stand re-
dIIIaed or increued 81 a relUlt of transfer of shaa:es, undertaking. or im-
IIIOvab1e. properties, as the case may be, under the provisions of this Act. 
10 
(2) In specifying the amount under sub-section (1), the Central 
G9vernnumt shall have regard to the following factors, namely:~ 
(i) the book value of shares referred to in sections 8, 9, 10 or 
11, as the case may be, of the concernerl company, on the appninted 
day, 
(ii) the net value of the undertakings of the dissolvjd company 
and transferred unit, as on the appcinted day, and 
IS (iii) the. book value of the immovable properties owned by :lle 
Hindustan Steel Limited referred to in section 7 as on the appoinW 
day, 
as are transferred to or from the companies referred to in sub-section (1). 
(') Bvery order made under sub-section (1) shall be made withbl a 
:ao period of one year from the appointed day and any such order may take 
effect prospectively or retrospectively, but not with effect from a date 
euU. tUn the aPPointed day. 
(4) Any ortler made by the Central Government under this section 
~ ,iIlcl~de a direction for the issUe Or cancellation of appropriate num-
as ber of ~res eo as to give effect to the prOVisions of this Act. 
CHAPTER IV ' 
PRoVISIONS RELATING TO OwIcERS AND EMPLOYEIS 
14. (1) Every oftlcer (not being a director) or other employee holding 
om- immediately before the appointed day in a dissolved company in 
30 I'.~on to any undertaking of such company, other than an Qflicer or 
other employee holding such office in relation to transferred units refer-
red to in section 6, shall, as from the appointed day, continue to hold 
QfliCle ... su.ch in the corresponding unit of the Integral Company by the 
~:~W'e and upon the same terms and conditions of service and with 
35 tIM. lUne riiPti. and privileges as to retirement benefit. 8$ would have 
.. '-ible to him if the company in which he was holding oftlce 
W not been diuolved and shall continue to do 10 unless and until such 
taure and terma and c:ont\itions are duly altered. by the Integral Com~ 
pallY· 
40 (a) NotwithatandiDg anything contained in sub--section (1). lule5 
~_to the conditions of service and Standing Orders applicable to 
the officers or other employees referred. to in SUb-section (1), an imme.-
diately before the appOinted day, shall continue to apply unless and until 
they ate duly altered by the Integral Company or other authority, 88 the 
.. , .... maybe. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern~ 
ment to 
modify 
the 
amount 
of paid-
up share 
capital 
of Inte-
gral Com-
pany, etc., 
and issue 
of shares. 
Provi.ions 
relatln, ' 
to oflt. 
cers and 
other 
. employees 
pf diJ- . 
solvc~d , . 
('emptl-
nies . 

Provi-
aiou 
relatinl 
to ofBcera 
and em-
plO)'eel of 
tralllfer, 
red units. 
Provisions 
relati.nc 
to dlrec. 
ton. 
Provi-
Ilona re-
JaUnt to 
auditors. 
Compen-
sation for 
transfer 
not pay. 
abM. 
Provident 
lund. 
8 
15. (1) Every officer or other employee holding ofRce im.ri1ediately 
before the appointed day in the transferred unit shall, as 1\rom the 
appointed day, continue to be an officer or other employee of the CGrrel-
ponding unit of the transferee company by the same tenure and upon 
the same terms and conditions of service and with the same rights and 5 
pl'ivileges as to retirement benefits as would have been,-admissible to him 
If the trBBSferred unit in which he was holding oftlce hart not been trllDl-
ferred and shall continue to do SD unless and until such tenure and terms 
and conditions are duly altered by the transferee company. 
(Z) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), rules 10 
relating to the conditions of service and Standing Orders applicable to the 
·officers or other employees referrerl. to in sub-section (1), as immediately 
before the appointed day, shall continue to apply unless and until they 
are duly altered by the transferee company or other authority, 8S the 
case may be. 15 
16. (1) Every person holding office as a director of a dissolved com-
pany immediately before the appc/inted c\ay shall, on that day, cease to 
hold office as such director. 
(Z) Every person, being a di·rector in whole-time employment of a 
r\issolved company, immediately before the appointed day, shall continue 20 
to be an employee of the corresponding unit of the Integral Company 
with such designation and cn such terms and conditions as may be deter-
mined by the Integral Company. 
n. Evel-y person appOinted under s~ction 619 of the Companiea Act 
as an auditor of a dissolved company or of a transferred unit, holding as 
office immediately before the appointed day, may continue to hold o1Bce 
as such auditor in the corresponding unit of the Inte'gral Company or of 
any other transferee company, as the case may be, for the duration for 
which he was so appointed on the same terms and conditions as were 
applicable to him immediately before the appointed day. 30 
18. NotWithstanding anything contained in the Industlrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in foroe, the transfer of l'of IM'I. 
services of any officer or other employee shall not entitle such oftlcer or 
other employee to any compensation under that Act or under any other 
law for the time being in force and no claim for such compensation shall 35 
be entertained by any' court, tribunal or other authority. 
1 •. Where a provir\ent fund has been established by a dissolved com-
pany or any other company in respect of a transferred unit for the beneftt 
of the employees and the same stands vested in a trust, the ~oneyll aDd 
other assets standing to the credit of each provident fund shall continue 40 
to be held in trust with the same objects as were applicable before the 
appointed day and the trustees of such trusts immediately before the 
appointe4 day shall, subject to the provisions of the trust r\eeds and the 
rules relating to such t·rusts, continue to function as trustees in resp€Ct of 
such provident fund of the corresponding unit of the Integral Company 45 
or of other transferee company, as the case may be, as if this Act had not 
been passed: 
Provided that the right to nominate trustees and other right. I'elatma 
to the tru.ta vested. in the dislolver\ company or other company in retpeC!.t· 

of the transferred unit, as the case may be, shall vest in the Intel1'al 
Company or other transferee company, as the case may be. 
210. Where any gratuity, welfare or other fund has been established 
by a dissolved company or any other company in respect of a trana1erred 
S UDit for the bene1it of lts employees and is in eXistence immediately 
before the appointed day, all moneys and other assets standing to the 
credit of or relatable to such gratuity, welfare or other fund shall vest in 
the corresponding unit of the .integral Company or other transferee com-
pany, as the case may be. 
10 CHAPTER V 
l!'lN.uiClAL PaoVISIONS 
n. (1) The Integral Company sha.i.l be liable to pay any sum under 
the provisions of the Income-tax Act or the Companies (Protits) Surtax 
Act which any c\issolved company would have been liable to pay if the 
IS dissolution had not taken place, in the like manner and to the same extent 
as the dissolved company. 
(2) For the purpose of making an assessment of the income or, BE. the 
case may be, the chargeable profits of any dissolved company and for the 
purpose of levymg any sum in accordance with the provisions of sub-
20 section (1),-
.(a) any proceecUng taken against any dissolved company before 
the appointed day shall be deemed to have been taken against the 
Integral Company and may be continued against the Integral Com-
pany from the stage at which it stood immediately before the 
2S appcdnted day; 
(b) allY proceeding which could have been taken against any 
dissolved company if the dissolution hact not taken place, may be 
taken against the Integral Company; and 
(c) all the provisions of the Income-tax Act or, as the case may 
30 be, the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act shall apply accordingl)., 
(3) The assessment of the income or, as the case may be, the charge-
able profits of the previous yeu of any dissolved company in which the 
diasolution took place up to the appointed day shall be made as if such 
dissolution had not taken place, and all the provisions of the Income-
3S tax Act and the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act shall, so far as may be, 
applyaccorcUngly. __ l 
(4) The transfer to, and vesting in, the undertaking of any dis-
solved company in the Integral Company under the provisiOns of this 
Act shall be deemed to be an amalgamation in relation to such companies 
40 and the provisions of the Income-tax Act shall, so fM as may be, apply 
accordingly as if references in the said Act to the amalgamating com-
pany and the amalgamated company were references to the dissolved' 
company and the Integral Company respectively. 
(5) Where any capital asset forming part of any unciertaking belong-
4S ing to the transfen-ed unit or, as the case may be, the Hindustan Steel 
Limited is, in pursuance of section 5 or section 6 Or section 7, transferred 
to, and vests 'in, the Integral Company or the Bharat Refractories 
Limited or, as the case may be, the Metallurgical and Engineering Con-
sultants (India) Limited, such capital asset shall be deemed to have 
50 -been transferred in a scheme of amalgamation and the prOvisions of the 
Gratuity. 
welfare 
and other 
funds. 
Provisions 
with res-
pect to 
income-
tax and 
to/lrtax. 

Taxes, 
fees and 
other 
charges 
not pay-
able. 
Saving 
of con-
tracts, 
etc, 
8 
Income-tax Act shall, so far as may be, apply according~y as if refer~. 
:ift tbesaid A'Ct to the amalgamating company were references to the 
transferred UBit or, as the case may be, the Hindustan Steel Limited and 
the Nferencea to tIae amalgamateci company, being an Indian company, 
were references to the lntegtal Company Q.r the ~arat Refractoriu 5 
Limited or, as the case may be, the Metallurgical and EDgineeriD& 
CQIlSuitants (India) Limited. 
(6) The accumulated loss and the unabsOIl'Ibed depreciation, if aI1Y:l 
of any dissolved company shall be deemed to be the loss or, as the case 
may be, allowance for depreciation of the Integral Company for the 10 
previous year in which the unclertaking of the dissolved company vested 
in the Integral Company, and the provisions of the Income-tax Act 
relating to set oft and carry forward of loss and allowance fOIl' d~pr~a-
tion shall apply accordingly. . 
(7) Th. provisions of sub-sections (1) to (6) shall have effect notwith- IS 
standing anything to the contrary contained in the Income-tax Act or the 
Companies (Profits) Surtax Act. 
Expl4nation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(4) ''Income-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act, 1961; 43 of 1961. 
(b) "Companies (Profits) Surtax Act" means the Companies 20 
(Profita) Surtax Act, 19M; '1 of 1964. 
(c) words and expressions used in this sectiQn and not cie&led 
in this Act but definecl in the Income-tax Act or Ule COIPPfm1es 
(Protits). Surtax Act shall haVe the meanings respectively~ed 
to them in the said Acts. . . 
Z2. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no taxes, 
duties, fees or other chHges of whatever nature (including legistration 
charges), shall be payable in respe.ct of any transfer of shares or u-ansfer 
of any u.ndertakings or transfer of lUly ilIlUlovable pro~yuuder the 
provisions of this Act. 
CHAPTER VI 
~U8 
23. (1) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements anel other instrume}),ts 
of whatever nature to which the dissolvecl company is a party subsisting 
or having effect immediately before the appOinted day, shall, as from 35 
that day, be· of full force and effect against, or in favour of the Integral . 
Company or other transferee company, as the case may tie, and may be 
enforced as f,ullyand effectually as if, instead of the dissolved company, 
the Integral Company 01' other transferee company had been a party 
thereto. 40 
(2) All co~tracts, deeds, bonc\s, agreements and ot~r instr~nts 9f 
whatever nature to which the company in respect of a trans(erred unit 
is a P8lI'ty if and in so far as it relates to matters pertainil).g to Qle u,nc:\er-
taldD8S of the transferred unit, subsisting or having effect imme~:Ua~dy 
before the appointed day, shall, as from that day, be of tuUf~e an4 45 
effect against, or in favour of the Integral Company or other ~s~ee 

8 
company, as the case may be, and may be enforced as fully and effectually 
as if, mstead of 8ucB company, the Integnl Company or ott. tralEfilree 
company bact been 8 party thereto. 
M. If, OD the appointed day, there is pending any suit, arbitration, 
5 appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature by or against a dis-
s01ved company, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any 
way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer under the provisions 
of this ~d to the 'Integral Company or any other tral1sferee company, as 
tire CAse may be, of the undertakings of the dissolved company or of 
1 anything contained in this Act, hut the suit, arbitration, appeal or other 
PrQceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enfoNed by or against the 
Integral Company or other transferee company, as the case may be, bl 
the same manner and to the same extent as it would or might have been 
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the dissolved company 
1 S if this Act liad not been passed. 
15. If any difficulty arises in ~ivin.'! effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government mav, by ordet'. published in the Official GllZetAe, 
make such provisions. not inconsistent 'with the provisions f1f thts Act, as 
appears to it t-o be neeessaTy, for the removal ()f the diftleulty: 
20 Provtdetf. that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
!period of three years ~om tlie appointed day. 
•. The provisions' of this Act or of any oraer made there1Dlder ehall 
liave effect notwithstanding anvthin~ contaIned in the Companies Act or 
in any other law for the time -bein(t in force (lr in any contract, express 
25 or 'implied, or fn any rules or regulations having effect by virtue of 8I1y 
law other than this Act. 
2'1. (1\ For the pUTflnse "f m'7in~ pffect to the proviAions (If thfs Act, 
the Central GOVf'~rnment mllV, h" notification in the OMclal Gazette, 
make ·such amendment!'! ;n th!'! memoranrJum or articles of association, or 
30 bot~, of the Tnt.e'~al Comp'lny 0" other trnnsferee company. 
3S 
(2) Any amendments in the memorAndum or articles of association 
of the lntel!ral Companv or othel" transfpree company made in pursuance 
of sub-section (1) shan hRve pfF~t Mtwithstan"'ng anything contained 
~n the Companies Act. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2 (d) and 4J 
~. Bhilai lspat Limited, a companv formed And registered under the 
Companies Act havin~ its re~fsterpd office at Bhilai in the State of 
Madhya Pradesh, -
40 2. Bokaro Steel Limited. a comnlmv fn"med and Il"ellistered under the 
CompanfeR Act hwing its "e'mstel'ed offiCI> at Bohrn Steel Citv in the 
State of Bfhar, 
,. UUl'I1Rnul' MllI!hrll Tsnnt V,."ttP.~ a ""mnAn', fC"rmM and re~stered 
under the ComnAnieq Al't hRvin~ its :rp.f7i"~"red offil"e at DwrJ!apur in the 
4' Shte of West BeD/~al. 
"vingoi 
legal 
proceed-
ings. 
Power 
to re-
move 
difflcul-
ties. 
Act to 
override 
the pro-
visions 
of other 
laws. 
Power 
to amend 
memo· 
randum 
and 
.rtlcletr 
of assocla~ 
tion, 

10 
4. Hindustan Steel Limited, a company formed and registered UDder 
the Companies Act having its registered office at Ranch! in the State of 
BihaJ 
5. Rourkela Ispat Limited, a company formed and registered under 5 
the Companies Act having its !registered office at Rourkela in the State 
of Orissa. 
6. SAIL International Limiterl, a company formed and registered 
under the Companies Act having its registered office at Calcutta in the 
State of West Bengal. 10 
7. Salem Steel Limited, a company formed and registered under the 
Companies Act having its registered office at Salem in the State .of TamU 
Nadu. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 9) 
1. Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) Limited, a 
company formed and registered unr\er the Companies Act having its 
registered office at Ranchi in the State of Bihar. 
IS 
2. Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited, a company formed 
and registered under the Companies Act having its registered office at 20 
Calcutta in the State of West Bengal. 
3. National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, a company 
formed and registered unrler the Companies Act having its registered 
office at Hyderabad in the State of Andhra Pradesh. 
4. Manganese Ore (India) Limited, a company formed and regIstered 
under the Companies Act havin'g its registered office at Nagpur in the 2S 
State of Maharashtra. 
5. Mandovi Pellets Limiterl, a company formed and registered under 
the Companies Act having its registered office at Mormugao Harbour in 
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Dill. 

BTATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There ate at present six integrated steel plants in the countlry 1II:lth a 
total installed capacity of .10.6 million tODDes of ingot steel. Of these, 
five steel plants with an aggregate capacity of 8.6 million tonnes ate in 
the public sector. The plants at BhUai, Durgapur and Rourkela are 
owned and managed by Hindustan Steel Limited and the plant at Bokaro 
by Bokaro Steel Limited, both the companies being wholly-owned subsi-
diaries of Steel Authority of Inttia Limited. The ftfth plant at Bumpur 
is under the Indian Iron and Steel Company Limited whose majority 
shares were acquired. by Government in July, 1976. Bhilai and Bokaro 
Steel Plants are befn'g expanded and this will raise the total steel pro-
duction capacity in the public sector to 12.4 million tonnes. Steel 
Authority of India Limited also has a number of other subsidiaries con-
cerned with activities allied to steel production such as. 'provision of 
consultancy, design and engineerin'g services for ferrous and IlOn-ferroul 
enterprises, heavy construction/erection '\York connectec1 with steel and 
other sectors, development and operation of major mecHanised iron ore 
mines to meet the demands for export and from steel plants, etc. 
2. It is essential for proper development of the steel industry that 
public sector steel plants achieve maximum production and are managetl 
with the greatest efficiency. For this purpose, it would be advisable to 
bring these plants under the overall control of an Integral Company 
which should function, to the maximum extent possible, as an integrated 
steel complex and all activities which are not dill'ectly related to steel 
production are kept outside its purview. Havin~ regard to the present 
nature of these activities and potentialities for the future, it would also 
be greatly atlvantageous if the units/companies concerned therewith 
function directly under Government. Accordingly the present set-up fs 
being reorganised broadly as under:-
or Hindustan Steel Limited, Bokaro Steel Limited, Salem 
Steel Limited, SAIL International Limited, Bhilai Ispat Limited, 
Rourkela Ispat Limited ann DUr(1AnUr Mishra Isnat Lfm1ted, whollv-
owned subsidiarieR of Steel Authority of IndiA Limited (,.C:;ATL), will 
lie merged In SAIL and will function as units of SAIL. 
(If)' The shal1'es presently held bv Government in Indian Iron 
and Steel Company Limited will be transferred to SAIL and it will 
become a subsldiary of SAIL. 
(HI) Metallurl!ical and Enl!ineerin(1 Consultants (IndiA\ Limited. 
HinduBtan Steplworks Construction l.fmUed and National MinerAl 
Development C"rnoration Limited, whollv-owned !'Iubsjdiaries of 
SAIL. will hp.com~ independent rnmnanip.!'I nnttpr the dfrp.ct admi-
nistrative control of DenArtment of Steel, 'Kfrlhuru And Mermahatu-
lmru Iron Ores 'MInelli of NAtionAl Mlner,,1 newlnnmpnt ~ornoratfon 
Limited will he tr8n!llferTe~ to ~AI[T. to SP.!'V" Ilq clintivp. units of 
~okal'o Steel Plant. 
" .'. n .., 

13 
(tv) Bharat Refractories Limited, a wholly-owned sub&alary of 
Bokaro Steel Limited will become an: independent company directly 
unr\er the ~eDt 91 Steel and 'oltler r'~clOry Units will also 
come unde1' it. 
8. Restructu:riDg as aforesaid is uDdertabn to secure bettJei' manage-
ment of, and greater dcleney in, the wor'king ofptlblic sector steel 
plants. The f.etmI and conditions appltcdle to b employees .. ouM 
rem81ft unaltered. 
4. 'TIte 'Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
BW PATNAIK. 
NEW na.m; 
The 14thlYeeefhb'flt, 1977. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provine for restructuring of the iron and steel companies in the pub-
lic sector so as to secure better management and greater efficiency 
in t:heir working and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shri. Bi;u. Pa.tMik, Minister of Steel a.nd Mines.) 