1
THE RIGHT  TO PROTECTION OF CROP PRODUCE  BILL, 2017
By
SHRI  SHRIRANG APPA BARNE,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for right to farmers for protection and sale of surplus crop produce at
remunerative prices and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Protection of Crop Produce Bill, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “centre” means any establishment of the appropriate Government meant for
storage and sale of crop produce;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 152 of  2017
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) “Committee” means the Inspection and Encouragement Committee
constituted under section 4;
(d) “farmer” means any person who cultivates land or causes it to be cultivated
for agricultural or horticultural purposes; and
(e)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Every farmer shall have the right to protect his crop produce and the sale of surplus
crop produced at remunerative prices at such centres as may be designated by the
appropriate Government, from time to time.
4. For the purposes of section3, the appropriate Government shall—
(i) extend the benefit of right to protection of crop produce to all the farmers
irrespective of religion, caste, gender, age, lineage or economic condition;
(ii) determine the remunerative prices of crop produce from time to time;
(iii) purchase the surplus crop produce of a farmer at remunerative prices which
shall be paid in cash;
(iv) develop the storage facilities for surplus crop produce of farmers;
(v) ensure necessary arrangements for transfer of surplus crop produce to
other parts of the country that are deficit in such crop produce;
(vi) create awareness amongst farmers for selling their surplus produce at
designated centres so as to receive the remunerative prices of such crop products;
(vii) organize campaigns to create awareness from time to time about disastrous
results of approaching hoarders by farmers;
(viii) implement Model Code of Practice to be framed by the appropriate
Government;
(ix) provide financial assistance to such farmers who are economically weak for
increasing quality and quantity of crop produce; and
(x) make necessary arrangements free of cost for transportation of surplus crop
produce of farmers to designated centres for sale; and
(xi) undertake such other measures as it deem necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Committee to be known as Inspection and Encouragement Committee for proper
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) Union Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, as Chairperson,
ex-officio;
(b) one agricultural scientist having such expertise to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed, member-secretary;
and
(c) Chief Minister or Minister of Agriculture of respective State Government
member, ex-officio.
(3) The Committee shall meet at least four times a month:
Provided that the Chairperson may if he deems fit call for a meeting at any time
in consultation with the member-secretary and members of the Committee, as and
when the circumstances so warrant.
Duty of the
appropriate
Government.
Right to protect
and storage of
surplus crop
produce.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Constitution
of an
Inspection
and
Encouragement
Committee.

3
(4) The Union Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare shall provide secretarial
and financial assistance to the Committee.
6. The Committee shall—
(1) ensure proper implementation of the provisions of this Act;
(2) ensure mandatory procurement of surplus crop produce of a farmer to
other parts of the country;
(3) organize training programmes for farmers, from time to time to acquaint
them about use of seeds, fertilizers, plant conservation, chemical and irrigation
systems in agricultural works through balanced and modern methods;
(4) organize special campaign programme for make farming profitable and
suitable as a means of livelihood;
(5) make arrangements to set up fair price shop of crop produce;
(6) make arrangements for procurement of surplus agricultural produce of
every farmer in a dignified way; and
(7) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it from time to time by
the appropriate Government.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite Funds to the Committee, from time to time, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with
provisions of this Act, which appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in mkaing any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Functions of
the Committee.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The formulation of policies in the public interest and its proper implementation are
important characteristics of a Welfare State. But when the subject matter is related to
agriculture, the public Welfare State seems eyewash. Even after a span of seventy years of
independence, there has not been any major change in the life of farmers of the country.
According to a report based on the National Sample Survey, more than eighty-six per cent.
farmers have less than two hectares of land which is resulting in suicide by farmers in a large
number whereas a corporate farmer is making profits in crores by gaining Income Tax rebate.
The share of agriculture in Gross Domestic Product of the country is approximately fourteen
to sixteen per cent. whereas forty-nine per cent. of total labour force and sixty-four per cent.
of village labour force is engaged in agricultural works.
To emerge out farmers from crop cycles, efforts are being made to make farmers aware
through organizing camps on a large scale, organized by the Government and the department
of agriculture. The farmers of Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh do
regrettable farming by getting suggestions from awareness camps organized by the
Government and the department of agriculture but farmers do engage themselves again in
paddy and wheat farming because of not getting the fair prices of crops in Mandies.
Despite huge production of grains and vegetables in the country, farmers are in
trouble. They got good fair price of their produce during the last two years but crops were
lost due to drought and unseasoned rains. As a result their incomes got affected. The aim
of the Government is to make farmers' income double which has been expressed by the
Hon’ble Prime Minister many times. But whether the crop is much or less, the income of
farmers never increases. This year prices of vegetables or grains got new lows despite
sowing on huge scale and favourable season.
Despite food sufficiency in the country, there has been constant less availability of
food grains in the country for want of proper mechanism. Therefore, by procurement of
surplus produce from farmers on fair price by the Government along with by making that
available in other parts of the country, the price rise would be controlled and farmers will get
fair price of their produce.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
June 30, 2017

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Inspection and Encouragement
Committee. Clause 6 provides for functions of the Inspection and Encourage Committee
Clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds to the
Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
twenty thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen thousand crore is  likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for right to farmers for protection and sale of surplus crop produce at
remunerative prices and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1380LS(S3)—26-07-2017.