As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 152 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Shri Arun Bharti, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 338B of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,  
namely:—
“338C. (1) There shall be a Commission for the socio-economic development of 
the Youth to be known as the National Commission for Youth. 
Short title and 
commencement.
National 
Commission for 
Youth. 
5
Insertion of new 
section 338C. 

(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, 
the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other 
Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, 
Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President 
may by rule determine:
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of the Commission 
shall not be more than forty-five years of age.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission 
shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided 
for the Youth under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in 
force or under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such 
safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights 
and safeguards of the Youth;
(c) to advise on the socio-economic development of the Youth and to evaluate 
the progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to work out a comprehensive medium-term strategy for employment, 
entrepreneurship, health and education of the youth; 
(e) to bring about synergy between technology and public policy and recommend 
measures for creating employment opportunities in rural and urban areas through 
diversification, application of appropriate technology and skill development; 
(f) to formulate a national policy for the overall development of youth in the 
country; and
 (g) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and 
development and advancement of the Farmers as the President may, subject to the 
provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of 
Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to 
be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which 
any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the 
Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State 
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of 
any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in  
sub-clause ( a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause ( b) of  
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect 
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of 
India and examining him on oath;
2
10
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
45

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all 
major policy matters affecting the youth.”.
3. In article 366 of the Constitution, after clause ( 30), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:—
“(31) “youth” means a citizen of India between the age of thirteen to thirty-five 
years.”. 
Amendment of 
article 366. 
3
10
5

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the latest report by Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, India has a youth 
population in this age group of about 37.14 crore (projected figures for 2021) which is about 
27.3 per cent. of the total population. It has one of the youngest populations in the world. 
The share of working age population in India is larger than the non-working age population, 
thus provide a window of opportunity to lead the world. If this opportunity of demographic 
dividend can be utilized efficiently, it can prove to be highly significant for the country to 
achieve a higher economic growth. 
Further in the report titled “Youth in India” the ministry also deals with the challenges 
faced by the youth in the country. It was stated by the report that there is slight decline in the 
population of youth in the country. States like Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh are 
projected to see a higher elderly population than the youth by 2036. Keeping these concerns 
in mind, there is a need to create a demand for better healthcare facilities and development 
of welfare schemes/programmes for the youth. 
In order to create a productive youth workforce, it is essential that the youth of the country 
have access to the right set of tools and opportunities to make a sustainable contribution. 
The youth must have equitable access to high quality education and be able to develop 
the necessary skills that are required by the labour market to ensure that they are gainfully 
employed. Given that a large proportion of the workforce is self-employed, entrepreneurship 
must be encouraged amongst the youth and they must be supported through the process of 
idea generation, incubation and financing.
It is thus extremely necessary to deal with the issues concerning the youth which if 
left unattended shall lead to complex problem like unemployment. To overcome with these 
difficulties the Commission need to act swiftly and promptly. Thus, with this Constitutional 
amendment, a Constitutional status is granted to National Commission for Youth. Granting 
Constitutional status ensures that the commission has a solid legal foundation and is 
recognized as a legitimate and authoritative body. This status is often accompanied by 
specific powers, functions, and responsibilities outlined in the Constitution. Constitutional 
status can help ensure the independence and autonomy of the Commission. This means that 
the commission can function without undue interference from the Government or other 
entities, enabling it to carry out its responsibilities effectively. 
The recognition enhances the credibility and trustworthiness of the Commission. It 
signifies a commitment to the promotion and protection of the rights and interests of the 
youth, and it can build public confidence in the commission’s actions.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                                  ARUN BHARTI 
November 13, 2024

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 2 of the Bill, inter alia, provides that the National Commission for Youth shall 
consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions 
of service of tenure of the offices of the Chairperson,Vice-Chairperson and Members so 
appointed shall be such as the President may, by rule determine.
The Bill therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. At this stage it is not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure both recurring 
and non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, 
it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crores will be involved per 
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri Arun Bharti, M.P .) 