As INTRODUCED In Lox 58858 ON

Qh

Bill No. 152 of 1986
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL,
1986
A
BILL
further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.
Br it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Essential Commodities (Second
Amendment) Act, 1986.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 11 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act) —

(a) after the words “Indian Penal Code”, the words “or any
person aggrieved or any recognised consumer association, whether
such person is a member of that association or not” shall be inserted;

10 of 1955.

(b) the following Explanation shall be added at the end,
namely: —

‘Explanation—For the purposes of this section and section
12AA, “recognised consumer association” means a voluntary
consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956
or under any other law for the time being in force.’.

1 of 1956. 15,

Short
title and
com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
iment of
section 11.


2

Amend- 3. In sub-section (1) of section 12AA of the principal Act, in clause
ment of (2), after the words “Government concerned”, the words “or any person

52९९ aggrieved or any recognised consumer association” shall be inserted.
12AA,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Essential Commodities. Act, 1955, provides, in the interest of
general public, for control of production, supply, distribution, trade and
commerce in, commodities which have been declared. as essential under
the Act. To achieve these objectives, the Government has been vested
with powers under the Act, to issue orders for regulating production,
storage, transport and distribution of such essential commodities and
for controlling the prices etc. The Act at present does not confer any

right on the aggrieved consumer or recognised consumer associations to
file complaints in courts.

2. To promote voluntary consumer movement and to ensure involve-
ment of consumers as well as recognised consunier associations in the
enforcement of this Act, it is considereq desirable to confer specific
rights on the consumer and: recognised consumer associations for filing
complaints to be taken cognizance of by courts, Accordingly, it is
proposed to amend. section 11 and clause (९) of sub-section (1) of section
12AA of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, to confer rights on the
aggrieved consumers and recognised consumer associations to file com-
plaints in courts. It is also proposed to define a ‘recognised consumer
association’ under the Act so as to mean a voluntary consumer associa-
tion registered under Companies Act, 1956 or under any law for the

time being in force. क्र le «

3. The Bill seeks to achieve above objects.

New Deut;

" में, छू. L. BHAGAT
The 1st December, 1986,


Cogni-
zance of
offences.

Offences
triable by
special
Courts,

ANNEXURE

ExtTRAcT FROM THE ESSENTIAL ComMoprtres Act, 1955

(10 or 1955)
* * * * *
11. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under
this Act except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence

made by a person who is a public servant as defined in section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.

od Ld हु * * *
12AA. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code,—
* * * * *
(e) a Special Court may, upon a perusal of police report of the facts
constituting an offence under this Act or upon a complaint made by an
officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised in

this behalf by the Government concerned take cognizance of that offence
without the accused being committed to it for trial;

a iT * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.

(Shr. H. K. L, Bhagat, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs,
Food and Civil Supplies)