As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 152 of  2022
THE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022 
By
Shri N.K. Premachandran, MP
a
BILL
further to amend the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
Be  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India  
as follows :—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Legal Services Authorities (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the official gazette, appoint.
2. In section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987—
(a) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) a senior citizen or a transgender;”; and
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Amendment of 
section 12.
39 of 1987.

(b) in clause (h):—
(i)  for the words “nine thousand” the words “five lakhs”; and 
(ii) for the words “twelve thousand” the words “seven lakhs”
shall be substituted. 
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 was enacted to provide free legal and equal 
justice to all citizens. No citizen is being denied access to justice on the basis of economic 
disadvantage or in any other way.  However, the cost of accessing justice is increasing and 
the amount prescribed in the Act to avail the free aid is very less.  As of now various States 
and Union territories have revised income from rupees nine thousand to rupees three lakhs 
with a view to avail the free legal aid.  There is no similarity in the income tariff fixed by the 
States. This criteria is not sufficient to achieve the object. 
Also, many of the deserving categories are still ousted from the purview of the Act. 
The vulnerable sections like senior citizen, differently abled person and transgender are not 
being provided  adequate legal aid.  In view of the above it is considered necessary to amend 
the existing law. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 with a 
view to,—
(a) include senior citizens and transgender as the entitled person;
(b) increase the annual income criteria from “rupees nine thousand’’ and “rupees 
twelve thousand’’ to “rupees five lakhs’’ and “rupees seven lakhs’’, respectively 
to avail legal services under the Act.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
1 July, 2022
3

ANNEXURE
Extract from the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
(Act No. 39 of 1987)
12. Every person who has to file or defend a case shall be entitled to legal services under 
this Act if that person is —
(a) a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe; 
* * * * * *
(h) in receipt of annual income less than rupees nine thousand or such other higher 
amount as may be prescribed by the State Government, if the case is before a court other 
than the Supreme Court, and less than rupees twelve thousand or such other higher amount 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, if the case is before the Supreme Court.         
* * * * * *
4
Criteria for 
giving legal 
services.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P.)