1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 152 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In article 75 of the Constitution, after clause ( 3), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(3A) A motion of no-confidence in the Council of Ministers shall be accompanied
by a motion of confidence, which shall specify the successor Prime Minister.
(3B) A motion of no-confidence in the Council of Ministers shall be voted upon
simultaneously with the accompanying motion of confidence and both the motions
together shall be treated as carried or defeated, as the case may be.".
3. In article 164 of the Constitution, after clause ( 2), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(2A) A motion of no-confidence in the Council of Ministers shall be accompanied
by a motion of confidence, which shall specify the successor Chief Minister.
(2B) A motion for no-confidence in the Council of Ministers shall be voted
upon simultaneously with the accompanying motion of confidence and both the
motions together shall be treated as carried or defeated, as the case may be.".
4. In article 172 of the Constitution, after clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Central Government
shall, within six months from the date of coming into force of the Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 2016, in consultation with the Election Commission, determine the
manner of extending or curtailing the duration of the term of the State Legislative
Assemblies in order to synchronise the general elections to the State Legislative
Assemblies with the general elections to the House of the People that shall be held
after the coming into force of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.".
5. After article 326 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"326A. The elections to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies
of all the States shall be held simultaneously.".
Amendment of
article 75.
Amendment
of article 164.
5
10
Amendment
of article 172.
Insertion of
new article
326A.
Simultaneous
elections.
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Constitution vests the power of superintendence, direction and control of
elections with the Election Commission. India being the largest democracy, it is quite obvious
that the magnitude and scale of conduct of elections is also of immense proportions. Such
an exercise does cost resources and is time consuming too. It is not surprising that the
country often finds itself in a perpetual election mode because of conduct of separate
elections to Lok Sabha and the State Assemblies.
While elections are the cornerstone of a democracy, it is equally important that the
conduct of elections does not, in any way, hinder the process of governance. This is where
frequent elections are considered undesirable and a case for simultaneous elections to
Lok Sabha and the State Assemblies is made out.
The first argument put forth for advocacy of simultaneous elections is that it will
considerably reduce the cost of elections. Conduct of separate elections to Lok Sabha and
State Assemblies requires huge costs in terms of men and material. If these elections are
held simultaneously on the same day, the financial burden on both the exchequer and the
political parties will be reduced considerably. This can further reduce the role of dubious
money that presently vitiates the election process. Secondly, the model code of conduct
tends to disrupt the process of governance since many governmental initiatives have to be
put on hold till the completion of elections. Thirdly, the electioneering campaigns also
disrupt the normal public life. At times, there are clashes between political workers and
some unscrupulous elements resort to inciting communal violence, defamatory statements
and other unethical practices.
The conduct of simultaneous elections is, however, also challenging. Most prominent
among those challenges is the possibility of early dissolution of Lok Sabha or a State
Assembly. Moreover, there are questions on capabilities of the election machinery to conduct
such a massive exercise.
The Bill, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to:—
(i) amend article 75 of the Constitution to provide that a motion of no-confidence
shall be accompanied by a motion of confidence naming the successor Prime Minister
and both these motions shall be voted upon together and accordingly carried or
defeated together;
(ii) to amend article 164 to make similar provisions in respect of motion of
no-confidence brought in a State Assembly;
(iii) to make transitional provision that on commencement of the provisions
contained in the Bill, the Central Government shall take a decision, in consultation
with the Election Commission, regarding extending or curtailing the duration of State
Legislative Assemblies so that the elections to the Assemblies may coincide with next
elections to Lok Sabha; and
(iv) insert a new article 326A in the Constitution providing for simultaneous
elections to Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies.
Hence the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
May 2, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
75. (1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the President onthe advice of the Prime Minister.
* * * * * *
(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the
People.
* * * * * * *
164. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor:
Provided that in the States of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa,
there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge of the
welfare of the Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other work.
* * * * * * *
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative
Assembly of the State.
* * * * * * *
172. (1) Every Legislative Assembly of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall
continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the
expiration of the said period of five years s hall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation,
be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not
extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to
operate.
(2) The Legislative Council of a State shall not be subject to dissolution, but as nearly
as possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration
of every second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by Parliament
by law.
* * * * * * *
Other
provisions as
to Ministers.
Other
provisions as
to Ministers.
Duration of
State
Legislatures.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1044LS(S3)—02-07-2016.