1
THE RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY IN
LAND ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Second Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of  December, 2014.
2. In the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for
the words "private company" wherever they occur, the words "private entity" shall be
substituted.
Substitution
of certain
expression
throughout
the Act.
30 of 2013.
Bill No. 152 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
3. In the principal Act, in sub-section (2) of section 2, after the second proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely: —
"Provided also that the acquisition of land for the projects listed in sub-section (1)
of section 10A and the purposes specified therein shall be exempted from the provisions
of the first proviso to this sub-section.".
4. In the principal Act, in section 3,—
(i) in clause (j), in sub-clause (i), for the words and figures "the Companies Act,
1956", the words and figures "the Companies Act, 2013" shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (y), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(yy) "private entity" means any entity other than a Government entity or
undertaking and includes a proprietorship, partnership, company, corporation,
non-profit organisations or other entity under any law for the time being in
force;'.
5. In the principal Act, after Chapter III, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
"CHAPTER IIIA
P
ROVISIONS OF CHAPTER II AND CHAPTER III NOT TO APPLY TO  CERTAIN PROJECTS
10A. (1) The appropriate Government may, in the public interest, by notification,
exempt any of the following projects from the application of the provisions of Chapter II and
Chapter III of this Act, namely: —
(a) such projects vital to national security or defence of India and every part
thereof including preparation for defence or defence production;
(b) rural infrastructure including electrification;
(c) affordable housing and housing for the poor people;
(d) industrial corridors set-up by the appropriate Government and its
undertakings (in which case the land shall be acquired up to one kilometer on both
sides of designated railway line or roads for such industrial corridor); and
(e) infrastructure projects including projects under public-private partnership
where the ownership of land continues to vest with the Government:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall, before the issue of notification, ensure
the extent of land for the proposed acquisition keeping in view the bare minimum land
required for such project.
(2) The appropriate Government shall undertake a survey of its wasteland including
arid land and maintain a record containing details of such land, in such manner as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.".
6. In the principal Act, in section 24, in sub-section (2), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely: —
"Provided further that in computing the period referred to in this sub-section,
any period or periods during which the proceedings for acquisition of the land were
held up on account of any stay or injunction issued by any court or the period specified
in the award of a Tribunal for taking possession or such period where possession has
been taken but the compensation is lying deposited in a court or in any designated
account maintained for this purpose shall be excluded.".
7. In the principal Act, in section 31, in sub-section (2), in clause (h), after the words
"affected families", the words "including compulsory employment to at least one member of
such affected family of a farm labourer" shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 3.
1 of 1956.
18 of 2013.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIIA.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to exempt
certain
projects.
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment
of section 31.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. In the principal Act, in section 46, in sub-section ( 6), in the Explanation, in
clause (b), the words "any person other than" shall be omitted.
9. In the principal Act, after section 67, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"67A. The Authority shall, after receiving reference under section 64 and after
giving notice of such reference to all parties concerned, hold the hearing in the district
where the land acquisition takes place for settlement of the objections raised in the
reference.".
10. In the principal Act, for section 87, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"87. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any person who is
or was employed in the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may
be, at the time of commission of such alleged offence, the court shall take cognizance
of such offence provided the procedure laid down in section 197 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 is followed.".
11. In the principal Act, in section 101, for the words "a period of five years", the words
"a period specified for setting-up of any project or for five years, whichever is later," shall be
substituted.
12. In the principal Act, in section 105,—
(i) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) The provisions of this Act relating to the determination of
compensation in accordance with the First Schedule, rehabilitation and
resettlement in accordance with the Second Schedule and infrastructure amenities
in accordance with the Third Schedule shall apply to the enactments relating to
land acquisition specified in the Fourth Schedule with effect from 1st January,
2015.";
(ii) sub-section (4) shall be omitted.
13. In the principal Act, in section 109, in sub-section (2), after clause (d), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(dd) the manner of undertaking a survey of waste land including arid land and
maintenance of the record containing the details of arid land under sub-section (2) of
section 10A;''.
14. In the principal Act, in section 113, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words "the provisions of this Part", the words "the provisions of this
Act" shall be substituted;
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "a period of two years", the words "a period of
five years" shall be substituted.
15. (1) The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015, is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal
Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under
the principal Act, as amended by this Act.
Amendment
of section 46.
Insertion of
new section
67A.
Hearing to be
held by
Authority in
district or
districts to
decide
grievances.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 87.
Offences by
Government
officials.
Amendment of
section 101.
Amendment of
section 105.
Amendment of
section 109.
Repeal and
saving.Ord. 4 of
2015.
Amendment of
section 113.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Act, 2013 (herein referred to as the Fair Compensation in Land Acquisition
Act) was enacted to provide for just and fair compensation to the owners of the land and
affected families for the land acquisitions made under the said Act and the 13 Acts specified
in the Fourth Schedule, which makes provision for acquisition of land for the purposes
specified in the respective Acts, in terms of the provisions made in the First, Second and
Third Schedule to the Fair Compensation in Land Acquisition Act. In other words, the
benefits of compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement provided in the Fair Compensation
in Land Acquisition Act is proposed to be extended in cases of land acquisition made under
the Acts specified in the Fourth Schedule.
2. In view of the deadline provided in Section 105 of the Fair Compensation in Land
Acquisition Act and the necessity of extending the enhanced compensation, rehabilitation
and resettlement to land acquisitions under thirteen Acts of the Fourth Schedule and to make
necessary provisions for infrastructure projects the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Ordinance,
2014 was promulgated on the 31st December, 2014. On the 24th February, 2015 a replacement
Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha. The Bill was passed by Lok  Sabha with some amendments
on the 10th March, 2015. Notice for Motion for consideration and passing of the Bill as
passed by the Lok Sabha was given in Rajya Sabha on the 13th March, 2015. However, the
Bill could not be taken up for consideration in the Rajya Sabha as the Rajya Sabha was
prorogued on the 28th March, 2015.
3. Section 105 of the Act of 2013 as amended by the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Ordinance,
2014 extends the benefit of enhanced compensation in case of land acquisition made under
the thirteen Acts listed in the Fourth Schedule of the Act.
4. Section 105 of the Act of 2013 as amended by the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Ordinance,
2014 provided to extend the benefit of enhanced compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement
in case of land acquisitions done under the 13 Acts listed in the Fourth Schedule of the Act.
With a view to give continuity to the provisions of the said Ordinance, it was necessary to
repromulgate the Ordinance and get the same replaced by the Replacement Bill in Parliament
so that enhanced compensation and rehabilitation and resettlement made available through
the provisions of earlier Ordinance continue to remain in force in cases of land acquisitions
made under the thirteen Acts listed in the Fourth Schedule to the Act of 2013.
5. As the Council of States was not in session and immediate action was required to be
taken by the Central Government to give continuity to the provisions of the Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2014 and to expedite the process of land acquisition, the Right to
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2015 (No. 4 of 2015) was promulgated on 3rd April, 2015.
6. The said Ordinance contains enabling provision necessary to expedite the process
of land acquisition for strategic and development activities, such as, national security or
defence of India including preparation for defence and defence production; rural infrastructure
including electrification; affordable housing and housing for poor people; industrial corridors
set-up by the appropriate Government and its undertakings (in which case the land shall be
acquired up to one kilometre on both sides of designated railway line or roads for such
industrial corridor); infrastructure projects including projects under public private partnership
where the ownership of the land continues to vest with the Government, it is proposed to
continue with the "Consent" clause provided under sub-section (2) of section 2 of the Fair
4

Compensation in Land Acquisition Act in case of the acquisitions provided in the Act except
in cases provided above.
7. Further, to ensure the growth and development of the country, while safeguarding
the welfare of farmers, it is proposed to empower the appropriate Government to exempt them
from "Social Impact Assessment" and "Special Provisions for Safeguarding Food Security"
provisions of the Fair Compensation in Land Acquisition Act. However, the appropriate
Government shall, before the issue of notification, ensure the extent of land for the proposed
acquisition keeping in view the bare minimum land required for such project. The appropriate
Government shall undertake a survey of its wasteland including arid land and maintain a
record containing details of such land, in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
8. It is proposed to make consequential amendment by substituting the ‘‘Companies
Act, 1956’’ with the ‘‘Companies Act, 2013’’ where the word ‘‘Company’’  has been defined.
At present, the provisions of the Fair Compensation in Land Acquisition Act extend to
‘‘private company’’ thereby excluding others like public company, proprietorship, partnership,
nonprofit organisation, etc. Therefore, in place of the term ‘‘private company’’, the term
‘‘private entity’’ is proposed to be substituted and defined accordingly.
9. It is proposed to exclude all such period, that is the period during which the proceedings
for acquisition of the land have been held up on account of any stay or injunction issued by
any court, or the period specified in the award of a Tribunal for taking possession or such
period where possession has been taken but the compensation is lying deposited in a court
or in designated account maintained for this purpose, in calculation of five years period as
specified in sub-section (2) of section 24 of the Fair Compensation in Land Acquisition Act,
arising out of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
10. Section 31 of the Act is proposed to be amended so that in the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Award passed by Collector for affected families, compulsory employment to at
least one member of such affected family of a farm labourer is also included.
11.  Section 46 is proposed to be modified so that the rehabilitation and resettlement
benefits are available to land owners in case of purchase of land through private negotiations
by non-governmental entities.
12. A new Section 67 A is proposed to be inserted in the Act mandating that the Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority shall hold the hearing in the district
where the land acquisition takes place for settlement of the objections raised in the reference
under section 64 of the Act.
13. Section 87 is proposed to be amended to provide that the court shall take cognizance
of offence by Government officials under the Act in accordance with the procedure laid
down in section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
14. Section 101 which deals with return of unutilised land is being amended to increase
the period after which unutilised land will be reverted back to land owner or to Land Bank
from ‘‘five years’’ at present to ‘‘a period specified for setting up of any project or for five
years whichever is later’’.
15. In section 113 of the Fair Compensation in Land Acquisition Act, the word ‘‘Part’’
has been inadvertently used instead of the word ‘‘Act’’ which needs to be rectified. Further,
the period provided for removal of difficulties is being extended to five years.
16. The Bill proposes to replace the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015 (4 of 2015).
N
EW DELHI; BIRENDER  SINGH
The  18th April, 2015
5

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY IN LAND ACQUISITION,
REHABLITATION AND RESETTLEMENT ACT, 2013
(30 OF 2013)
* * * * *
2. (1) * * * * *
(2) The provisions of this Act relating to land acquisition, consent, compensation,
rehabilitation and resettlement, shall also apply, when the appropriate Government acquires
land for the following purposes, namely :—
* * * * *
Provided further that the process of obtaining the consent shall be carried out along
with the Social Impact Assessment study referred to in section 4:
* * * * *
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(j) ‘‘company’’ means—
(i) a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956, other
than a Government company;
* * * * *
24. (1) * * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in case of land acquisition
proceedings initiated under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, where an award under the said
section 11 has been made five years or more prior to the commencement of this Act but the
physical possession of the land has not been taken or the compensation has not been paid
the said proceedings shall be deemed to have lapsed and the appropriate Government, if it so
chooses, shall initiate the proceedings of such land acquisition afresh in accordance with
the provisions of this Act:
Provided that where an award has been made and compensation in respect of a majority
of land holdings has not been deposited in the account of the beneficiaries, then, all
beneficiaries specified in the notification for acquisition under section 4 of the said Land
Acquisition Act, shall be entitled to compensation in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.
* * * * *
CHAPTER V
R
EHABILITA TION AND RESETTLEMENT AWARD
31. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Award shall include all of the following,
namely:—
* * * * *
(h) details of mandatory employment to be provided to the members of the
affected families;
* * * * *
Application
of Act.
Definitions.
Land
acquisition
process under
Act No.1 of
1894 shall be
deemed to
have lapsed in
certain cases.
Rehabilitation
and
Resettlement
Award for
affected
families by
Collector.
1 of 1956.

7
46. (1) * * * * *
(6) If any land has been purchased through private negotiations by a person on or
after the 5th day of September, 2011, which is more than such limits referred to in sub-section (1)
and, if the same land is acquired within three years from the date of commencement of this
Act, then, forty per cent. of the compensation paid for such land acquired shall be shared
with the original land owners.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression—
* * * * *
(b) "specified persons" includes any person other than—
(i) appropriate Government;
(ii) Government company;
(iii) association of persons or trust or society as registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860, wholly or partially aided by the appropriate
Government or controlled by the appropriate Government.
* * * * *
87.  (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any department of
the Government, the head of the department, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any person liable to any
punishment if such person proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that such person exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a Department of the Government and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of any officer, other than the head of the department, such officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
* * * * *
101. When any land acquired under this Act remains unutilised for a period of five
years from the date of taking over the possession, the same shall be returned to the original
owner or owners of their legal heirs, as the case may be, or to the Land Bank of the appropriate
Government by reversion in the manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, "Land Bank" means a governmental
entity that focuses on the conversion of Government owned vacant, abandoned, unutilised
acquired lands and tax-delinquent properties into productive use.
* * * * *
105. (1) * * * * *
(3) The Central Government shall, by notification, within one year from the date of
commencement of this Act, direct that any of the provisions of this Act relating to the
determination of compensation in accordance with the First Schedule and rehabilitation and
resettlement specified in the Second and Third Schedules, being beneficial to the affected
families, shall apply to the cases of land acquisition under the enactments specified in the
Fourth Schedule or shall apply with such exceptions or modifications that do not reduce the
compensation or dilute the provisions of this Act relating to compensation or rehabilitation
and resettlement as may be specified in the notification, as the case may be.
Provisions
relating to
rehabilitation
and
resettlement
to apply in
case of
certain
persons other
than specified
persons.
Offences by
Government
departments.
21 of 1860.
Return of
unutilised
land.
Provisions of
this Act not
to apply in
certain cases
or to apply
with certain
modifications.

8
(4) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (3), shall be
laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses
agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as
the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both
the Houses of Parliament.
* * * * *
113. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Part, the
Central Government may, by order, make such pr ovisions or give such directions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry of a period of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
* * * * *
Power to
remove
difficulties.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
————
(Shri Birender Singh, Minister of Rural Development, Panchayati Raj and Drinking
Water and Sanitation)
GMGIPMRND—786LS(S3)—01.05.2015.