As rntropucep In Lox SaBHA

“9 Sep 189
7

’ Bill No. 152 of 1991
THE ELECTRICITY LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991
A
BILL

further to amend the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the Electricity
(Supply) Act, 1948,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity Laws (Amendment)
1

Act, 1991. |

| 5. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, hy notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 6 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, in clause (b) of sub-
section (1), for the words “twenty” and “ten”, the words “thirty” and
“twenty” shall respectively be substituted.

pt of 194, 10. 3. In section 2 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (hereinafter
॥ “referred to as the principal Act) —

6) after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

‘(3A) “competent government” means the Central Govern-
15 ment in respect of a Generating Company wholly or partly

Short title
and com-
mence.
ment,

Amend-

ment of
section 6
of Act 9
of 1910.

Amend-
‘ment of
section 2,


Amend-
‘ment of
section

Amend-
ment of
section
188.

Amend-

ment of

section
29,

5 F
owned by it and in all other cases the Government of the State
in which the generating station of a Generating Company is
located or proposed to be located;’;

(® for clause (4A), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely;

‘(4A) “Generating Company” means a company registered
under the Companies Act, 1956 and which has among its objects

the establishment, operation and maintenance of generating
stations;’;

(iii) after clause (9), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely: — |

“(9A) “Regional Electricity Board” means any of the Boards
as constituted immediately before the commencement of the
Electricity Laws (Amendment) Act, 1991, by resolution of the
Central Government for ensuring integrated operation of consti-
tuent system in the region;

(9B) “Regional Load Despatch Centre” means the Centre
so designated where the operation of each of the Regional

Electricity Girds constituting the country’s power system is co-
ordinated;’

4. In section 158 of the principal Act—

6) the word “Formation,” occurring in the marginal heading
and sub-section (1) shall be omitted;

(ii) for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following sub-sections shall
be substituted, namely:—

|

“(2) The objects of a Generating Company shall include—

(a) establishment, operation and maintenance of
generating stations and tie-lines, sub-stations and main
transmission lines connected therewith;

(०) operation and maintenance of such generating 30
stations, tie-lines, sub-stations and main transmission lines
as are assigned to it by the competent government or govern-
ments.

(3) The Generating Company shall carry on its activities
within such areas as the competent government or govern-
ments, as the case may be, may, from time to time, specify in
this behalf.”; '

(iii) sub-sections (4), (6) and (7) shall be omitted,

5. In section 18A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the
words “promoting government or promoting governments’, at both the 40
places where they occur, the words “competent government or govern-
ments” shall be substituted,

6. In section 29 of the principal Act—

6) for sub-section
substituted, namely:—

35

(1), the following sub-section shall be

45
“() Every scheme estimated to involve a capital expendi-
ture exceeding such sum, as may be fixed by the Central Gov-
ernment, from time to time, by notification in the Ufficial


3

Gazette, shall, as soon as may be after it is prepared, be sub-

mitted to the Authority for its concurrence.”;
(ii) in sub-section (4), in the proviso, for the words “promoting
government or one of the promoting governments”. the words
5. “competent government or one of the competent governments” shall

be substituted.
7. In section 30 of the principal Act, in clause (g), the words “and
such other directions as may be given by the Central Government” shall
he added at the end.

10. 8. Im section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the proviso,
for the words “the promoting government or one of the promoting
governments”, the words “competent government or one of the competent
governments” shall be substituted.

9. In section 39 of the principal Act—

15 (i) in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for the words “promot-
ing government or one of the promoting governments”, the words
“competent government or one of the competent governments”
shall be substituted;

(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be

20 inserted, namely: —

“(3) For the purposes of this section, no direction shall be
issued to a Generating Company wholly or partly owned by the
Central Government unless and until the prior concurrence of
that Government is obtained.”,

25 10. In section 43 of the principal Act, sub-section (3) shall be omitted.

11. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely: —

“43A. (1) A Generating Company may enter into a contract for
the sale of electricity generated by it—
(a) with the Board constituted for the State or any of the
States in which a generating station owned or operated by the
company is located;
(b) with the Board constituted for any other State in
which it is carrying on its activities in pursuance of sub-section
35 (3) of section 15A; and

(c) with any other person with consent of the competent
Government or Governments.
(2) The tariff for the sale of electricity by a Generating Com-
pany to the Board shall be determined in accordance with the norms
40 regarding operation and the Plant Load Factor as may be laid down
by the Authority and in accordance with the rates of depreciation and
reasonable return and such other factors as may be determined, from
time 10 time, by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette:

Amend.
ment of
section
30.

Amend.
ment of
section
31,

Amend-
ment of
section
39.

Amend-
ment of
section 43.

Insertion
of new
section
434.

‘Terms,
conditions
and

tariff

for sale of
electri-
city by
Genera-
ting
Company.


Substi-
tution of
new sec-
tion for
section
55.

Comp-
liance of
direc
tions of
the Re-
gional
Electri-
city
Board, ete,
by licen-
sees or
Genera.
ting Com-
panies.

Amend-
ment of
section
BA.

Amend-
ment of
Sixth
Schedule

4

Provided that the terms, conditions and tariff for such sale,
shall, in respect of a Generating Company wholly or partly owned
by the Central Government, be such as may be determined by the
Central Government and in respect of a Generating Company wholly
or partly owned by one or more State Governments be such as may
be determined, from time to time, by the government or govern-
ments concerned.”.

12, For section 55 of the principal Act, the following section shall be

substituted, namely: —

“53. (1) Every licensee shall comply with such reasonable direc-
tions as the Board may, from time to time, give him for the purpose
of achieving the maximum economy and efficiency in the opera-
tion of his undertaking or any part thereof,

(2) Every licensee or Generating Company shall follow all the
directions of the Regional Electricity Boards and shall conduct their
operations in accordance with the instructions of the Regional Load
Despatch Centre so as to ensure integrated grid operations,

(3) If any dispute arises with reference to the integrated grid
operations as to whether any direction given under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2), is reasonable or not, it shall be referred to the
Authority, whose decision thereon shall be final; so, however, pend-
ing the decision of the Authority, directions of the Regional Electri-
city Boards or the Regional Load Despatch Centres shall prevail in
the interest of smooth operation of the integrated grid.”.

13. In section 75A of the principal Act,—
(0) sub-section (1) shall be omitted;

(ii) in sub-section (2), for the word “promoting” wherever it
occurs, the word “competent” shall be substituted;

(iit) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely: —

“(8) For the purpose of preparing the statement of accounts
referred to in sub-section (2), the depreciation to be provided
every year shall be calculated at such rate as may be specified
by the Central Government, by notification in the Official
Gazette, in accordance with the provisions of section 43A.”;

(iv) sub-section (3A) shall be omitted;

(v) in sub-section (4), for the words, brackets and figure “sub-
sections (1) and”, the words “sub-section” shall be substituted.

14. In the Sixth Schedule to the principal Act, in paragraph XVIT.—

15

30

35

(i) in sub-paragraph (2), in clause (c), after sub-clause (va), the 40

following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely: —

_“(vb) debt redemption obligation of the private licensees
which may be done on a year to year basis, taking into account


20

5

the requirements of debt redemption and resource generation
through depreciation, retained surplus;”;

(४) in sub-paragraph (6), for clause (b), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—

“(b) interest charges on capital expenditure incurred during
the period between the date of grant of the license and the date
when the undertaking commences supply, from borrowed money
and properly attributable to the assets as actually accrued up to
the date of such supply, as well as interest incurred on outlays
for subsequent expansions;";

(ii) in sub-paragraph (10), in clause (b), for the words “part of

capital base for that year, the Reserve Bank rate ruling at the

beginning of that year, plus two per centum”, the following words.
brackets and figures shall be substituted, namely:—

“capital base for that year, the Reserve Bank rate ruling at the
beginning of that year plus—

(i) two per centum for investments made up to the date
of the commencement of the Electricity Laws (Amendment)
Act, 1991; and

(ii) five per centum for investments made thereafter:”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Indian Electricity Act, 1910 deals with the supply and use of |
electrical energy and the rights and obligations of the licensees. The
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 deals with the statutory powers and func-
tions of the Central Electricity Authority, State Electricity Boards and
Generating Companies,

2, It is proposed to widen the scope of private sector participation in
power generation, supply and distribution by suitably amending the afore-
said Acts, The main amendments are as follows,—

(a) Section 6 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 which deals
with the period of license is sought to be amended to enhance the
said period of license to 30 years followed by subsequent extensions
for 20 years at a time. This will ensure reasonable stability in the
operation of the license.

(b) Section 2 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (hereinafter
referred to as the said Act), which defines various expressions, is
proposed to be amended to give effect to certain changes in the
definitions and also to define certain new expressions. Clause (4A)
is proposed to be substituted to remove the exclusion of private
sector from the definition of “Generating Company”, as it permits
only the companies formed by the Central Government or by any
State Government or jointly by the Central Government and one or
more State Governments.

(c) Section 158 of the said Act which deals with the formation,
objects, etc., of Generating Companies is proposed to be amended so
as to provide for the establishment of Generating Companies in the
private sector as well as in the joint sector.

(3) Section 29 of the said Act which deals with the submission
of schemes involving capital expenditure exceeding rupees five crores
to the Central Electricity Authority is proposed to be amended in
the interest of flexibility, keeping in view the escalation in the cost
of projects and to provide for revision from time to time of the
prescribed limit of project cost vequiring such clearance.

(०) A new section 43A is proposed to be inserted to the said
‘Act to provide for the terms and conditions and tariff for sale of
electricity by the Generating Companies.

(0 Section 55 of the said Act which provides for the licensees’
compliance with the Board’s directions is proposed to be amended
to ensure that the licensees as well as Generating Companies shall
comply with the directions issued by the designated coordinating
agencies in the matter of generation and supply of power.


i,

(8) Paragraph XVII(10) (b) of Schedule VI to the said Act
is proposed to be amended to raise the standard rate from the
existing level of 2 per cent. over the Reserve Bank of India rate to
5 per cent. over the Reserve Bank of India rate to motivate equity
investment in the power projects set up b y licensee companies.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Detu;
The 30th August, 1991. KALP NATH RAI,


ANNEXURE
Extracr From THE INDIAN ELECTRICITY Act, 1910

(9 oF 1910)
* * . * *
हल 6. (1) Where a license has been granted to any person, not, | a
ieee local authority, the State Electricity Board shall,

* * . * *

(0) in the case of a licease granted on or after the commence-
ment, of the said Act, on the expiration of such period not exceeding
twenty years and of every such subsequent period, not exceeding ten
years, as shall be specified in this , ~half in the license;

have the option of purchasing the undertaking and such option shall be
exercised by the State Electricity Board serving upon the licensee a
notice in writing of not less than one year requiring the licensee to sell
the undertaking to it at the expiry of the relevant period referred to in
this sub-section. 7
* * * * *
Extracts FROM THE ELECTRICITY (Suppiy) Acr, 1948
(54 oF 1948)
* . * के *
ater 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
tation, context,—

* = * * *

(44) “Generating Company” means a company formed—

(a) either by the Central Government or by any State Goy-
ernment; or
(0) jointly by the Central Government and one or more

State Governments or by two or more State Governments,
and registered under the Companies Act, 1956;

* * * * *

आर 154. (1) * * * *

tion, (2) The main objects of a Generating Company shal] be—

objects हि F
juris. (i) establishing, operating and maintaining generating stations
diction, and tie-lines, sub-stations and main transmission lines connected
ete, of therewith;

Gene- ti हि
rating (8) operating and maintaining such generating stations, tie-
Com- lines, sub-stations and main transmission lines as are assigned to it
panies,

by the Government or Governments forming the Generating Com-
Pany (hereinafter referred to as the promoting government).


“aa बयान
“oun
yo
apuaaans
“40d Jog
samoyas
Jo uois
-siwgng

“ued
05
Bun,
-paatay
jo
sonng

जपूर 10 Adoo & ‘sjuaurusA03 Sutouord ay} Jo au 30 yuaWUIEACS Suour
cord oy} Sf yuaUIUAAAOD [४३५०० ay} पगपक 07 uoneier uy Auedwog Sur
~yeaouian ४ Aq poredasd uaeq sey Puayos a4) exeym ३०५४ paplAcig
*PEUIIOUOD S}UBWIUTAADH 2481S 10 JUOUTUTAAOCH गण 4} 0} papzeA\Zoy
eq Treys (६) uoMsas-qns sapun Auedwod Sunereuey ey) ‘aq eur ३8७०
ou} sv “10 pavog om Aq paredesd Aqjeuy ouroyos ay} yo Ado y (F)
* * . * *
‘eoUBLNIUOD Sf उग्र ApLONJNY ay} 0} PayWGns oq ‘uOr
veaedaid था उग्र aq Avur se woos se ‘[[eys Saadni Jo axo19 १७ Sutpaeoxa
eanypusdxe peydes & aajoAut 0} Payeuysa auayos Arwagq (1) 6
* * * * *
—Aypoyyny ay} Sq payroads eq Aew se उम्प्रएष्ण yons ur ‘ya
ea} PazyeuUOd sou, UOISsTUISUeT} PUe sUOTPys-qns ‘sauT]-eN एप
suones Suyerouss Surystiqe}se toy ‘aq Avux oseo ayy Se ‘spieog a0
preog PY} YA UoReUIpIO-09 ur ‘sauleyos azedaid pue suoresiseaut
peTfei@p 16 woH9as Jo Suorstaosd ayy 04 yoalqns “no Azsed ० (०)

Pue ‘yyMersy} payeuuoo ‘Aue Jr ‘woyshs samod ay} 32240
ए०्पए०० Suyaey Aouase Jo yuouusaaocs ey} pue ‘aq Aeurt 9४७० ayy se
‘spavog, 10 prvog ey} YIM UONeUIPIO-od UT SjuaUTUIEAOS Suoword
40 juauuTeACS Suyoword ayy Aq 31 0} pauisisse ‘saury प्रणुष्शुप्प्रषपरण्य
पएाुएप्प pue 8पणप्र्न--पुाड $ग्प्रपू-भ 'डपणए1३ Supesauead ay} teuueUt [eo
जुष्प्रणप००० pue yUsIoWe ३४००प ay} UT ‘Ule}UIeU pue ajesado 0} (q)

j | $Suedwog Sur
“yeIOUEH 4} 0} प्रण्प्रणुग Ur sjueuUIEACS Suyowosd 10 yuewUI0A0S
Sunouoad ayy Aq poysyqeyse aq ० pasmnbex aq Aeus se “प्श&ग्ग्ग्पड
एग०२9प्रप०० #ग्प्तूु॒ प्रणुष्शुप्प्षप्रय Ufeu PUB 5पणछ5-पृषड ‘soul-o4 pue
suone}s Suyereued yons urejureur pue ojesedo “ystiqeysa ० (०)

चाभीग्प्पष्प ‘sannp गैप[॥णा्‌ण ay} yyen एग्डैग०प० aq पृष्पू४ Aued
“Wog Sunesuey ४ yoy siy} Jo suoistaord ayy ० qoalqng (1) “WET
* * * + *

‘PY Sty} Jopun Auedwiog Sunersuan
© aq oF ‘sasodind व 10F ‘powreap aq [TeYys ‘(2) uoKaas-qns ut payroods
अभगाष्प Og} Jo Aue 3० [Je ५२०१० ureut sy1 se Survey ‘yuaweouowWOD yons
uo Buruonoung pue Apyutof ‘syuourusaaoy 948345 e10UI JO OM} 30 ‘syUaUE
“WIOAOS) 2384S भा०प्प JO auO pue JUaUIUTeAOD [eI}UED ay} 3० ३प्रण्प्रपप२७००७
aeig Aue Jo juawuraoy [४३००० ey Aq ‘9161 ‘ooueutpsQ queupuouy
(iddng) Ayornsatg ayy ३० quoweouatiw0s ayy axoyaq Paurzoy 9961 joy
seruedwoy ay} Jo ६ uoNdas Jo Suravou ayy un Auvduos y (4)

मे “preog ay} Jo उम्पृष्प्रग्य 0} आवतर
Soy se Suedwoy Suyerouay e jo s10j9ea1p jo Pieog ay} Jo szequieur
Arana 0} idde ‘aq Kew se sey os ‘yeys 6 प्रणु३२०७ Jo SuoIstAoId अप) (9)

* * * * *

‘yoorayy

Stoquiaut ग्पप्नापड़ 5४ payurodde aq eux ‘syuouraz0A0S Surjowoad yons Aq

uodn paasse eq Aeut se ‘avo uey) sjuaumuzaacs Sunjoword axour are aray}

aroyss “IO IY SHUI} JusuUIEACT Burouosd aq} se Aueduroy Suyesuen
B Jo SiojerIp Jo Pavog ey3 Jo ध्यम्पृष्पगण्प oy} Jo Jaquinu yong (F)

Feyeq sup ur Spoeds ‘oun, ०. wy worz

‘Kew sjuourusas08 Suyoword 420 juauussa0d Supowosd ay} se svar yens
UyHAL  soNANDE था Wo Luzed [Teys Auedwoy Sunerouey ayy, (¢)

6

a4

“9901


Matiers
to be
consider-
ed by
the
Autho-
rity.

Coneur-
rene? of
‘Autho-
rity to
scheme
submit-
ted to it
by

Board or
Genera-
ting Com.
pany,

Opera:
tion of
Board's
gene-
rating
stations.

Power to
Board to
enter into
arrange-
ments for
purchase
or sale of
electricity
under
certain
conditions.

10

scheme finally prepared shall be forwarded also to the Cen
ment.

* * . * *

30. The Authority shall, before concurring in any scheme
to it under sub-section (1) of section 29, have particular
whether or not in its opinion—

= * * *

(g) the scheme conforms to any other technical, economic
other criteria laid down by the Authority in accordance with
national power policy evolved by it in pursuance of the provi
contained in clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 3.

31. (1) Where a scheme is submitted to the Authority under si
section (1) of section 29, the Authority may, having regard tp the matter
referred to in section 30, either concur in the scheme without modifica-
tion or require the Board or, as the case may be, the Generating Com-
Pany to modify the scheme in such manner as the Authority specifies in
the requisition so as to ensure that the scheme conforms to the national
power policy evolved by the Authority in pursuance of the provisions
contained in clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 3 and in either case
the Authority shall also communicate its decision to the State Govern-
ment or State Governments concerned:

Provided that where the scheme was submitted for concurrence by
a Generating Company in relation to which the Central Government is
the promoting government or one of the promoting governments, the
decision shall be communicated also to that Government.
* = * * *

39. (0). * * * * *

(2) Where a Generating Company has been established having its
activities wholly or partly in a State, the State Government may direct
the Board to make over any generating station established or acquired
by the Board to the Generating Company subject to such terms and con-
ditions as may be specified in the direction and the Eoard shall comply
with such direction:

Provided that where the Central Government is the promoting gov-
ernment or one of the promoting governments in relation to the Gene-
rating Company, no direction shall be made by any State Government
under this stib-section without the concurrence of the Central Govern-
ment:

के * * * .
43. (1) * * * *
(3) A Generating Company may, on such terms as may be agreed
upon, enter into arrangements for the sale of electricity generated by it—
(a) with the Board constituted for the State or any of the
States wherein such Generating Company is operating; or
(0) with any other person with the consent of the Government
-or. Governments which, in relation to that Generating Company, is
the promoting government or promoting governments.

के * * * *


aby

55. (1) Every licensee shall comply with such reasonable directions
as the Board may from time to time give him for the purpose of achieving
the maximum of economy and efficiency in the operation of his undertak-
ing or any part thereof.

(2) If any dispute arises between the Board and the licensee as to
whether any directions given under sub-section (1) are reasonable or not,
it shall be referred to the Authority whose decision thereon shall be final.

+  * * * न

753. (1) A Generating Company shall, before the expiry of the 3lst
December of each year, submit to the promoting government, or where
‘there are more than one promoting government to all such promoting
governments, a report giving an account of the activities, if any, which
are likely to be undertaken by such Generating Company in the ensuing
year together with a statement of the estimated capital and revenue
receipts and expenditure for that year in such form as may be specified
hy the promoting government or, as the case may be, the promoting gav-
ernments.

(2) A Generating Company shall, as soon as may be after the end
of each year, prepare a report giving an account of its activities during
the previous year and shall, within six months from the date of closure
of the year, forward to the promoting government, or where there are
more than one promoting government, to all such promoting govern-
ments, the report together with a statement of accounts, in such form and
containing such particulars as may be specified by the promoting govern-
ment or the promoting governments, as the case may be, a copy of the
balance-sheet and profit and loss account and the auditor's report, in re-
lation to the accounts of the year aforesaid.

(3) For the purpose of preparing the statement of accounts referred
to in sub-section (2), the depreciation to be provided every year shall
be calculated in accordance with the same method as laid down by or
under this Act for calculating depreciation in relation to the Board,

(8A) (a) The Generating Company shall carry on its operations under
this Act and adjust its tariffs so 88 to ensure that the total revenues in
any year of accotint shall, after meeting all the expenses properly charge-
able to revenues including operating, maintenance and management ex-
.Penses, taxes (if any) on income and profits, depreciation and interest
payable on all debentures, bonds and loans, leave such surplus as the
promoting government or promoting governments, as the case may be,
may, from time to time. specify.

(0) In specifying the surplus under clause (a), the promoting govern-
ment or promoting governments, as the case may be, shall have due re-
gard to the availability of amounts accrued by way of depreciation and
‘the liability for loan amortization and leave a reasonable amount to con-
tribute towards the cost of capital works and for payment of dividend
on shares.

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be in addition to
and not derogation of the provisions contained in the Companies Act, 1956,
in relation to reports, statement of accounts and other documents required
to be prepared or kept or submitted by a company within the meaning
of section 3 of that Act.

* * * . *

Licenses
to comply
with
Board's

directions,

Annual
Teports
and
accounts
of Gene-
rating
Company,


12 ,

THE SIXTH SCHEDULE <
(See sections 57 and 57A)

FINANCIAL PRINCIPLES AND THEIR APPLICATION

. * = + *
Definitions
XVII. For the purposes of this Schedule—
* * . *

(2) “clear profit” means—
the difference between the amount of income and the of
expenditure plus specific appropriations, made up in each case aS
follows: —
* * * *

(c) special appropriations sufficient to cover—

* . * * *

(6) “Original cost” means in respect of any asset the sum of—

* « * *

(0) interest charges on capital expenditure incurred, during
the period between the date of the grant of the licence and the
date when the undertaking commences supply, from borrowed
money and properly attributable to the asset, accrued up to the
date of such commencement of supply at a rate not exceeding
the average Reserve Bank rate ruling at that time plus one per
centum;

* * * के

so however, that the original cost of any asset shall not in any case
exceed the original cost attributed thereto in the books of the under-
taking.

* * * *

(10) “standard rate” in respect of any year of account means—

* * * *

(७) in relation to the remaining part of the capital base for
that year, the Reserve Bank rate ruling at the beginning of that
year, plus two per centum:

Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, and with effect from such date as may be speci-
fied therein, increase or decrease the standard rate specified in clause
(0), if, after consultation with the Authority, that Government con-
siders it necessary so to do to ensure that any rise or fall in the Re-
serve Bank rate does not affect the reasonable return in any subse.
quent year of account in relation to that part of the capital base
which is equivalent fo the capital base as computed on the last date
of the previous year of account.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the /
(Supply) Act, 1948.

(Shri Kalp Nath Rai, Minister of State in the Ministry of Power and
Non-Conventional Energy Sources)