1
THE INSECTICIDES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Insecticides Act, 1968.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Insecticides (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as  the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 4 of the Insecticides Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),—
(a) in sub-section (3), after clause (xxi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 153 of  2019
Amendment
of section 4.
46 of 1968.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
“(xxii) one scientist who shall be an expert in non-animal alternatives, to be
nominated by the Central Government.”; and
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words “under clauses (xiv) to (xxi)”, the words “under
clauses (xiv) to (xxii)” shall be substituted.
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “and the Plant
Protection Adviser to the Government of India", the words," the Plant Protection Adviser to
the Government of India and the scientist appointed under clause (xxii) of sub-section (3) of
section 4" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 5.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The world, in the past ten years, has seen a paradigm shift in the way chemicals are
being tested for health risk assessment. Safety testing is moving away from simply causing
recognizable toxic effects in animals and moving into understanding symptoms, disorders,
diseases and toxicity endpoints more holistically. This includes moving away from obsolete,
time consuming, painful experiments on animals to swift, sustainable, superior non-animal
technologies.
Europe and the United States have already begun to invest heavily in this research
area, with collaborative research agreements being struck to maximize coordination, data
sharing and potential synergies.
Europe, in the recent past, has made considerable progress in reducing the number
of animals used to test a new active substance by an unprecedented 40% to 50% compared
to previous requirements—making it one of the largest one-time regulatory animal test
reduction ever achieved.
Whereas Europe was lagging behind 15-20 years in its regulation for safety
assessment of pesticides, India's regulation still has elements that date back forty-five years.
Obsolete, animal intensive experiments are still being mandated by the regulatory authority.
India has been a signatory to the Mutual Acceptance of Data (MAD) agreement of
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) since 2011. The
OECD contains a number of non-animal alternatives for any of its member countries or
MAD signatory countries to uptake. However with India, the uptake and putting in practice,
these alternatives have been extremely slow. This is due to the fact that neither the Central
Insecticide Board nor the Registration Committee consist of any member with expertise in
the non-animal alternatives. The Board heavily relies on stakeholders outside the Committee.
With the advent of alternatives in a larger way in the near future owing to the development
of alternatives worldwide and the requirements of Indian law, i.e., section 17(2)(d) of the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 requires that ‘‘experiments on animals are avoided
wherever it is possible to do so’’, it is important that a scientist with knowledge and
expertise on non-animal alternatives be included in the Central Insecticide Board and the
Registration Committee so that redundant animal testing could be avoided thereby saving
animals from unnecessary pain and suffering; and advancing India's standards in
technology by bringing its regulatory requirements at par with the global leaders.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA
June 18, 2019.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968
(46 OF 1968)
* * * * *
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be constitute a Board to be
called the Central Insecticides Board to advise the Central Government and State
Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to
carry out the other functions assigned to the Board by or under this Act.
(2) The matters on which the Board may advise under sub-section (1) shall include
matters relating to—
(a) * * * * *
(b) * * * * *
(3) * * * * *
* * * * *
(xxi) one ecologist to be nominated by the Central Government.
(4) The persons nominated under clauses ( xiv ) to ( xxi ) inclusive, of
sub-section ( 3) shall, unless their seats become vacant earlier by resignation, death or
otherwise, hold office for three years from the date of their nominations, but shall be
eligible for re-nomination:
Provided that the persons nominated under clauses ( xvii) and ( xviii) shall hold
office only for so long as they hold the appointments by virtue of which their
nominations were made.
* * * * *
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Registration Committee consisting
of a Chairman, and not more than five persons who shall be members of the Board
(including the Drugs Controller, India and the Plant Protection adviser to the Government
of India—
* * * * *
4
The Central
Insecticides
Board.
Registration
Committee.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Insecticides Act, 1968.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—946LS(S3)—08-07-2019.