5 
As. INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA. ON 
.. 
BiI No. 153 of 1985 . 
THE INTELLIGENCE ORGANISATIONS (RESTRICTION OF 
. RIGHTS) BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
to provic:{e for the restriction of certain Tights conferred by Part III: Of the 
Constitution in their application to the members of certain organise,. 
ti0n3 established by the Central Government for purposes Of,., inwUi-
gence OT C01lnter-intelligence so as to ensure the proper discharge at 
their duties aM the ,m.aintenance of discipline among them. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the RepublIc 
of India ~s foUows:- . 
1: (1) This Act may be called the Intelligence Organisations (Restric- ~hort 
tion of Rights) Act, 1985. title, ex· 
feIlt IIId 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such ,date as the Centr8I Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. ... 
2. In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires;-
..> 
mellt. 
DefiD1-
tions • 
(a) "Intelligence Organisation" means any organisation esUib-
10 lisbed by the Central Govenunent", for purposes of inteWgence or 
counter~jntetiigence and speCified in. the Schedule; 
(b) "member of an Intelligence Organisation" means any pergon 
appointed to, or employed in,any Intelligenct! Organisation; 
(c) l11QrAScrjl~"'d" "Qeans prescribed bY. rules made under this Act., 
• r 

Rutric-
lioas .... 
pectiq 
riJht'to 
farm aIIO-
c:iatioa, 
freecIodI 
of .,eecb, 
otc. 
Penalty. 
.. 
Offences 
to be 
cognizable. 
Power to 
amelid . 
Schedule. 
2 
3. (1) ·No member of .an Intelligence Organisation shall,-
,(4) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any' trad~ 
union, labour union, political association or with any class of trade 
unions, labour un:'ons or polittcal associations;" or 
(b) be ,a member of, or be associated in any way with, or .raise 5 
funds for, or hold oftlce'in, or function in any othe~ manner for, any 
other society.. imrtftution, association or organisation that. is not 
recognised by' the C.mtral Government as part of tht; Intelligence' 
O.rganisation ot' which he is a member or is not of a purely social, 
.... recreational or: r,eligious nature; or ' 10 
• 
(c)' commurtfa. 'te with the press or publish or cause to be pubUsh-
ed any book, letter. pamphlet, poster or other document except with 
. the prior permission ,-of the head of ,the Intelligence Organisation; or 
(d), except for put~1)oses of official dutY,.contact, or communicate 
with any person on any matter relating to functioning, structure, 15 
personnel or organisationa.l ~ffairs of the Intelligence Organisation of 
which he is a member; 
(e) use the name of thelutelIiglmce OrganisatiOn of whi~h he is 
a member for purposes not autliorised .by the head of the Intelligence 
Organisation or in any other marmer. except for purposes relating to 20 
the official work and functioning of the' ,~rganisation itself. 
Explanation.-lf any question arises as to'. whether any society, insti-
tution, association or organisation is of a purel~.y social, recreational or . 
religious nature under rlallse (b) of this sub.sa ,tion, the decision of the 
Central Government thereon shall be final. 25 
(2) No member of an Intelligence Organisati()."l, shall participate in, 
or address, ,any' meeting or take part in any demon~·tration organised by 
anybody of persons for any political purposes or for :such other purposes 
as may be prescribed. \. ... . 
4. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of section 3 30 
shall, without prejudice to any other action that may. be ta~en against 
him, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may e.:ctend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rUI't.'es, or 
with both. '., 
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal PTO:' 3vC\ 
cedure, 1973, all offences punishable. under section 4 shall be cogni~ble, ~' of 1974. 
6. (1) The Central Government m~y, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Schedule by including therein any other organisation 
established by the Ce~tral Government for purposes of intelligence or 
counter-inte11i~ence or by omitt~g. therefrom any organisation already 40 
specified therem and on the publIcation of the notification, such organisa-
tion shall be deemed to be specified in, or, as the case may be, omitted 
from, the Schedule. , 
(2) A copy of every notification issu,d under sub-section (1) shall, as 
soon as may be after it is issued, l;le laid be1o~e eaeb House of Parliament, 45 
.~ 

3 
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlclal Power 
Gazette, make rUles to carry out the purposes' of this Act. to make 
rules. 
(2) Every rule made by, the Central Government un.der this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after iti! made, before each House of Parlia-
5 ment, while it is in. session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more . successive sessions,' and if, 
before the expiry· of the session immediately following the ses..n or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifi-
cation in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
10 the rule shall the.reafter have effect only i~ such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi~cation or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
vioWily dorie under that rule. 
THE SCHEDULE 
15 (See sectioQ 2(a) and section 6(1) 
1. The Intelligence Bureau. 
2. The Research and Analysis ~ing. 

'S\-ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
TheCOutltution (FlftieUl Ametidment) 'A~, 1984-has ani~4!d·atttcle 
33·0£ the COnstitution, so as to "bring within ita purviawpersona employ-
edm any bureau or other organisation established' by the State for pur-
poeea of inteW«ence or eounter"intelligtmce and pm-SOils employed iri, or 
in connection with, the tele-communication systems set up for the purposes 
of. any Foree, bUreau or organisation refetred to in th~ said article. The 
Parliament is, thus, now empowered to enact a law determining td what 
extettt any of the rights conferred by Part nI of the Constitution shall, in 
their application to the persons wot:king in Intelligence' Bureau(m), And 
Research and Analysis Wing (R&A W), be restricted or abrogated, so as to 
ensure the proper discharge of duties, and the Maintenance of discipline 
among them. ' ri'. '''£, 
2. It is, therefore, proposed to enact a law with a view to check the 
tendency of groWing mdisdpllite in these highly sensitive organisations 
and thereby to ensure that the personnel of these orpsatiODa work with 
total dedication and discipUne in the discharge of their duties. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW Da.mj S. B. CHAVAN. 
The 7tJ, August, 1985'. 
:"'-··I'·~' 
.. 
4 

, 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause' (3) of 'clause 1 of the Bill empowers the Central Govern-
ment to appoint the date on which the proposed legislation, when enact-
ed, will come. into force. Sub-clause .. (2) of clause 3 'of the Bill 'empowers· 
the Central. Government to prescribe the purposes of any meetings or 
uemonstration in which a member of an Intelligence Oirganisation shall 
be precluded from participating. . Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to amend the Schedule to include therein any or-
ganisation established by the Central Government for purposes of 
intelligence or counter intelligence or omit tberfrom .any organisation 
already specified' therein. It is not pOPsible to visualise at this stage 
what other Intelligence or counter-Intelligence organisatons may have 
to be included in the Schedule particularly as it may be found necssary 
in future to further establish such' organisatiOns. Having regard to this 
circumstance, the powers delegated are of a normal character. 
2. Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the proposed legislation.' The matters 
in respect of which rules may be made are matters relating to procedure 
Or detail. Moreover, the rules and the notification under clauSe 6 shaD 
• De' subject to sc~tiny of Parliament. Thus the. deleg~tion. of legislative 
power is of a normal char8cter. ' 
.' 
.. 
5 

""', .. i. .. :' 
LOK SABRA . 
A 
BILL 
'. 
to provide for ~ reatriction of certain rights c~nferre4 by ~..n In of tile 
'CoDSti~~~ 'in ~ei,r ~pl!cation to t~ ~rs of ~ ~-
tiODS established \;;". the CeD.tral Gove . ". t for" .' , of' ~~-"? l'IlIJl8D. ~ . . ... 
pnce or counter-intelligence so as to ensure the prOper discliarje of 
their duties and the maintenance of discipUne among them. 
,.. 
(Shri S. B. Chavan, 
MiniB'teT of Home Alai"',) 