43 of 1951. 
• As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
2 2 DEC 19t1 
Bill No. 153 of' 1977 
THE ELECTION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the R~8entation of the People Act, 1951 and the 
Indian Pe7l4l Code. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1977. Short 
title. 
Z. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred Amend-
S to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) of section '17,- ment at 
section 
(a) for the words "the date on which he has been nominated", 77. 
10 
IS 
the words "the date of publication of the notification calling the 
election" shall be substituted; 
(b) Explanation 1, Expla.nation 2 and Explanation 3 shall be 
omitted. 
3. In section 79 of the principal Act, for clause (b), the following Amend-
clause shall be substituted, namely: - ment of 
'(b) "candidate" means a person who has been or claims to 
have been duly nominated as a candidate at any election and any 
such person shall be deemed to have been a candidate as from the 
time when, with the election in prospect, he began to hold himself 
out as a prospective candidate;\ 
section 
'19. 

Amend_ 
mentot 
section 
123. 
Amend. 
mentol 
section 
171Aot 
Act 45 01 
1860. 
2. 
4. In section 123 of the principal Act,-
t· 
(a) in' clause (3), the proviso shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (7), the proviso shall be omitted; 
(c). in the Explanation at the end, paragraph (3) shall be 
omitted. S 
5. In the Indian Penal Code, in section 171A, for clause (a), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
'(a) "candidate" means a person who has been nominated as a 
candidate at any election and includes a person who, when an election 
is in contemplation, holds himself out as a prospective candidate 10 
thereat; provided that he is subsequently nominated as a candidate 
at such electionj'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND ~SONS 
The Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1974 (58 of 
1974) and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 (40 of 1975) 
effected certain amendments in the Representation of the People Act., 
1951 (43 of 1951) inter a114 to provide that the expenditure incurred or 
authorised by a political party or any other association or body of person" 
or by any individual (other than the candidate or his election agent) 
shall not be deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election 
incurred or authorised by the I::andidate or by his election agent and also 
to remove! the concept of "election in prospect", so. that the ban contem-
plated for the purposes of corrupt practices would apply only from the 
date of filing of the nomination (instead o~ from the time when, with the 
election in prospect, the candidate began to hold himself out as a pros-
pective candidate) till the date of declaration of the result. 
2. The Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 also made amendments 
to section 123 (relating to corrupt practiceS) of the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951, for the following purposes:-
(i) exclusion of a symbol allotted by the Election Commission 
from being challenged as a religious symbol under section 123 (3) ; 
(ii) exclusion of the acts, such as making arrangements or pro-
viding facilities in connection with. an election by a person in the 
service of the Government, from being construed as obtaining the 
assistance of the prohibited category of persons enumerated in sec-
tion 123 (7); and 
(iii) making the publication in the Official Gazette of the 
appointment, resignation or termination, dismissal or removal from 
service of a person in the service of the Government, a conclusive 
proof of such appointment, resignation, etc. 
3. The Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 also amended section 
171A of the Indian Penal Code so as to define the expression "candidate" • 
occurring therein, as meaning a person who has been nominated as a 
candidate at any election. 
4. It is considered that the amendments made in the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951 and the Indian Penal Code, referred to above, 
far from enslJ .. ing free and fair elections, may have the effect of increas-
ing money po\\'~r and the chances of misuse of omclal machinery at 
elections. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the said Acts to restore 
the position that obtained earlier. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NJ:W DI:LHI; SHANTI BHUSHAN. 
The 17th December, um. 
3 

Account 
ot 
election 
expenses 
and 
maximum 
thereof. 
ANNEXURE 
Ex'IRAI.."TS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE Acr, 1951 
(43 OF 1951) 
.. III III III • 
77. (1) Every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by 
his election agent, keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure 
in connection with the election incurred or authorized by him or by his 
election agent between the date on which he has been nominated and 
the date of declaration of the result thereof, both dates inclusive. 
Explanation 1.-N otwithstanding any judgment, order or decision of 
any court to the contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorized in 
connection with the election of a candidate by a political party or by any 
other association or body of persons or by any individual (other than 
the candidate or his election agent) shall not be deemed to be, and 
shall not ever be deemed to have been, expenditure in connection with 
the election incurred or authorized by the candidate or by his election 
agent for the purposes of this sub-section: 
Provided that nothing contained in this Explanation shall affect-
(a) any judgment, order or decision of the Supreme Court 
whereby the election of a candidate to the House of the People or 
to the Legislative Assembly of a State has been declared void or 
set aside before the commencement of the Representation of the 
People (Amendment) Ordinance, 1974; 
(b) any judgment, order or decision of a High Court whereby 
the election of any such candidate has been declared void or set 
aside before the commencement of the said OrdinaDce if no appeal 
has been preferred to the Supreme Court against such judgment, 
order or decision Qf the High Court before such commencement and 
the period of limitation for filing such appeal has expired before 
such commencement. 
Explanation ~.-For the purposes of Expla.na.tion I, "political party" 
shall have the same meaning as in the Election Symbols (Rpervation 
and Allotment) Order, 1968, as for the time being in force. 
Explanation 3.-For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that 
any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities 
provided or any other act or thing done by any person in the service 
of the Government and belonging to any of the classes mentioned in 
clause (7) oi section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of his 
official duty as mentioned in the proviso to that clause shall not be 
deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election incurred or 
authorized by a candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of 
this sub-section. . 
• • • • • 

S 
79. In this Part and in Part VII, unless the context otherwise 
requires.-
• • • • 
(b) "candidate" means a person who has been or claims to have 
been duly nominated as a candidate at any election; 
.. .. .. .. • 
123. The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the 
purposes of this Act:-
.. .. .. .. • 
(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person 
with the consent of a candidate or his election agent to vote or refrain 
from voting for any person on the ground of his religion, race, caste, 
community or lal).guage or the use of, or appeal'to, religious symbols 
or the use of, or appeal to, national symbol'S, such as the national flag 
or the national emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of th ~ 
election of that candidate or for prejudiCially affecting the election of 
any candidate: 
Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to a candidate shall 
be deemed to be a religious symbol or a national symbol for the pur-
poses of this clause. 
.. .. .. .. • 
(7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain 
or procure by a candidate or his agent or, by any other person with the 
consent of a candidate or his election agent, any assistance (other than 
the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of that candi-
date's election, from any person in the service of the Government and 
belonging to any of the following classes, namely:-
(a) gazetted officers; 
(b-) stipendiary judges and magistrates; 
(c) members of the armed forces of the Union; 
(d) members of the police forces; 
(e) excise officers; 
(f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers known 
as lambardars, malguzars, patels, deshmukhs or by any other name, 
whose duty is to collect land revenue and who are remunerated by 
a share of or commission on the amount of land revenue collected , , 
by them but who do not discharge any police functions; and 
(g) such other class of persons in the service of the Government 
as may be prescribed: 
Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government 
and belonging to any of the classes aforesaid, in the discharge or pur-
ported discharge Of his official duty, makes any arrangements or pro-
vides any facilities or does any other act or thing, for, to, or in relation 
to, any candidate or his agent or any other perlOn acthlJ with the 
Deftni-
nitions . 
Corrupt 
practices . 

"Candi_ 
date", 
"Electoral 
right" 
defined. 
6 
consent of the candidate or his election agent, (whether by reason of 
the office held by the candidate or for any other reason), such arrange-
ments, facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to be assistance for 
the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's election. 
Explanation.-(l) In this section the expression "agent" includes an 
election agent, a polling agent and any person who is held to have acted 
as an agent in connection with the election with the consent of the 
candidate. 
(2) For the purposes of clause (7), a person shall J>e deemed to 
assist in the furtherance of the prospects of a candidate"s election if he 
ncts as an election agent of that candidate. 
(3) For the purposes of clause (7), notwithstanding anything con-
tained in any other law, the publication in the Official Gazette of the 
appointment, resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal 
from service of a person in the service of the Central Government 
(including a person serving in connection with the administration of 
a Union territory) or of a State Government shall be conclusive proof-
(i) of such appointment, resignation, termination of service, 
dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, and 
(ii) where the date of taking effect of such appointment, resig-
nation, termination of service, dismissal or removal from service, as 
the case may be, is stated in sLlch publication, also of the fact that 
such person was appointed with effect from the said date, or in the 
case of resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal 
from service, such pers:m ceased to be in such service with effect 
from the said date. 
• 
• 
• • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
(45 OF 1860) 
• • • 
U1A. For the purposes of this Chapter-
• 
• 
(a) "candidate" means a person who has been nominated as a 
candidate at any election; 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation ot the People Act, 1951 and the 
Indian Penal Code. 
(Shri Shanti Bhushan, Minister oj Law, Justice and Company Affairs). 