1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 153 of 2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  For section 309 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“309. (1) Where any person attempts to commit suicide or performs any act towards
the commission of such attempt, in a manner that is likely to cause breakdown of public
order, then a police officer, not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, shall
apply to a Judicial Magistrate for determination to that effect.
(2) where the Judicial Magistrate makes a determination under sub-section (1), he
may pass an order allowing a police officer to detain such person in a police station for such
time as may be specified in the order and direct the police officer to take such other measures
as may be necessary to ensure that the detainee does not attempt to commit suicide while
in custody:
Provided that the Judicial Magistrate’s order shall specifically state all measures that
may be taken to ensure that the person does not attempt to commit suicide while in custody.
Illustration: X begins a hunger strike in a public place and incites a crowd by
proclaiming that he will fast unto death. X is attempting to commit suicide in a manner that
is likely to cause breakdown of public order.
(3) Where any person imminently attempts to commit suicide or performs any act
towards the imminent commission of such attempt, in a manner that is likely to cause
breakdown of public order, a police officer, not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of
Police, or equivalent rank, shall have the power to detain such person in a police station and
to take such other measures as may be necessary to ensure that he does not attempt to
commit suicide while in custody:
Provided that the police officer shall, within twenty-four hours of such detention,
apply to the Judicial Magistrate for determination to that effect.
Illustration: X climbs on the roof of a tall building and incites a crowd by proclaiming
that he will jump down to his death. A is imminently attempting to commit suicide in a
manner that is likely to cause breakdown of public order.
(4) Where the Judicial Magistrate makes a determination under sub-section ( 3), he
may pass an order allowing further detention of such person in a police station for such time
as may be specified in the order and direct the police officer to take such other measures as
may be necessary to ensure that the he does not attempt to commit suicide while in  custody:
Provided that if the Judicial Magistrate does not make a determination, such person
shall not be detained any more.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, ‘such other measures as may be
necessary to ensure that the he does not attempt to commit suicide while in custody’,
include measures to forcibly feed someone attempting suicide by refusing.
(5) Where any person attempts to commit suicide or performs any act towards the
commission such attempt of, which does not lead to death of such person, the person who
abets in commission of such attempt or performance of such act shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also
be liable to fine.”.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 309.
Attempt to
commit
suicide that is
likely to cause
breakdown of
public order.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

S-3\F\BILL 2015\LS\1086LS
3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is an indication of the tendency of many of our laws to stick to status quo that the
anachronistic provision that criminalises the attempt to commit suicides continues to operate
today. The mental state of a person who commits suicide deserves understanding and
careful intervention, and the blunt instrument of criminal sanction is markedly ill-suited for
this purpose. A large number of other jurisdictions have long since realised this fact, and do
not criminalise attempts to commit suicide today. Despite recommendations of the Law
Commission and the Supreme Court to adopt a similar approach in India too, the same has
not been achieved so far.
This Bill addresses this situation by decriminalising attempts to commit suicide. It
also addresses two concerns that may arise with such a proposal. First, it grants the authorities
narrowly defined powers to intervene if they come across a suicide attempt that has the
potential to cause breakdown of public order. Secondly, it clarifies that the decriminalisation
of suicide attempts does not in any way dislodge the legal liability of those who abet
suicide, whether their abetment ultimately results in a suicide or an attempt to commit
suicide.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
May 6, 2016.

S-3\F\BILL 2015\LS\1086LS
4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
309.  Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards the commission
of such offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year or with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
Attempt to
commit
suicide.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1086LS(S3)—02-07-2016.