AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

84 ॥0॥ 2a,

BILL No. 153 of 2000.

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Pror, UMMAREDDY VENKATESWARLU, M.>P.
A
BILL
{farther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as _
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title.

2. Article 130 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (/) thereof and after Amendment
5. clause (1) as so renumbered the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— of article 130.

“(2) There shall be established a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at
Hyderabad, consisting of such number of judges of the Supreme Court as the Chief
Justice of India may from time to time determine, but not less than five in number, to
exercise the powers and jurisdiction for the time being vested in the Supreme Court

10 in respect of cases arising in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and
Tamil Nadu and Union territory of Pondicherry.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Supreme Court, the apex Court of justice in the country is located in Dethi. The
litigant public have to come to Delhi in connection with their cases in Supreme Court,
Countless other people have also to come to Delhi in response to the summons of the
Supreme Court.

India being such a vast country, all such visits to the Supreme Court from far off
Places exact a very high cost in terms of time and money on litigants. This is more so, in
case of people coming from southern India. From the administrative point of view also
serving of notices, paper work, postal exigencies in regard to distant places are leading to
staggering of cases, postponement, exparte decisions, etc., the major reasons behind delays
in delivery of justice.

Under the circumstances creation of a bench of the Supreme Court in southern India
is the need of the hour.

Hyderabad the cyber city of the nation is ideally suited for the purpose as it is
almost midway through Delhi and southern most point of the country. Having infrastruc.
ture and other facilities, itis also being well connected both within the region and with
Delhi.

In case a bench of Supreme Court is set up here it would not only save time and
money of the litigants but also help in expeditious disposal of cases.

The Bill accordingly seeks to amend the Constitution of India.

New Deut; UMMAREDDY VENKATESWARLU
August 3, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of bench of the Supreme Court at
Hyderabad. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated

Fund of India. Itis likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakhs per
annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE,

EXTRACT FROM THE ConSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * *

* * * ‘ *

Seat of 130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place of place, as the

Cour” Chief Justice of India may, with the approval ofthe President, fromvine to time, appoint.
unt.

* * * * * * a *


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Prof. Ummareddy Venkateswarlu, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—4124LS—21-03-2000.