w

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

. 153 of 2021

THE PERSONS LIVING ON RIVERINE ISLANDS IN THE STATE
OF ASSAM (WELFARE AND CENSUS) BILL, 2021
By
Suri (80901, KHALeQue, M.P.

A
BILL

to provide for welfare and census of persons living on char or riverine
islands in the State of Assam and issue of migration certificate to
persons displaced from their place of residence in riverine
island due to erosion caused by rivers flowing across the
State of Assam and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows: —

1.(/) This Act may be called the Persons Living on Riverine Islands in the State
of Assam (Welfare and Census) Act, 2021.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Short title and
commencement.


. .
५३८ ७० छत ee
_
7 हु
रा
रा हि
India? gs
| पलक लत oe 031 ह811 6315 Hee | a
se a हा 9109: Ee he det SO” a -
पु ; | re oe
| : पु
रा ः न UG ः 7 ——
7 19 ee ४७ ५ कक
a हु ee | ee | 7 -
a हु ०» ६ ७.०७ ,  %$६. ४ कस | है
7 a न हु
बी ee a ee oe
- 7 Oo - 7
५. ae आए रा 1 1 ||
| ः 9 टरोि
2० eat te Fe eet |e a fet ait -
Oo पु se ae
ee ne | ee ee 5 9 5
——
- a



To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 153 of 2021

THE PERSONS LIVING ON RIVERINE ISLANDS IN THE STATE
OF ASSAM (WELFARE AND CENSUS) BILL, 2021

By
Suri 8901 Kiateque, M.P.

A
BILL

to provide for welfare and census of persons living on char or riverine
islands in the State of Assam and issue of migration certificate to
persons displaced from their place of residence in riverine
island due to erosion caused by rivers flowing across the
State of Assam and for matters connected therewith

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows: —

1. (/) This Act may be called the Persons Living on Riverine Islands in the State Short title and

of Assam (Welfare and Census) Act, 2021. commencement,

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.


Definitions.

Prohibition on
discrimination
on person
living ona
riverine island.

Central
Government
to map and
designate
riverine
islands, etc.

Constitution
of State
Riverine
Committee.

Functions of
the State
Committee.

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise require:

(a) “dependent” means parents, children and under aged siblings of the person;

(b) “District Committee” means the Committee constituted in each district of

the State under section 7;

(c) “local officer” includes an officer or employee of Gram Panchayat and
officers under the administrative control of district administration or local bodies,
as the case may be;

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(०) “riverine island”, means a landmass, within the State of Assam, surrounded
by a river and formed often due to changing course of a river, especially if the
river meanders; and

(“State Committee” means the State Riverine Committee constituted under
section 5.

3. No person who has lived or is living ona riverine island shall be discriminated
against and termed as illegal settler from the date of commencement of this Act ifhe
establishes his residence on riverine islands for such period, as may be prescribed.

4. The Central Government, in consultation with the Government of the State
of Assam, shall—
(a) map and designate the riverine islands and carr
mapped areas; and

annual census of such

(b) ensure setting up of an early warning system to warn the persons living
on riverine islands about flood and other natural calamities.

5. (1) The State Government of Assam, shall constitute a Committee to be
known as the State Riverine Committee for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) The State Riverine Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such
other member as may prescribed.

(3) The State Committee shall meet at least once in every four months.

(4) The State Committee shall regulate its own procedure.

(5) The State Committee shall be provided with such number of officers and
staff as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the

Committee under this Act.

(6) The salary, allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
services of officers and employees of the State Committee shall be such as may be

prescribed.
6. The State Committee shall, —

(a) cause to conduct a detailed census of the people inhabiting the riverine
islands;

(b) monitor and keep record of persons who have migrated from riverine islands
due to erosion, flood or other natural calamities on a regular basis and provide
necessary directives for welfare of such persons to the District Committees;

40


20

30

£ |

(८) maintain list of riverine islands, from time to time;
(d) maintain population count of each riverine island on yearly basis;
(०) supervise the functions of the District Committees; and

(f issue necessary directions to the District Committees for issuance of migration
certificates to the displaced person and their dependent family members within fifteen
days of displacement through local officers of district administration in such manner

as may be prescribed.

7. (1) The State Government of Assam shall, in consultation with the State
Committee, constitute a District Committee to be known as the District Riverine
Committee for every district under its jurisdiction for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.

(2) The District Committee shall consist of:—

(a) District Magistrate—Chairperson, ex-officio;

(b) one Additional District Magistrate, nominated by the District Magistrate
Member-Secretary;

(c) all Sub-divisional Magistrates of the district-Members ex-officio;
(वी Superintendent of Police of the district-Member ex-officio;
(e) Block Development Officers of the areas concerned~Members ex-officio;
(0 Chief Medical Officer-Member ex-officio; and
(g) Circle Officer of Revenue Circle-Member ex-officio.
8. (1) The District Committee shall—
(a) carry out the directions given by the State Committee, from time to time;

(4) issue migration certificate, in concurrence to the directions of the State
Committee under clause (f) of section 6, to the displaced person and their dependent
family members within fifteen days of displacement through local officers; and

(c) instruct local officers to maintain vigil in riverine islands.

(2) The District Committees shall meet at least once in every four month.

(3) The District Committee shall regulate its own procedure.

(4) The District Committee shall be provided with such number of officers and
staff as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the
Committee under this Act.

(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of

services of officers and employees of the District Committee shall be such as may be
prescribed.

9. No act or proceedings of the State Committee and the District Committee, as
the case may be, shall be questioned or invalid on the ground of existence of any
vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Committee(s).

10. If any difficulties arise in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the
Central Government may, by notified order, make such provisions not inconsistent

Constitution
of District
Riverine
Committee.

Functions of
District
Riverine
Committee.

Vacancies not
to be
invalidated.

Power to
remove
difficulty.


Act to have
overriding
effect.

Power to make
rules.

4

with the provision of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing,
the difficulties:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of this Act.

11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force.

12. (/) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State of Assam,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.

(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

(3) Every rule made by the State of Assam under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

20


STATE!

INT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Assam is a land of rivers, including the mighty Brahmaputra with average width
of 5.46 Kilometers. The State suffers heavy loss of lives and properties due to flood
and erosion. A large number of persons get displaced and migrate to different places
of Assam and are often accused of being ‘illegal migrant’ despite being residents of
the State of Assam for generations.

Whenever these people are asked to prove their citizenship before Foreigners
Tribunal, voters list and land documents from earlier place of residence are often
stated as false with similar names from different villages by the Tribunal and citizenship
is striped. Many of these people land up in detention centres. To reduce arbitrary
deprivation of nationality, the need is to issue affected people “certificate of migration
due to erosion” by the local administration.

Therefore, it is necessary to enact a law to provide relief to the erosion affected
people of the riverine islands in the State of Assam.

Hence, this Bill.

New Devui; ABDUL KHALEQUE
November 21, 2021.

wn


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall map and designate
the riverine islands across the State of Assam and carry annual census of such
mapped areas. It also provides for setting up of an early warning system to warn the
persons living on riverine islands about flood and other natural calamities. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of rupees ten crore will be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the

delegation of legislative power is of'a normal character.


LOK SABHA

BILL

to provide for welfare and census of people living in char or riverine islands in the
State of Assam and issue of migration certificate to persons displaced from their
place of residence in riverine island due to erosion caused by rivers flowing
across the State of Assam and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Abdul Khaleque, M.P.)