THE PINEAPPLE BOARD BILL, 2018
By
ADV . JOICE GEORGE, M.P.
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
 1. Short  title, extent and commencement.
 2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE P INEAPPLE B OARD
 3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board.
 4. Secretary and other officers.
 5. Advisory Committees.
 6. Functions of the Board.
 7. Registration of pineapple farmers.
 8. Returns to be made by registered owners.
CHAPTER III
C
ERTIFICA TE FOR EXPORT OF PINEAPPLE
 9. No  person to export pineapple without certificate.
10. Grant of certificate.
11. Cancellation, suspension, etc., of certificate.
12. Appeal.
13. Power to permit export without certificate.
CHAPTER IV
C
ONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
14. Power to control price and distribution of pineapple.
15. Power to prohibit or control import of pineapple.
16. Power of the Central Government to issue directions.
17. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Board.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
BILL NO. 154 OF 2018

CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
18. Grants and loans by the Central Government.
19. Constitution of Pineapple Board Fund.
20. Budget.
21. Annual report.
22. Accounts and audit.
23. Annual report and auditor's report to be laid before Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
24. Penalty for making false returns.
25. Penalties for obstructing an officer or member of the Board in discharging of his
duties and for failure to produce books and records.
26. Penalty for contravention of order relating to control of price, etc.
27. Penalties for contravention of section 7 or any order made under section 12.
28. Other penalties.
29. Offences by companies.
30. Delegation.
31. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants.
32. Protection of action taken in good faith.
33. Power to enter.
34. Power to make rules.
35. Power to make regulations.
36. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
37. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.
(ii)

1
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  154 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
THE PINEAPPLE BOARD BILL, 2018
BY
ADV. JOICE GEORGE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of export of  pineapple
and for the control of pineapple industry including the control of cultivation of pineapple
and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India  as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pineapple Board Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the Pineapple Board constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3;
(b) "certificate" means a certificate granted under section 9;
5
10

2
(c) "dealer" means a dealer of pineapple;
(d) "estate" means the area administered as one unit which contains land planted
with pineapple plants;
(e) "export" and "import" means, respectively, taking out of or bringing into
India by land, sea and air;
(f) "manufacturer" means a manufacturer of pineapple;
(g) "member" means a member of the Board appointed under sub-section (3) of
section 3;
(h) "owner", in relation to any land planted with pineapple plants, includes—
(i) any agent of the owner; and
(ii) a mortgagee, lessee or other person in actual possession of the land;
(i) "pineapple" means the fruit of pineapple plant and includes all the varieties
specified in the Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or
expedient in the public interest to do so, by notification in the Official Gazette, add any
other pineapple variety to the Schedule;
(j) "pineapple plant" means Ananas Comosus which the Board may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, declare to be a pineapple plant for the purposes of this Act; and
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE PINEAPPLE BOARD
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute,
for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called the Pineapple Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, and shall,
by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding thirty-two, as
may be prescribed, and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise provide, the Board
shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of
the People and one by the Council of States;
(c) three members to represent respectively, the Ministries of the Central
Government dealing with—
(i) Commerce;
(ii) Agriculture; and
(iii) Finance;
(d) six members to represent growers of pineapple;
(e) eleven members to represent the exporters of pineapple;
(f) three members to represent major pineapple producing States; and
(g) five members, of which three members/scientists to represent the Scientific
Research Institutes from pineapple producing States and two members/scientists
from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).
Constitution
and incorpo-
ration of the
Board.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(4) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen
as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board,
exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated to him by
the Board and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed.
(7) The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice-Chairperson who shall exercise
such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairperson as may be prescribed
or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.
(8) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board;
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the
case.
4. (1) The Board may appoint the Secretary and such other officers and employees as
it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be
determined by regulations.
5. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Board may, from time to time,
constitute such advisory committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its
functions.
(2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of such number of
persons as the Board may deem fit.
6. (1)The Board may—
(i) develop, promote and regulate export of pineapple;
(ii) grant certificate for export of pineapple and register brokers therefor;
(iii) undertake programmes and projects for promotion of export of pineapple;
(iv) assist and encourage studies and research for improvement of processing,
quality, techniques of grading and packaging of pineapple;
(v) strive towards stabilization of prices of pineapple for export;
(vi) evolve suitable quality standards and introduce certification of quality
through "Quality Marking" for pineapple for export;
(vii) control quality of pineapple for export;
(viii) give licences, subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed,
to the manufacturers of pineapple for export;
(ix) market pineapple, if it considers necessary, in the interest of promotion of
export;
(x) provide warehousing facilities abroad for pineapple;
(xi) collect statistics with regard to pineapple for compilation and publication;
(xii) import, with the previous approval of the Central Government, pineapple for
sale; and
Secretary and
other
officers.
Advisory
Committees.
Functions of
the Board.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(xiii) advise the Central Government on matters relating to import and export of
pineapple.
(2) Without prejudice of provisions of sub-section (1), the Board may also—
(i) promote co-operative efforts among pineapple farmers;
(ii) provide loans to farmers for sowing, as well as ensuring a Minimum Support
Price (MSP) for pineapple farmers and also facilitating insurance for the Pineapple crop
and ensuring timely storage of harvested crop in godowns/warehouses.
(iii) provide financial assistance for improved methods of research to create
better yielding varieties of Pineapple crop;
(iv) regulate the sale of pineapple and stabilization of prices of pineapple;
(v) provide training in pineapple testing and fixing grade standards of pineapple;
(vi) increase the consumption of pineapple and facilitating advertising and
marketing strategies;
(vii) register and licence brokers (including auctioneers) of pineapple and persons
engaged in the business of pineapple;
(viii) improve the marketing of pineapple;
(ix) collect statistics from growers, dealers and such other persons as may be
prescribed on any matter relating to the pineapple industry; publish statistics so
collected or portions thereof or extracts therefrom;
(x) secure better working conditions and the provision and improvement of
amenities and incentives for workers; and
(xi) undertake, assist or encourage scientific, technological and economic
research.
7. (1) Every owner of land planted with pineapple plants, whether such land is comprised
in one estate or more than one estate, shall, before the expiration of  one month from the date
on which he first became owner of such estate or estates, apply to the registering officer
appointed in this behalf by the State Government to be registered as an owner in respect of
each estate owned by him:
Provided that the State Government may, for sufficient reasons, extend the time-limit
for registration by such period as it thinks fit.
(2) Registration once made shall continue to be in force until it is cancelled by the
registering officer.
8. (1) A registered owner shall furnish returns to the Board in such form, at such times
and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board may authorize an officer to visit any farmland/estate at any time to verify
the accuracy of any return made under this section or to ascertain the productive capacity of
the farmland/estate.
CHAPTER III
C
ERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF PINEAPPLE
9. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall, after the commencement of
this Act, commence or carry on the business of export of pineapple, except under and in
accordance with a certificate:
Provided that a person carrying on the business of export of pineapple immediately
before the commencement of this Act, may continue to do so for a period of three months
from such commencement; and if he has made an application for such certificate within the
Registration
of pineapple
farmers.
Returns to be
made by
registered
owners.
No person to
export
pineapple
without
certificate.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
said period of three months till the disposal of such application.
Explanation.—The reference in this section to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed in relation to any variety of pineapple added to the Schedule by notification as
reference to the date with effect from which such variety of pineapple is added to the
Schedule.
10. (1) An application for grant of certificate shall be made to the Board in such form
and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a
receipt evidencing the payment of the prescribed fee.
(2) On receipt of such application, the Board shall —
(a) if the application is not in the prescribed form or does not contain any of the
prescribed particulars, return the application to the applicant; or
(b) if the application is in the prescribed form and contains the prescribed particulars,
grant the certificate subject to such terms and conditions as may be determined by regulations.
11. (1) The Board may cancel any certificate on any one or more of the following
grounds, namely:—
(a) that the holder of the certificate has violated any of the terms and conditions
of the certificate; and
(b) that in the opinion of the Central Government it is necessary in the interests
of general public to cancel the certificate.
(2) Where the Board, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that pending
consideration of the question of cancelling the certificate on any grounds mentioned in
sub-section (1), it is necessary so to do, the Board may, by order in writing, suspend the
operation of the certificate for such period not exceeding forty-five days as may be specified
in the order and require the holder of the certificate to show cause, within fifteen days from
the date of receipt of such order, as to why the suspension of the certificate should not be
extended till the determination of the question as to whether the registration should be
cancelled.
(3) No order of cancellation of registration under this section shall be made unless the
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the
grounds for such cancellation.
12.(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 9 may prefer an appeal to
the Central Government within such period as may be prescribed.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefore:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefore if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for
not preferring the appeal within the prescribed period.
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be
accompanied by a copy of order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(5) The Central Government may confirm, modify or reverse the order appealed against.
13. The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient, so to do,
in public interest, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any,
as may be specified therein, permit anybody or other agency to commence or carry on the
business of export of pineapple without a certificate.
Grant of
certificate.
Cancellation,
suspension,
etc. of
certificate.
Appeal.
Power to
permit
export
without
certificate.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
CHAPTER IV
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
14. (1) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, fix in
respect of pineapple of any description specified therein—
(a) the maximum price or the minimum price, or the maximum and minimum prices,
which may be charged by a pineapple farmer or pineapple dealer, wholesale or retail,
whether for the Indian market or for export; and
(b) the maximum quantity which may in one transaction be sold to any person.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-section (1), any
order made thereunder may provide—
(a) for requiring persons engaged in the production, supply or distribution of, or
trade and commerce in, pineapple to maintain and produce for inspection such books,
accounts and records relating to their business and to furnish such information relating
thereto as may be specified in the order; and
(b) for such other matters, including in particular the entering and search of
premises, vehicles, vessels and aircraft, and the seizure by a person authorised to
make such search, of pineapple in respect of which such person has reason to believe
that a contravention of the order has been, is being or is about to be, committed.
15. The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling the import of pineapple, either
generally or in specified classes of cases.
16. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in
the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on
questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
17. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of opinion—
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction
issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions
and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such
default the financial position of the Board or the administration of the Board has
deteriorated; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to
do, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the
Board for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Board,—
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as
such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board, shall until the Board
Power to
control price
and
distribution of
pineapple.
Power to
prohibit or
control
import of
pineapple.
Power of the
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power of the
Central
Government
to supersede
the Board.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or
persons as the Central Government may direct; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh
appointment and in such case any person or persons who vacated their offices under clause
(a) of sub-section (2), shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the
period of supersession, take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such
action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
18. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums of money as it may consider
necessary.
19. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Pineapple Board Fund and
there shall be credited thereto—
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government under
section 16;
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of Certificates granted under this
Act; and
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided
upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other
employees of the Board;
(b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 6; and
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorized by this Act.
20. The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time each financial year, as may
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
21. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may
be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities  during the previous
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
22. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner as may,
in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed and the
Board shall furnish to the Central Government before such  date, as may be prescribed, its
audited copy of accounts together with the auditors' report thereon.
23. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be
laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
Grants and
loans by  the
Central
Government.
Constitution
of  Pineapple
Board Fund.
Budget.
Annual
report.
Accounts and
audit.
Annual report
and auditors'
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
24. Any person who being required by or under this Act to furnish any return fails to
furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false and which
he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees.
25. Any person who—
(a) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairperson in writing or any officer
or other employee of the Board authorised by it in this behalf or any person authorised
in this behalf by the Central Government or by the Board, in the exercise of any power
conferred, or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on him by or under this Act; or
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails to
produce such book or record when required to do so by or under this Act, shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
26. ( 1) If any person contravenes any order made under section 11, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; and the property in respect of which the
order has been contravened or such part thereof as the Court may deem fit, shall be forfeited
to the Central Government.
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of, any order
under section 11 shall be deemed to have contravened that order.
27. If any person contravenes the provisions of section 7 or any order made under
section 12 he shall, without prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to which he may be
liable under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
28. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder other than the provisions,
punishment for the contravention whereof has been provided for in sections 21, 22, 23 and
24, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention
with an additional fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which such
contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.
29.(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( I), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Penalty for
making false
returns.
Penalty for
contravention
of order
relating to
control of
price, etc.
Penalties for
obstructing an
officer or
member of
the Board in
discharging of
his duties and
for failure to
produce books
and records.
Penalties for
contravention
of section 7
or any order
made under
section 12.
Other
penalties.
Offences by
companies.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
30. The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson
or any other member or to any officer of the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations,
if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act.
31. All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, when
Acting or purporting to Act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
32. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, or the
Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Board or such committee, or
any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person authorised by
the Government or the Board, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
33. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person, generally or specially authorised
by the Board in this behalf, may, whenever it is necessary so to do, for any of the purposes
of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or premises and make any inspection
or inquiry or do such other Act or thing as may be prescribed:
Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed courtyard or
garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof)
without previously giving such occupier at least twenty-four hours' notice in writing of his
intention to do so.
34. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry into effect the provisions of section 7.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may prescribe
the form of the application for registration and for cancellation of registration, the fee payable
on such applications, the particulars to be included in such application, the procedure to be
followed in granting and cancelling registration, the registers to be kept by registering
officers and the supply by registering officer.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the purposes of this Act.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the number of members of the Board under sub-section (3) of section 3;
(b) the salary and allowances payable and other conditions of service of the
members of the Board under sub-section (5) of section 3;
(c) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (6) of section 3;
(d) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairperson under sub-section (7) of
section 3;
(e) the constitution of committees under section 5;
(f) the terms and conditions for giving licences to manufacturers of pineapple for
export under clause (viii) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(g) the form of the application and the fees under sub-section (1) of section 8;
Delegation.
Members,
officers and
employees of
the Board to
be public
servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
enter.
Power to
make rules.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(h) the period of limitation for appeal under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(i) the form of appeal and the fees payable under sub-section (3) of section 12;
(j) the procedure for disposal of appeal under sub-section (4) of section 12; and
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
35. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules
generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the salary and allowances payable to, terms and conditions of service of the
Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board under sub-section ( 2) of
section 4; and
(b) the terms and conditions under which the certificate may be granted under
sub-section (2) of section 10.
36. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
37. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such  provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of  two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Power to make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
10
5
15
20
25
30

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2 (j)]
All cultivators/varieties of pineapple ( Ananas Comosus) across India and imported
high yielding varieties and indigenously developed hybrids.
11

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Agriculture is demographically the broadest economic sector and plays a significant
role in the overall socio-economic fabric of India. India has witnessed voluminous increase
in horticulture production over the last few years. Fruits and vegetables account for nearly
ninety per cent. of the total horticultural production in the country. Fruit production plays an
important role in employment, income generation, export and meets household's nutritional
security. Pineapple (Ananas comosus) is one of the commercially important fruit crops of
India. In addition to serving as a food, with its natural sweetness the pineapple has served in
history as a symbol and an artistic motif. It is also used as an ornamental symbolising
welcome and opulence. The rarity, reputation, visual attractiveness have made pineapple as
an ultimate exotic fruit. Pineapple is grown and yields the best in areas with relatively uniform
climate year around. Current production remains restricted to the tropical regions of the
world. Presently the total global production in the world is twenty three Million Metric
Tonne (MMT) which is produced by approximately eighty countries around the world. In
India, the leading pineapple producing States are West Bengal, Assam, Kerala and Karnataka.
In the light of increasing tensions and deadlock at the International Trade Agreements,
the setting up of a Pineapple Board would be extremely helpful to speed up the process of
attaining a Geographical Indication (GI) tags for indigenous breeds of pineapple varieties.
This would also be a significant step in increasing the brand value of Indian pineapple
globally.
The constitution of the Pineapple Board is imperative for the following reasons:—
(1) throughout the years pineapple was exported offering surplus foreign
exchequer. However, the crop is not being able to be marketed effectively; and
(2) more and more farmers are entering into pineapple farming and hence there is
need of a dedicated Board to look into the affairs.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for constitution of a Pineapple Board for the
development of export of pineapple and for the control of pineapple industry including the
control of cultivation of pineapple.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; JOICE GEORGE
July 5, 2018.
12

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of Pineapple Board. Clause 4
provides for appointment of Secretary and other officers and employees to the Board. Clause
5 provides for the constitution of Advisory Committees by the Board. Clause 18 provides for
the grants and loans by the Central Government. Clause 19 provides for the constitution of
a Pineapple Board Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one
hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
13

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue orders to control price
and distribution of pineapple. Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to issue orders to
prohibit or control import of pineapple. Clause 16 empowers the Central Government to issue
directions. Clause 17 empowers the Central Government to issue notification to supersede
the Board. Clause 34 empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act. Clause 35 empowers the Board, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to make regulations consistent
with this Act and the rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. As the orders,
directions, notifications, rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
14

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of export of pineapple and
for the control of pineapple industry including the control of cultivation of
pineapple and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Adv. Joice George,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1843LS(S3)—11-10-2018.