THE WHISTLE BLOWERS PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Whistle Blowers Protection (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 2, the words “the armed forces of the Union, being” shall be omitted.
3. In the principal Act, in section 3,—
(i) for the words and figures “section  617 of the Companies Act, 1956”, wherever
they occur, the words, brackets and figures “clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies
Act, 2013” shall be substituted;
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 3.
17 of 2014.
1 of 1956 .
18 of 2013.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 13 MAY, 2015
Bill No. 154-C of 2015
5
10

2
(ii) in clause (d), in the opening line, for the word “complaint”, the word
“disclosure” shall be substituted.
4. In the principal Act, in section 4, for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1)  Any public servant or any other person including a non-Governmental
organisation may make public interest disclosure before the Competent Authority.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no public interest
disclosure shall be made by any public servant or any other person including a non-
Governmental organisation under this Act, if such disclosure contains—
(a) information, the disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, the strategic, scientific
or economic interests of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or lead
to incitement to an offence;
(b) information, which has been expressly forbidden to be published by
any court of law or tribunal, or the disclosure of which may constitute contempt
of court;
(c) information, the disclosure of which would cause a breach of privilege
of Parliament or State Legislature;
(d)  information relating to commercial confidence, trade secrets or
intellectual property, the disclosure of which would  harm the competitive position
of a third party, unless such information has been disclosed to the complainant
under the provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005;
(e) information which is available to a person in his fiduciary capacity or
relationship, unless such information has been disclosed to the complainant
under the provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005;
(f) information received in confidence from a foreign Government;
(g) information, the disclosure of which would endanger the life or physical
safety of any person or identify the source of information or assistance given in
confidence for law enforcement or security purposes;
(h) information, which would  impede the process of investigation or
apprehension or prosecution of offenders;
(i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of the Council of
Ministers, Secretaries and other officers, except as otherwise provided under
the Right to Information Act, 2005;
(j) personal information, the disclosure of which has no relationship to
any public activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion of
the privacy of the individual, unless such information has been disclosed to the
complainant under the provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005.”.
5. In section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The Competent Authority shall not inquire into any public interest
disclosure which involves information of the nature specified in sub-section (1A) of
section 4:
Provided that the Competent Authority shall, on receipt of any such public
interest disclosure, refer such disclosure to an authority authorised under
Amendment of
section 4.
22 of 2005.
22 of 2005.
22 of 2005.
22 of 2005.
Amendment
of section 5.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
sub-section ( 1) of section 8 to ascertain whether the disclosure contains any
information of the nature specified in sub-section (1A) of section 4, and the certificate
given in this regard by such authority shall be binding on the Competent Authority.”.
6. In section 8 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(1) No person shall be required or authorised under this Act, or under any other
law for the time being in force, to furnish any information or answer any question or
produce any document or render any other assistance in an inquiry under this Act, if
furnishing of such information, or answering of question or the production of the
document or the rendering of assistance is likely to result in the disclosure of any
information of the nature specified in sub-section (1A) of section 4, and for this purpose,
a certificate issued by an authority, authorised in this behalf by the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, certifying that such information, answer,
document or assistance is of the nature specified in sub-section (1A) of section 4, shall
be binding.”.
7. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“14. On any disclosure made by the complainant or public servant, if the
Competent Authority is of the opinion that pending inquiry, any corrupt practice is
required to be stopped, it may pass such interim order, as it may deem fit, to stop such
practice.”.
8. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “is attributable,
such officer”, the words “is attributable to any negligence on the part of any officer other
than the Head of the Department, such officer” shall be substituted.
9.  In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words and figures “relating to imposition
of penalty under section 14 or section 15 or section 16”, the words and figures “under
section 15” shall be substituted.
10. In the principal Act, in section 23,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “a consolidated”, the word “an” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), for the words  “cause a copy thereof”, the words
“consolidate the reports so received and cause the consolidated report” shall be
substituted.
11. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “be deemed”, the
words “shall be deemed”  shall be substituted.
Substitution
of  new section
for section
14.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 31.
Amendment
of section 8.
Power to pass
interim orders.
Amendment
of section 23.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Whistle Blowers Protection  Act, 2011.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—1118LS(S3)—13.05.2015.