5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 154 of 2026 
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND 
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new 
section 9D. 
 
 
Certain 
conditions or 
restrictions on 
imposition of 
tax, cess, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 13. 
 2. In the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after the words 
“regulation of mines”, the words “and mineral bearing lands” shall be inserted. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after clause ( ad), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘(ada) “mineral bearing land” means any land having the  mineral 
contents in accordance with the parameters prescribed under clause ( a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 5;’. 
4. After section 9C of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“9D. ( 1) No tax, cess or such other levy (by whatever name called) 
shall be imposed by the State Government on— 
(a) mineral rights; or 
(b) mineral bearing lands, either based on mineral quantity  or 
mineral value or royalty payable or otherwise, 
except in accordance with such conditions or restrictions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, or in any judgment, decree or order of any court, the 
imposition of any such tax, cess or other levy by the State Government on— 
(a) mineral rights; or 
(b) mineral bearing lands either based on mineral quantity  or 
mineral value or royalty payable or otherwise, 
which is not deposited with the State Government or recovered by it before 
the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026, shall be deemed to be invalid at all 
material times: 
Provided that any such tax, cess or other levy on mineral rights or on 
mineral bearing lands, already deposited with the State Government or 
recovered by it before such commencement, shall not be liable to be 
refunded.”. 
5. In section 13 of the principal Act, i n sub-section (2), after clause ( t), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(ta) the conditions or restrictions on imposition of tax, cess or such 
other levy under sub-section (1) of section 9D;”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
67 of 1957. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Minerals constitute an important natural resource which are of great 
geopolitical importance and are critical to infrastructure (including digital 
infrastructure), manufacturing, energy security, and the overall economic 
development of the country. Sustainable and uniform development of minerals 
across the country is an important pillar to subserve the public interest.  Hence, in 
view of the larger pu blic interest, the Union has taken under its control the 
regulation of mines and the development of minerals under section 2  of the Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (the MMDR Act). 
2. Mineral resources are finite and concentrated i n a few States, and their
extraction and management have to be guided by long -term national goals of 
sustainable, equitable and uniform development integrated into the overall strategy 
of the country’s economic development. Any regional disparity in fiscal  
impositions on minerals impacts public interest. Unbalanced imposition of steep 
taxes and levies will prompt the industry to completely bypass local supply lines, 
leading to sub-optimal development of markets, increased transportation costs and 
the result ant pollution load. There is also a risk of an increase in imports of 
minerals despite having sufficient local mineral resources as domestic mineral 
supply becomes expensive. The uneven imposition of taxes or other levies on 
mineral rights and mineral bearing lands by the State Governments in the absence 
of reasonable limitations have resulted in various issues, such as— 
(i) heavy tax burden in the sector;
(ii) unpredictable introduction of tax, cess and other levies, even after
commencement of mining operations; 
(iii) multiple taxes, cess and other levies on production or dispatch of
minerals; 
(iv) non-uniformity of rates of tax and other levies among States;
(v) imposition of tax, cess or levies with retrospective effect.
3. Excessive fiscal burden makes mining operations commercially unviable, 
discourages mineral extraction, adversely affects mineral production and in some 
cases, leads to closure of mines. Any  additional  and unpredictable  costs 
disproportionately may lead to adverse impact on small and medium-scale mining 
operators. Multiple and  inconsistent taxes hamper  development of  the  mineral 
industry and slow  down  economic growth  resulting  in  cascading  tax  effect  and 
high compliance  costs. An excessive  tax  burden  at  the extraction  stage or 
otherwise may ultimately  increase the  cost of goods and services  and, 
consequently, the cost of living for the common citizen in the country. Further, 
any retrospective imposition of taxes would cause legal uncertainty and erode 
investors’ trust.  
4.
 Any fiscal burden imposed on mineral extraction should be guided by a 
uniform and balanced  fiscal framework across  the  country. The  cumulative 
incidence of different levies should not become disproportionate to the economic 
value and profitability  of the mining  operations.  There is also a need to  ensure 
certainty, stability and predictability of the fiscal regime applicable to mining. The 
State has the power, coupled with the duty as a trustee of natural resources of the 
nation, to advance the national interest, inter alia, by ensuring harmonised mineral 
development (and consequent  economic  development) across the nation, rather 
than creating localised pockets of mineral resource driven growth.  
5. The Mines a nd Mineral s (Development and Regulation) Amendment 
Bill, 2026, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:— 

4 
(i) the Union will take under its control the regulation of mineral
bearing lands having the mineral contents in accordance with the parameters 
prescribed by the Central Government under the MMDR Act. This is in 
addition to the existing provision which declares the Union’s control over the 
regulation of mines and the development of minerals; 
(ii) insertion of a new section 9D in the MMDR Act which provides
that no tax, cess or such other levy (by whatever name called) shall be 
imposed by the State Government on mineral rights; or mineral bearing 
lands, either based on mineral quantity, mineral value, royal ty or otherwise, 
except in accordance with such conditions or restrictions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. It further seeks to provide that any 
such tax, cess or other levy which is not deposited with the State 
Government or recovered by it  before the commencement of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026, shall be 
deemed to be invalid at all material times. However, any such tax, cess or 
other levy on mineral rights or on mineral bearing lands, already depos ited 
with the State Government or recovered by it before such commencement, 
shall not be liable to be refunded. 
6. The above amendments strive to provide certainty, stability and
predictability in the fiscal regime in the mineral sector, thereby giving imp etus to 
national economic growth which would facilitate the aims of Atmanirbhar Bharat 
and ultimately attaining the vision of Viksit Bharat 2047.  
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;  G. KISHAN REDDY.
The 7th August, 2026.        

5 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment         
Bill, 2026, if enacted, would not involve any expenditure, either recurring or    
non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 

6 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 13 of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 so as to empower the Central 
Government to make rules for prescribing the conditions or restrictions subject to 
which the State Government may i mpose tax, cess or such other levy on mineral 
rights or on mineral bearing lands.  
2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made under the aforesaid
provision are matters of detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the 
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.  

7 
 
  ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
ACT, 1957 
(67 OF 1957) 
*   *   *   *   * 
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the 
Union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development 
of minerals to the extent hereinafter provided. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
*   *   *   *   * 
(ad) “minerals” includes all minerals except minerals oils; 
*   *   *   *   * 
RULES FOR REGULATING THE GRANT OF MINERAL CONCESSIONS 
13. (1) *   *   *   *   * 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
*   *   *   *   * 
(t) the manner of sale of mineral under sub-section (7A) of section 8A; 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Declaration as to 
expediency of 
Union Control. 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules in 
respect of 
minerals. 
 

LOK SABHA 
———— 
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. 
———— 
(Shri G. Kishan Reddy, Minister of Coal and Mines) 