5 
10 
!20 
As IN'l'RODUCED IN Lox SABRA ON 
Bill 'No. 154 of 1985 
THE, GOVERNMENT SAVINGS LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Government 'Savings Banks Act, 1873 and 
the Government Savings Certificates Act... 1959. 
BBit enacted by Parliament in, the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:"-
1. This Act may be called the Government Savings Laws (Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1985. ' title, 
2. In the Government Savings Banks Act" 1873,-- Amend-
mentot 
(a) in sub-section (4) of section 4A,- Acta of 
(i) in clause (a), for the words "five thousand rupees", the 1873, 
w.ords "such liJnii.as may be prescribed" shall be substit~tedj 
(ii) in clause (b), for the wordS "aforesaid limit of five 
thousands rupees", the words, brackets and letter "limit prescrib-
ed under clause (4)" shall be substituted; . 
(b) in su~tion (2) of-section 15, after clause (h), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(i) the limit under clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 
4A.". 
3. In the Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959,- Amend-
mentof (eI) in sub-section (4) of section 7, for the Words five thousand Act~ot 
rupees", the words "such limit 'as may be prellCl'ibed" shall be 1959. 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) of section 12, after clause (i), the follow-
ing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
" (ia) the limit under sub-section ,(4) of section 7;". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND· REASONS 
Under section4A of the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873, deposits 
in a Government Savin'gs Bank belonging to the estate of a deceased 
person are payable, i. ... case there is a nomination in favour of any person, 
to such person or, as the ca.<:e may be, the guardian at such person. In 
caSe there !s no nomination, and the deposit exceeds five thousand rupees, 
deposits are payable to the legal heirs of the deceased only on production 
of a probate of his will or letters of administration . of his estate or ' a 
succession certificate. Where there is no nomination and the deposit does 
not exceed Dve thousand rupees, the authority concerned can pay the 
deposit to the 'persons appearing to him to be entitled to receive the same 
or theo administrator of the estate of the deceased.. Similar provisions are 
contained in the Government Savjngs Certificates Act, 1959 with regard 
to payment of sums due 01'\ savings certificates in the event of the death· 
of the holder. 
2. The production of legal proof of succession involves considerable 
delay and expense. It was for ,this reason that the aforesaid provisions 
by way of facility at nomination and by way of payment of·amounts not 
exceeding five thousand rupees without production of legal proof of 
,succession were made. While every .ca.re is taken and special drives in 
that behalf have been organised to secure that depositors and certificate 
holders make proper nominations, there have been a number of cases 
without proper nominations. Further, the limit of five thousand rupees 
was fi..~ed long ago on the basis of the money value then. it is, therefore, 
proposed to omit the limit and empower the Central Government to 
provide by rules from. time to time appropriate limits up to which claims 
could be settled by the authorities without insisting on legal proof of 
succession. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective. 
NEW Dm.HI; 
The 9th August, 1985. VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH . . 
2 

MEllORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Bill empowers the Central Government to· make rules specifying 
the limit up to which the d.eceased depositor's or ceniftcate holder's claim 
can be settled iii C88e6 where there is no nomination, without production 
of probate or letters of administration or succession certificate. This is a 
matter of nonnal nature and administrative detail. Moreover, the rull!S 
made will have to be laid before each House of Parliament and they will 
be subject ,to the scrutiny of Parliament. The delegation of legislative 
power is, theretore, of a normal character. 
s 

Payment 
on death 
of de-
poaltor. 
Power 
tDmlike 
rules. 
. Pa)-ment 
on death 
of holder. 
ilVwer 
to make 
rules. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM 'mE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS BANKS Acr, 1873 
(5 OF 1873) 
... • ... ... 
4A. (1) ... ... • ... 
(4) If a depositor dies·and thea."e is no nomination in 'oree at the time 
of his death and. .probate of· .his .. will .or letters -of .administration -of, his 
estate or a succession eanificate granted under the· ,J'ndian -Succession 
Act, 1925, is not within three months -of the deatbof the depositor .pro-
duced to the Secretary ·of· the Government Savings Bank in which the 
deposit -is, then-
(a) if the deposit does not exceed five thousand rupees, the 
SecretaTY may pay the same to any person appearing to him to be 
entitled to receive it or to administer the estate of the deceased; and 
(b) within the aforesaid limit of five thousand rupees, any 
officer employed in the management of a Government Savings Bank 
who is empowered in this behalf by a general or special order of 
the Central Government may, to the extent to which he is empower. 
ed by such order and subject .to any general or special orders of. the 
Secretary in this behalf, pay the deposit to any person appearing to 
him to be entitled to receive it or to administer the estate . 
• ... • ... ... 
15. (1) ... ... • • ... 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rlll£'~ may provide for alfor'any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• • • ... • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE GoVEJllQBNT SAVINGS CBRTDTCATES Alc:r, 1959 
(46 OF 1959) 
• ... • • ... 
7. (1) • ... • ... • 
(4) If a person dies and is at the time of his death the holder of a 
savings certificate and there is no nomination in force at the tim.eof his 
death and probate of his will or letters of administration of his estate 
or a succession certificate' granted under the Indian Succession Act, 1925, 
is not within three months of the death of the holder produced to the 
prescribed authority, then, if the sum due on the savings certificate does 
not exceed five thousand rupees, the prescribed authority may pay the 
aame to any person appearing to it to be entitled to receive the sum or 
. to administer the estate of the deeeaaed . 
• • • • • 
-12. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
go~ power. such ruleS may provide for:-
• • • • • 
39 of 1925. 
39oflH5. 

I. 
~. 
LOIC SABHA 
.. 
A. 
BJU~ 
further to amend the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873 aad the Gov-
ernment Savings eel tificatc::; Act, 1959. 
(Shri Vishwana.th Pra.ta.p Singh, 
Mini$ter 01 Finance.) 