5
Short title.
Amendment 
of article 51A.
Bill No. 154 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Shri P.P. Chaudhary , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.
2. In article 51A to the Constitution, after clause (k), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:—
“(1) who is eligible to vote, to cast his vote at any elections to the House 
of the People, Legislative Assembly of State and institutions of local self-
Government.”.
As introduced in Lok Sabha

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the largest democracy in the world. It has a strong parliamentary system. 
Since 1951, free and fair elections to the Houses of Parliament, State Legislatures 
and local bodies have been held at regular intervals. Indian elections are benchmark 
for many other countries.
At present a candidate is declared as elected even if he secures seventeen per 
cent. of the votes polled. Though he has won the seat, yet he may not have the 
support of even half of the electors. In the true sense, he is not representing the 
majority of voters in the constituency from which he has been elected.
The percentage of votes polled at every election is very less which shows that 
people are not willing to participate in the election process. Sometimes in some 
of the constituencies, as low as thirty per cent. of the total votes are polled. This 
is not a healthy sign for democracy. Casting a vote at an election is one of the 
duty of community service mentioned in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. Introducing an obligation to vote will help in strengthening the democracy 
and, electing a Government with more stability, legitimacy and genuine mandate. 
Compulsory voting system can confer a high degree of political legitimacy because 
it results in high voter turnout. High level of participation decreases the risk of 
political instability.
The compulsory voting is a system in which electors are obliged to cast their 
votes in elections.
Therefore, it is proposed to make it a fundamental duty of every eligible citizen 
to cast vote at elections to the House of the People, Legislative Assemblies and 
institutions of local self-Government.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; P. P. CHAUDHARY
November 13, 2024.

3
Fundamental 
duties.
ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution of India
*  * * * * 
PART IV A
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) * * * * *
* * * * *
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his 
child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
*  * * * *

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri P . P . Chaudhary, M.P .)