As INTRODUCED un Lox SABHA on

> है DEC SAG

Bill No. 154 of 1986
semen ate

THE MONOPOLIES AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986

A
BILL

further te amend the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1968.

Ber it enaeted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices (Amendment) Act; 1986.

5 (9) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 2 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act,
of 1969. 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (m), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

10 *(n) “registered consumers’ association” means a voluntary asso-
1 of 1956, ciation of persons registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or any
other law for the time being in force which is formed for the purpose
of protecting the interests of consumers generally and is recognised
by the Central Government as such association on an application made
15 in this behalf in such form and such manner as may be prescribed,’,

Short
title and
com-
mence-
ment,

Amend-
ment of
section 2.


| Amend-
ment of
section 10.

Amend-
ment of
section 11,

Amend.
ment of
section
36 8,

Amend.
ment of
section
360.
Amend.
ment of
section 67,

2

3. In section 10 of the principal Act, in clause (a), in sub-clause (i),
for the words “from any trade or consumers’ association having a mem-
bership of not less than twenty-five persons or from twenty-five or more
consumers”, the words “from any trade association or from any consumer
or a registered consumers’ association, whether such consumer is a mem-
ber of that consumers’ association or not” shell be substituted.

4. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words,
brackets and letters “under sub-clause (i) of clause (a) » the words,
brackets and letters “from any association under sub-clause (i) of clause
(a)” shall be substituted.

5. In section 36B of the princtpal Act, in clause (a), for the words
“from any trade or consumers’ association having a membership of not
less than twenty-five persons or from twenty-five or more consumers”, the
words “from any trade association or from any consumer or a registered
consumers’ association, whether such consumer is a member of that con-
sumers’ association or not” shall be substituted.

6. In section 36C of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and letter
“ander clause (a)”, the words, brackets and letter “by an association
under clause (a)” shall be substituted.

1. In section 67 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (aa)
shall be relettered as clause (ac) and before clause (ac) as so relettered,
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(ab) the form and the manner in which an application for re-
cognition shall be made under clause (n) of section 2;”,

1,10

15

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969,
only gives a discretion to the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission to hear or not to hear an individual consumer aggrieved by
any restrictive or unfair trade practice. The Bill seeks to confer an im-
portant right on an individual consumer and a voluntary consumers’
association to file a complaint before the Commission and of being heard
by it. ‘On receipt of a complaint in this behalf, the Commission will ‘be
required under the provisions of the Bill to institute regular inquiry into
any restrictive or unfair trade practice alleged by such individual con-
sumer 07 voluntary consumers’ association. |

T. VENGALA RAO
New DE.uHt;
The 3rd December, 1986.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill defines a registered consumers’ association. As per
the provision made in clause 3 of the Bill, an individual consumer 85 well
as the registered consumers’ associations will have a statutory right to
make a complaint and to be heard as regards any restrictive trade practice
by which he or the association is aggrieved. Similarly, as per clause 5 of
the Bill, such a consumer or association would have a statutory right to
make a complaint and to be heard as regards any unfair trade practice by
which he or the association is affected. At present, the Commission is not
bound to entertain any such complaint or to institute formal enquiry pro-
ceedings. In order to give real protection to the consumer, it is also not
expected that the consumer from all over the country should travel to
Delhi to pursue their complaints and to be present to participate in the
proceedings at Delhi. Since large number of individual complaints are
expected to be filed and these complaints are to be converted into formal
enquiries, it will be necessary for the Commission to set up Benches, at
least to begin with, at Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras. It may also
be necessary for the Commission to have Circut Benches to sit at other
State headquarters. As per present section 5 of the Act, the Commission
may consist of the Chairman and eight other members. However, the
Commission’s present strength is the Chairman and three members. With-
in the maximum strength already fixed under section 5, it is proposed to
appoint five additional members with necessary complement of staff in-
cluding the staff required for the court room.

The recurring and non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India which would be involved in giving effect to the provisions
of the Bill, if it is enacted, would be of the order of Rs. 51,30,000 as
detailed below:

1. Recurring expenditure on pay and allowances

and contingencies —Rs. 43,30,000
2. Non-recurring expenditure for accommoda-

tion, furniture, stationery, etc. —Rs. 8,00,000
bd Total —Rs. 51,30,000

2. The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any other expenditure of a
recurring or non-recurring nature.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause (2) of the Bill proposes to insert a definition of registered con-
sumers’ association. The said association will be recognised by the Cent-
ral Goverriment on an application made to it in such form and in such
manner as may be laid down by the rules made under the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969.

2. The matters in respect of which the said rules may be made are
essentially matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character,


ANNEXURE

ExTRACTs FROM THE MONOPOLIES AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES
Act, 1969 {
BREA कलम (54-0० 1969) ५०
* * *. * .
8 10..The Commission may inquire into—
@ any restrictive trade practice— :

(i) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such
practice from any trade or consumers’ association having a mem-
bership of not less than twenty-five persons or from twenty-five
or more consumers, or

* * * * *

11. (1) Where any complaint is received by the Commission under sub-
clause (i) of clause (a) of section 10, it may, before issuing any process
requiring the attendance of the person complained against, by an order,
require the Director General to make, or cause to be made, a preliminary
investigation in such manner as it may direct and submit a report to the
Commission to enable it to satisfy itself as to whether or not the complaint
requires to be inquired into.

368. The Commission may inquire into any unfair trade practice,—
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitutes such
practice from any trade or consumers’ association having a five or
more consumers; or
(b) upon a reference made to it by the Central Government or a
State Government;
* * s * s
३360, In respect of any unfair trade practice of which complaint is made
under clause (a) of section 36B, the Commission shall, before issuing any
process requiring the attendance of the person complained against cause
a preliminary investigation to be made by the Director General, in such
manner as it may direct, for the purpose of satisfying itself that the com-
plaint requires to be inquired into.
के * * * *

67. (1) * * * * *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the

foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—

* .

(aa) the form in which an application shall. be made to the

Central Government under section 28 for the approval of any scheme

of merger or amalgamation of an undertaking with any other under-

taking;

* * *

* * * * Be

4

Inquiry
into
mono.
polistic
or res-
trictive
trade
practices
by Com.
mission,

Tavestiga-
tion by
Director
General
before
issue of
process in
certain
cases.

Inquiry
into un.
fare
trade
practices
by Com-
mission,

Investiga.
tion by
Director
General
before an
issue of
process in
certain
cases.

Power to
make rules,


LOK SABHA

enna

& i
BILL

further to amend the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969,

(Shri J. Vengal Rao,
Minister of Industry.)