Short title and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 154 of 2022.
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY 
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋංආൺඍං Aඉൺඋඎඉൺ Pඈൽൽൺඋ, M.P.
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
Bൾ it enacted in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

2. In the long title of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) and in the principal Act for 
the words “fourteen years” wherever they occur, the words “eighteen years” shall be 
substituted.
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, for clause (c), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:–
“(c) “Child” means any person below the age of  eighteen years.”.
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:–
“Provided that the appropriate Government shall set up special schools with 
proper educational infrastructure in each district for –
(a) children belonging to disadvantaged groups including the Scheduled Caste, 
the Scheduled Tribe, minorities, refugees and children living with or affected with 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus;
(b) children belonging to backward classes under socially and educationally 
backward classes; and
(c) children belonging to economically weaker section including child belonging 
to such parent or guardian whose annual income is lower than the minimum limit 
as prescribed by the appropriate Government.”.
Substitution 
of references 
to certain 
expressions by 
certain other 
expression.
Amendment 
of section 2. 
Amendment 
of section 3. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Indian school education system is one of the largest in the world with more than 15 lakh 
schools, nearly 97 lakh teachers, and nearly 26.5 crore students in pre-primary to higher 
secondary levels from varied socio-economic backgrounds. 
Education is one of the essentials of life for every child across the country and the 
tool of education is one way to bring change. Education has become an essential path to 
achieving success and progress in life for all. It is a pathway in order to bring a change 
and the most important thing which matters is the quality of education that determines the 
standards of education. 
School education plays a vital role in life. Every level of education has its importance 
and role in the development of an individual. We all want to see our children be successful 
in life which is only possible through quality and the right to education.
Education has become very important in today’s modern technological world. The 
crucial role of universal elementary education in strengthening the social fabric of democracy 
through the provision of equal opportunities to all has been accepted since the inception of 
our Republic. Our Constitution lays down that the State shall provide free and compulsory 
education to all children up to the age of fourteen years as a Fundamental Right.
But, recent COVID-19 brought forth unprecedented changes across all sectors. One 
sector, particularly hit hard, is school education. Schools have been closed for nearly eight 
months. The World Bank and other agencies have predicted a reduction of nearly $400 
billion in the prospective earning capacity of India due to school closures.
Last year saw a lot of concern about school closures leading to ‘learning loss’ and 
higher dropout rates. A lot of digital content was generated and transmitted to help children 
continue to learn while at home.  But it was reported that at the peak of the pandemic, around 
24.7 crore school children were impacted owing to the closure of schools. The digital divide 
was the root cause that posed a problem for children who could not access remote learning 
when schools were shut down. Especially children from low-income homes suffered a major 
loss and faced challenges in accessing the remote learning.
Annual Status of Education Report (ASER) 2021 found out that the non-enrolment of 
children in the 6-14 age group went up from 2.5 per cent in 2018 to 4.6 per cent in 2021 in 
rural schools, the decline was however more for boys than girls and highest in the 7-10 age 
groups.
The reason was the academic disruption caused owing to the pandemic, which led to 
the shutting down of schools. According to the ASER 2020-2021 survey, possible reasons 
could be the shutdown of low-cost private schools, financial distress of parents, and families 
migrating back to villages. The number of children, particularly children from disadvantaged 
groups and weaker sections, who drop out of school before completing elementary education, 
remains very large. Moreover, the quality of learning achievement is not always entirely 
satisfactory even in the case of children who complete elementary education.
In today’s time, so many issues are growing and have become challenging, especially 
for those who belong to disadvantaged groups with no solution. Today is the time when 

education should be provided to each and every person, ensure that the students belonging 
to a lower-middle-income class are able to face the challenges in life and provide them with 
education because it’s their right and to bring change. Making the education universalized 
for children belonging from the age of 6 to 18 years is that every child should be given the 
opportunity to study and should have access to education to spreading mass literacy, helping 
in the basic requirement for economic development and which is the indispensable first step 
towards the provision for the equality of opportunity to all citizens.
The present Bill seeks to substitute the definition of child and amend the age of child 
in the Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009. The purpose of including the 
definition of a child is to lay down that every child means a person who is below eighteen 
years of age, the bill tries to keep the definition gender-neutral in view of providing education 
to each and every child in the country. The purpose of amending the age from 6 to 18 is that 
excluding the children between 14 to 18 is not concrete.
The need is also to help in universalizing education in order to provide equal 
opportunities to all children irrespective of age, gender, sex, or caste. The right to education 
is a fundamental right why it should be only limited to a certain group of age, it should be 
provided to all in order to the modernization of social structure and the effective functioning 
of a democratic institution. It also represents an indispensable first step toward the provisions 
of equality of opportunity for all citizens which will make them vocal and advocate for 
bringing in  better change in the future.
The present Bill also seeks to specifically lay down the guidelines that talks about setting 
up and establishing special schools with educational infrastructure to provide education to 
the children who belong to disadvantaged groups, backward classes, and weaker sections 
of society. The purpose of substituting this section in order to provide equal education to 
all despite any social constrains and economic barrier. They should be included in each 
and every aspect, and be given equal opportunity to bring change. It’s their fundamental 
right to have free and compulsory education and also the right to education as prescribed 
in the Convention on the rights of the child, establishing special schools with educational 
infrastructure for those children who belong to disadvantaged groups and weaker sections 
of the society, in order to set up special schools in each district of the country by the Central 
Government to ensure free and compulsory school education to all children in the country.
The proposed legislation is anchored in the belief that the values of equality, social 
justice, and democracy and the creation of a just and humane society can be achieved 
only through the provision of inclusive elementary education to all. Provision of free and 
compulsory education of satisfactory quality to children from the disadvantaged and weaker 
sections irrespective of age, gender, sex, and caste.
Hence this Bill.       
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                         APARUPA PODDAR
5 July, 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appropriate Government to set up special schools 
with proper educational infrastructure in each district for children belonging to disadvantaged 
groups, other backward classes and weaker sections. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum would be involved from the 
Consolidated Fund of India is likely to be involved. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Rං඀ඁඍ ඈൿ Cඁංඅൽඋൾඇ ඍඈ Fඋൾൾ ൺඇൽ Cඈආඉඎඅඌඈඋඒ Eൽඎർൺඍංඈඇ 
Aർඍ, 2009
*  *  *  *  *           *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) *  *  *  *
(c) “child” means a male or female child of the age of six to fourteen years;
*  *  *  *  *           *
3. (1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years, including a child referred to in 
clause (d) or clause (e) of section 2, shall have the right to free and compulsory education in 
a neighbourhood school till the completion of his or her elementary education. 
*  *  *  *  *           *
Deﬁnitions.
Right of child 
to free and 
compulsory 
education.

LOK  SABHA
------------ 
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
------------ 
(Shrimati Aparupa Poddar ,  M.P .)