" 
..... 
. ':.~" ,j~. 
CORRI GE}IDA 
to 
THE CODE OF CRI~\UNAI, PRO~·'IDU!1.E (1\..t.1ENDMm T) BILL, 19'77 
/-lb be/As introduced in Ipk Babba 7 
1 • 
2. 
Page 4, l:int; 5',-
after "Chapter V" 
Page 5', line 4',-
insert 
!ll: "Act" . ~ "Cha.pter" 
3. Page., line 33,-
t:2!:. "Act" . ~ "Chapter" 
4. Pa.ge 6, line 34,-
for "Act" ~ "Clla;pter" 
5'. Page 7, line 41,-
"of this Code" 
". 
',. 
after "circumstances" insert IIjustifios or'l: 
,. ~a~e 8, line 13,-
a:fter "shal.l~13 n ~ "-e" 
7. Fage 9, line 25,-
-. 
11. 
12. 
after "86" insert "sha.ll" , 
Page ~', linE} 3e,- " .. 
• '1", 
> . ... . ," 
P~gc 1.;, ~ tile marginal bead.1ng.to proposed~.,: .. 
. s~ction 1 ~'!tRIt ,-
....... .... ~".. ''''l 
Page '10, line 4,-
, .' .. ' 
;tQ.t. "Act" ~ "Chapter" 
.c 
Page to, 11lle ',-
t~ "Act" ~ "Chapter" 
Page 1', l:Jne 13,-
nu:. "Act" m.a4 "Chapter" 

,io. 
" 
1 2 of 1974. 
31 of 1948. 
As DlTRODUCTED IN LoIC SABRA ON 
13 DEC '911. 
Bill No. 154 of 18'7 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amend-
ment) Act, 1977. 
S Z. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act), in sub-section (2) of, section 1, in the proviso, after 
the figures "VIII,", the ~gures and letter "VillA," shiall be inserted. 
10 
IS 
3. After Chapter VIII of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall 
~be inserted, namely:-
'CHAPTER VIllA 
PRBVBNTION OF TREASONABLE AND OTHER DANGEROUS ACTIVITIES 
124A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means, as respects a detention 
order made by the Central Government or a person detained 
under such order, the Central Government, and as respects a 
detention order made by a State Government or by an officer 
subordinate to a State Government or as respects a person de-
tabled. under such order, the State Government; 
('b) "detention order" means an order made under section 
i24B; 
(c) "detenu" means a person detained under a detention 
order; 
(d) "foreigner" has the same meaning as in the Foreigners 
~1~ ~ 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 1. 
Insertion 
otnew 
Chapter 
VIllA. 
Deftni-
tions. 

Power to 
make 
orders 
detaining 
certaln 
persons. 
" , 
2 
(e) "person" includes a foreigner; 
'(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the 
Central Government; 
(g) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, 
means the Administrator thereof. S 
124B. (1) The Central Government may,-
(a) if satisfied with respect to any p~rson that with a view 
to preventing him from acting in any m:mner prejudicial to the 
defence of India or the 'seem il.Y of India; 01' 
, (b) if satisfied with respect to any foreigner that with a 10 
view to regulating his cuntim:{d presence in India or with a 
view to making arrangements for his expulsion from India, 
it is necessary so to do, make an order directing th:lt such person be 
detained. 
(2) The Central Government or the State Government may, it IS 
satiosfied with respect to any person that with a view to preventing 
him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of 
supplies and services essential to the community it is necessary so to 
do, make an order directing that such person be detained. 
(3) The State Government may, if satisfied with respect to any 20 
person that, with a view 'to preventing him from acting in any 
manner prejudicial to-
(a) the security of the State; or 
('b) the maintenance of public order, 
it is necessary so to do, make an order directing that such person be 2S 
detained. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-sec~ion (3),-
(a) C;acting in any manner prej-udicial to the security of the 
State" means making preparations for using, or attempting to 
use, or using, or instigating, inciting or otherwise abetting the use 30 
of, any lethal weapons (including firearms, explosive substances 
and corrosive substances), to overthrow or overawe the Govern-
ment established by law in India; 
(b) "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of 
public order" means- 35 
\ 
, 
(i) promoting, propagating, or attempting to create, 
feelings of enmity or hatred or disharmony on grounds of 
religion, race, caste or community; 
(U) making preparations for using, or attempting to use 
or /USing, or instigating, inciting or otherwiSe abetting the 40 
use of. any lethal weapons (including firearms, explosive 
tIIubstances and corrosive substances) where such prepara-
tions, using, attempting, instigating, inciting or abetting, dis--
turbs or is likely to disturb public order; 

i5 of 1880. 
S 
10 
54 of 1959. 
3 
(iii) attempting to commit, or committing, or insijgating. 
inciting or otherwise abetting;the commission of, mischief 
within the meaning of section 425 of t.he Indian Penal Code 
in respect of public property or means of public transporta-
tion where the commission o£. such mischief disturbs, or is 
likely to disturb, public order; 
(iv) committing offences punishable with death or im-
prisonment for life or imprisonment for a term extending W 
seven years or more, where the commission of such offences 
disturbs, or is likely to disturb, public order. 
Ezplaootion-In this sub-section,-
(a) "firearms" shall have the same meaning as in the Arms 
Act, 1959; 
6 of 1908. IS 
(b) "explosive substances" shall have the same meaning as 
in the Explosive Substances Act, 1908; 
(c) "public property" means any property owned or con-
trolled by the Government or by a corporation owned or con-
trolled by the Government or by a 'Society financed wholly or 
substantially by the Government. 
20 (5) If, having regard to the circumstances prevailing or likely 
to prevail in any area within the local limits of the jurisdiction of a 
District Magistrate or a Commissioner of Police, the State Govern-
ment is satisfied that it is nece9S8ry so to do, it may, by order in 
writing, direct that, during such period as may' be specified in the 
25 order, such District Magistrate or Commissioner of Police may, if 
satisfied as provided in sub-section (2) or in clause (b) of S\lb-section 
(3), exercise the powers thereunder: 
Provided that the period specified in an order made by the State 
Government under this sub-section shall not, in the first instance, 
30 exceed three months, but the State Government may, if satisfied as 
aforesaid that it is necessary so to do. amend such order to extend 
such period from time to time by any period not exceeding three 
months at anyone time, 
(6) When any order is made under this section by an officer men-
35 tioned in sub-section (5), he shall forthwith report the fact to the 
State Government to which he is subordinate together with the 
grounds on which the order has been made and such other parti-
culars as, in his opinion, have a bearing on the matter and no such 
order shall:r~ain in force for more than twelve days after the mak-
40 ing thereof unless, in the meantime, it has been approved by the 
State Government. 
(7) When any order is made or approved by the State Govern-
ment under this section, the State Government shall, within seven 
days, report the fact to the Central Government together with the 
45 grounds on which the order has been made and such other particulars 
as, in the opinion of the State Government. have a bearing on the 
necessity for the order. 
\\n (8) Save as otherwise provided In sub-section. (6). an order 
\ rade under this section by an om~~r. me~~i(ln~ in sub-section (5) 

Execution 
of 
detention 
orders. 
Power to 
regulate 
place of 
detention. 
Condi-
tions Bnd 
restric-
tions 
as to 
detention 
and faci-
lities to 
persons 
under 
detention 
and relief 
to their 
families. 
4 
shall have the same force and effect as an order made by the State 
Government to which he is subordinate. 
124C. A detention order may be executed at any place in India 
in the manner provided for the execution of warrants of arrest under 
Chapter V. 5 
124D. Every person in respect ot whom a detention order has 
been made shall be liable-
(a) to be detained in such place as the appropriate Govern-
ment may, by general or special order, specify; and 
(b) to be removed from one place of detention to another 10 
place of detention, whether within the same State or in another 
State, by order of the appropriate Government: 
Provided that no order shall be made by a State Government 
under clause (b) for the removal of a person from one State to an-
other State except with the consent of the Government of that other 15 
State. 
tHE. (1) Every detenu shall, during the period of his deten-
tiaa., be subject to such conditions and restrlctiou aDd be entitled to 
such facilities as may be prescribed fa respect of the matters sped-
6ed In SUHeetion (2). 20 
(2) The matters in respect of which oonditions, re&trictioas and 
facilities may be prescribed in relation to d~tenUsare the fellowing, 
namely:-
(a) maintenance of discip1ine (including breaches of disci-
pline and punishments therefor) and restrictions wiGl regard to 25 
such other matters as may be requ,ired to be regulated for secur-
ing the purposes for which sum persons are detained; 
('h) medical, recreational and other facilities. 
(3) Subject to any rules made in this beh-aU under sectiOn 1248, 
the appropriate Government shall, if satisfied ,that the meaas of sub- 30 
sisteace of the family of a dctenu ha,ve been readereel inadeqwd'e 'by 
reason of his detentioa, grant to such family 8uch maaeta.ry relief as 
it may deem appropriate. 
Explanation.-For the pUl'POSes of this sub-seetiOD, "family", in 
relation to a detenu means his or her spouse, dependent chUdren a .... 3S 
depeodeat parents. 
(4) The appropriate Government may. I.y «eneral or speeia) 
0I'der, and whether by way of relaxatioa of the prescribed conditions 
and restrictions or otherwise, provide that, in addiUon to tile prescrib-
ed facilities, deteDus may, at *"eir option~ b" el\tltled to sw:1a. faeilitiel. 40 
as may be specifted in the ori1er. 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
4S 
124F. No detention order shall be invalid or inoperative merely by 
reason-
(a) that the person to be detained thereunder is outside the 
limits of the territorial jurisdiction of the Government or officer 
making the order, or 
(b) that the place of detention of such person is outside the 
said limits. 
124G. (1) U the Central Government or the State Government or 
an officer specified in sub~section (5) of section 124B, as the case may 
be, has reason to believe that a person in respect of whom a deten-
tion ,order has been made has absconded or is concealing himself so 
that the order cannot be executed, that Government or officer may-
(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a Metropolitan 
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class having juris-
diction in the place where the said person ·ordinarily resides; 
('b) by order notified in tke Official Gazette direct the said 
person to appear before such ofticer, at such place and within 
such period as may be specified in the order. 
(Z) Upon the making of a report against any person under 
clause (a) of Bub-section (1), the provisions of sections 82 to 86 
(both inclusive) shall apply in respect of such person and his pro-
perty as ifi the detention order made against him were . a warrant 
issued by a Magistrate. 
(3) If any person fails to comply with an order issued under 
clause (b) of sub-section (1), he shall, unless he proves that it 
was not possible for him to comply therewith and that he had, 
within the period specified in the order, informed the officer men-
tioned in the order of the reason which rendered compliance there-
with impossible and of his whereabouts, be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, 
or with both. . 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provi-
sion of this Code, every offence under SUb-section (3) shall be 
cognizable. 
Detention 
orders not 
to be in-
valid or 
inopera-
tive on 
certain 
groWlcis. 
Powers in 
.,elation 
to abs-
conding 
persons. 
124H. (1) When a person is detained in pursuance of a deten- Grounds 
tion order, the authority making· the order shall, as soon as may ot order 
be, but not later than five days from the date of detention, com- ~~tention 
municate to him the grounds on which the order has been made to be 
and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a repre- disclosed 
. sentation against the order to the appropriate Government. to 
persons 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall require the authority to affected 
disclose facts which it considers to be against the public interest by the 
to disclose. order. 
JIM-I. (1) 'ftle Central Government and eacb State Govem- Constltu-
ment shall, whenever 1Ieeessary. COIlStitute one or more Advisory tion at 
Boards for the parposes of this Act. Advisory Boards. 
(2) Every such Beard shall consist of a Chairman and two 
other members; and 

Referenca 
to 
Advisory 
Boards. 
PJ'ocedure 
of 
Advisory 
Board. 
8 
(a) the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appro-
priate High Court and the other members shall be serving or 
retired Judges of that or any other High Court; and 
(b) the Central Government or, as the case may be, the 
State Government shall appoint the Chairman and other mem- 5 
bers in accordance with the recommendations of the Chief 
Justice of the appropriate High Court: 
Provided that the serving Judge of any High Court other than 
the appropriate High Oourt may be appointed as the Chairman if, 
having regard to the number of available Judges of the appropriate 10 
High Court and other relevant circumstances, the Chief Justice of 
the appropriate High Court so recommends. 
E.rplanatiPn.-ln this section.-
(a) "appropriate High Court" means,-
(i) in the case of an AdviSOry Board constituted, or IS 
proposed to be constituted, by the Central Government, the 
High Court of Delhi; 
(ii) in the case of an Advisory Board constituted, or 
proposed to be constituted, by a State Government, the 
High Court for that State; 20 
(b) "High Court" means,-
(i) in relation to any State other than a Union terri-
tory, the High Oourt for that State; 
(ii) in relation to a Union territory, to which the 
jurisdiction of a High Court has been extended under 25 
article 230 or, for which and for any other State or States 
a High Court has been established under article 231, the 
High O:>urt whose jurisdiction has been so extended or, 
as the case may be, the High Court so established; and 
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, such 30 
High Court as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
124J. Save as otherwiSe expressly provided in this Act, in every 
case where a detention order has been made under this Act, the 
appr:>p~iate Government shall, within four weeks from the date of 35 
detention under the order, place before the Advisory Board consti-
tuted by it under section 124-1 the grounds on which the order has 
been made and the representation, if any, made by the person 
affected by the order and, in case where the order has been made 
by an officer, also the report by such officer under sub-section (6) 40 
of section 124B. 
124K. (1) The Advisory Board shall, after considering the 
materials placed before it (including the representation, if any, 
made under section 124H) and, after calling for such further infor-
maition as it may deem necessary from the appropriate Government 45 
or from any person called for the purpose through the appropriate 
Government or from the person concerned, and if, in any parti-
cular case, it considers it essential so to do or if the person con-

7 
cerned desires to be heard, after hearing him in person, submit its 
report to the appropriate Goverrunent within eight weeks from 
the date of detention. 
(2) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a sepa-
S rate part thereof the opinion of the AdviSOry Board as to whether or 
not there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person con-
cerned. 
10 
IS 
20 
(3) When there is a difference of opinion among ,the members 
forming the Advisory Board, the opinion of the majority of such 
members shall be deemed to be the opinion of the Board. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person against 
whom a detention order has been made to appear by any legal 
practiUoner in any matter connected with the reference to the 
Advisory Board, and the proceedings of the Advisory Board and its 
report, excepting that part of the report in whicb the opinion of 
the Advisory Board is specified, shall be confidential. 
124L. (1) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported 
under section 124K that there is, in its opinion, sufficient cause for 
the detention of a person, the appropriate Government may confirm 
the detention order and continue the detention of the pentOn con-
cerned for such period as it thinks fit. 
(2) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported under 
section 124K that there is, in its opinion, no sufficient cause for the 
detention of the person concerned, the appropriate Government 
25 shall revoke the detention order and cause the person to be released 
fortpwith. 
35 
40 
45 
So 
124M. (1) A person detained in pursuance of a detention order 
which has been confirmed under section 124L may make represen-
tations to the appropriate Government for the revocation of the 
detention order made against him on anyone or more of the fol-
lowing grounds, namely:-
(a) that he undertakes to desist from the activities for the 
prevention of which he has been detained and that he is willing 
to comply with all such conditions and restrictions as the 
appropriate Government may deem fit to impose in this behalf; 
(b) that the circumstances in which the detention order 
was made against him have changed in material respects and 
Ithat in the changed circumstances it is no longer necessary to 
keep him under detention; or 
(c) that the condition of his health or the condition of his 
family or any members thereof or any other circumstances justify 
a compassionate view being taken of his case. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall consider a representa-
tion received under sub-section (1) as soon as may be after it is 
received and if, after such consideration, that Government is of 
opinion that the detention order against the person making the 
representation shall not be revoked, it shall cause the representation 
to be placed before the Advisory Board for its opinion as early as 
possible but not later than sixty days from the date of receipt of the 
representation: 
Action 
upon the 
report 
of the 
Advisory 
Board. 
Represen-
tations by 
detenu 
for revo-
cation of 
the 
detention 
order 
a,awt 
him. 

Maximum 
period of 
detention. 
Revoca-
tion of 
detention 
order. 
8 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to place such represen-
tation before the Advisory Board if during the pt"nod of ninety 
days immediately preceding the date of receipt of such representation 
an:! other representation under sub-section (1) was received from 
such person. S 
(3) The Advisory Board shall consider the representation 
placed before it under sub-section (2) in such manner AS it deems 
appropriate and submit its opinion to the appropriate Government 
as expeditiously as possible and the appropriate Government shall 
act in conformity with such opinion. 10 
124N. The ,maximum period for which any person may be 
detained in pursuance of any detention order which has been con-
firmed under section 124L shall be be twelve months from the date of 
detention: 
Provided rt:~t nothing contained in this section shall affect the IS 
power of the appropriate Government to revoke or modify the deten-
tion order at any earlier time. 
124-0. (1) Without prejudice to the provision'S of section 21 of! 
the General Clauses Act, 1897, a detention order may, at any time, 
be revoked or modified,- 20 
(a) notwithstan:dlng that the order has been made by an 
oflicer mentioned in sub-section (5) of section 124B, by the 
State Government to which that officer is subordinate or by 
the Central Government; 
(b) notWithstanding that the order has been made by a Statt' 25 
Government, by the Central Government. 
(2) The revocation of a detention order shall not bar the making 
of a fresh detention order under section 124B against the same person 
in any case where f.resh facts have arisen after the date of revoca-
tion on which the Central Government or a State Government or an 30 
officer authorised under sub-section (5) of section 124B, as the case 
may be, is satisfied that such an order should be made. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall be construed to bar the 
making of a fresh order of detention against a person on the same 
facts as an earlier order' of detention made against such person in 3S 
any case where-
(i) the earlier order of detention or its continuance is not 
legal on account Of any technical defect; or 
(ii) the earlier order of detention has been revoked by 
reason of any apprehension, or for avoiding any challenge, 40 
that such order or its continuance is not legal on account of 
any technical defect: 
10 of 1897. 

10 
1'5 
25 
30 
9 
Provided that in computing the muimum,period IAr whieb 
a person against whom such fresh order of detention hal been 
issued may be detained, the period during which such penon .... 
under detention under the earlier order of tk!teiIeion aball be 
excluded. 
124P. (1-) The appropriate Government may, at lilly time, 
4ireet that any 'pernn detained ·in pursuance ·ofa "'ntbl order 
may .be released for any specified period eit_ witilaut OGDditiODl 
or upon such conditions specified in the diHCtion • that perIOD 
accepts, and may, at any time, cancel his release. 
.(2) In directing the 'releaaeof any:perJOJl uW I&lla-eectioD 
. (1), the appropriate Gove~~t may requir.. JiW:D ., . .au into 
a .lMmd with or without sureties 'for the due o_~ of the 
conditions specified in the direction. 
(3) Any person released under sub-seetiontl) Jlball ........ 
himself at the time and place, and to the aUlthority, speaiW·J.n:the 
order· directing his release or cancelling his release, u the cue 
m~y be. 
1(.) If the appropriate Govermnant .has reuo.D .tobelieve that 
oy 'person who has failed to sUITender himself.in.t.be mlan .. 
specified in sub-section (3) has absconded or:is coneealilw .hlmIelf, 
that Government may make a report in writing of the fact to • 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate ;fIf:the tint dill 
.haviqg jurisdiction in the place where the said .person ordinarily 
ftSidesand thereupon the provisions of sections '82 .to 86 apply in 
relation to such person as. they apply in relation to a .perIOD who 
has absconded or is concealing himself so that a warrant 1aaued 
'by the Magistrate cannot be executed. 
(5) If any person fails without sufficient cause to surrender him· 
self in ,the manr.er specified in sub-section (3), he Ihell be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may ectend to two ',ears. 01' 
with fine, or with both. 
(6) If any: person )'eleased under IUb.osection (1) · .. ilI:jo :tulAl 
any of the 'Conditions imposed upon himuntter tile 1IIlcl ... , •• Dtioa 
01' . in the bond entered. into by him, the 'band .hall be odeeIand '. be 
forfeited and any person bound ·thereby shall 'M 'ltable :to ~-the 
penalty -thereof. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything. contained in any other law and \ 
-Ve as otherwise provided. in this section, no peraona.alnat ·Whom 
,a ,detention order made under this Chapte1' is in forc:e thalt '.be NIle .. 
eel whether on bail or bail bond or otherwise. 
124Q. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie agaln8t .. 
ClentiFalGovernment or a State Government, and DO lult, proteeU-
ioicm .. other lEtgal ,proceeding shall li~ against any person, . for any-
tbtnI in.good ·faith done or intended to be don~ in. ~uanee tJ't ofhit 
·OJ p... . 

Report 
on the 
adminis-
tration of 
the Act, 
." -.. , 
~.: ... 
10 
'~::, ~~~. (1) Within three ,montiv; from the expiry of each calendar 
.,~~r.-
1' •• 
~., . (.) the President shall cause to be laid before each House 
of Parliament a report on the administration of this Act during 
that year; 5 
; ",.' ~\ (b) the Governor of each State shall cause to be laic\ before 
the Legislati\re Auembly or, as the case may be, each House of 
the :lAgislature of the State a report on the administration of 
this Act ill that State during that year; 
", 
;.' . 
(c) the Administrator of each Union territory having a 10 
Legislative Assembly shall cause to be laid before the Legisla-
tive 'A.aaem.bly of the Union territory a report on the adminis-
tration of'this Act in that Union territory during that year. 
, (2) For the purpose of preparing any report referred to in 
"clause (a) of subooSeCtion (1), the Central Government may call for JS 
any periodic or other report from any State Government. 
1245, (1) The Cell!tral GovernmE'nt may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
, '1oregoulg power, such rules may provide for all or any of the folJow- .3.Q 
, ing matters, namely:-
(a) the matters referred. to in sub-section (2) of section 124E; 
, (b) the limit S'Ulbject to which monetary relief may be 
granted to families of detenus under sub-section (3) of section 
124E and other matters relating to such relief; lS 
(c) the ma,tte.rs which should be dealt with in the reports 
referred to in section 124R; 
! (d) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed 
~, under this Chapter. 
(3) Every rule made by the Cent.ral Government under' this 30 
Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
, . HOUle of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
",'days which, may be comprised in one session or in two or rMTeSUC-
, ,te8live sessions, and if, before the expiry of the sesSion immedia,tely 
followin.r the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both HoUses 35 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses' agree 
... ' that the rule should not be made, the rule shalal thereafter have effect 
"~on1yin such J'nOdifted form or be of no eftect. as the case may be; so, 
,,', ,)iow,ver, tQ~t a,ny such modification or annulment shall be witbout 
'prejudice to the vaUdity of anything preViously done under that rule.'. 4tJ 
Repeal 4. (1) The Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971, is hereby 
of Ad .. ,", n!pealed. 
28 or-J97i;. ' 
., ..... 
.. ; .... , .. 
, :(2). ,The c:e~r ,of operation, by ft'ason of such repeal, of 'any Gtciet 
ot .~tion .against any person in force under the said Act iml'il~ately 
before such repeal shall not bar the making of a fresh order Of CHten- 4~ 
tion against such person under Chapter vnIA of the Code of Cnmblal 

2 of 1974:. 
2 of 18'74, 
11 
Proeedure, 1973, on all or any of the facts on which the order which 10 
ceased to operate was made: 
Provided that in computing the maximum per~ for which r:uch per-
IOn may be detaineci under such fresh prder, the period during which 
S .uch person was under detention under the order which so ceased to 
operate shall be excluded. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall have eftect notwithstandiri'g 
anything coni!ained in section 124-0 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
1b. p:tt1~ of the Government with regard to the .Mab1~ ., 
Internal Security Ad, 19'11 was enunciated in the Address- of" tlie- Viee-
.......... t aet£D. ft President to the Joint Session of both I{O\UIII of 
~t OIl 28th March, 1977. in the following words: - . 
"Having regard to the gross abuse to which Maintenance 01 
Internal Security Act has been put during the last two year., a 
thorough review of the Act will be undertaken witl) a view to re-
pealing it and examining whether the existing laws need further 
Itrengthening to deal with economic offences and security of the 
eountry··withou;t denying the right of approach to courts .... 
2. Considering the complexity and nature of the problems, p.artieular-
ly in respect of security, public order and prices, faced by the country, 
it is the considered view of the Government that the administration 
would be greatly handicapped in dealing eft'ectively with the same in the 
absence of powers of preventive detention. Government are, however, 
fully conscious of the gross abuse to which the powers under the Main-
tenance of Internal Security Act We1'e put during the Emergency. 
Tbi, was made possible on accou,nt of certain amendments made in the 
Jaw during the Emergency, the Presidential Order under article 359 of 
the Constitution taking away the right of persons to move the courts 
for enforcement of Fundamental Rights, the severe curbs on the free-
dom of the Press and the general climate of fear created during the 
Emergency. These factors are no longer operative. 
3. Accordingly, it is proposed to include a new Chapter ill the Code ot 
Criminal Proeedure, 1973 to provide for preventive detention. However, 
having regard to the past experience, the previous laws have been Vf!fY 
elo&e1y examined with a view to building into the new Chapter appropriate 
safeguards in order to completely eliminate the possibility of its misuse 
in future. In particular, the expressions "acting in any manner prejudi-
cial to the security of the State" and "acting in any manner prejudicial 
to the maintenance of public order" have been so defined as to remove 
any possibility of the use of this law for political purpoSes. Also, the 
composition of the Advisory Boards and the manner of their appoint-
ment have been so modified that every detention would be subject to 
independent judicial review which would inspire public conAdence as 
well as act as a great restraining influence on the executive. 
•. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
Nzw Dam; 
~ 20th December, 1917. CHARAN SINGH. 
12 

PDfANCtM; MEMOIfAN'DUM 
.. -*loa. lJtE (l»ntained. in the Olepter whiCh is proposed. to be 
iDIerW in the C'ode or Criminal Procedure, 11m. by clause :t of the Bin) 
provides for the making of rules and orders, inter cU"" in respect ~ fact-
... wrWcA.1Ulf be. pro\lidad. iIo· detenus. The IJeCtioD a180 provides that 
.... aaJRllitlte Qo\tamaam&. .. y. if. satisfted that. the IDe8llS of aubsi&-
.... el .... ~ -' • dMeau. hav. been ftDd.ered. inaclecpJate by reaaon 
1II&w.........,pant.tu-IIICh,fu;U.ly suchmoaet.-y l'eUef .. it-may deem 
... ....... .... Rat. J.2tt..~ fol'lmiJlg. pan of tbe IllUDe Chapter, pro-
....... ta. .. ..u..aticm. ot AdwillC7 Boards by the Central Government. 
2. In the cue of perIODS detained in pUl'suance of orders made by the 
Omtral Government, the expenditure in respect of facilities to such per-
lOllS, monetary relief to families of detenus in cases where the same iI 
IdE I ' ........ ibe apenditu. in COIUlecticm with the Advisory Boards 
wII. ........ ·be met .., tbe CentIr.a1 Government. The actual expenditure 
_II •••• ' at JadiIII., to cletenua aDd moDetary relief to faInWtw. ot de • 
... wIa ..... upea vadeua cc:mt~_ .uch aa the number of per-
IODI who may be detained in pursuance Gf oMell8 ilaued by the Ceatral 
Government, the nature of facilities that may be provided for under the 
rules, etc., and it is not possible to visualise at this stage the quantum ot 
IUCh expeDditure. Some expenditure of a recurring nature will have to 
be 1DeUn'ed in connection with the Advisory Boards and it is not possibloe 
at this .tage to make an accurate esUmate of the expenditure which may 
be involved. ' 
3. The. provitions of tho Bill do not involve any otper expenditure of 
• reeurrtD, or non-recurring nature. 
l~ 

MEMORANDUM ,REGARDING .D~LEGAl'~· LEGISLATION 
.' Clause 3 ofi the BiU seeks to insert a new Chaptef! ~~ly, . <;'h,pter 
· VIllA, eonslst£ng of sections 124A to 1245, i,n "the Code' of crithliml Pz:bc~ 
d\U'8, 19'13. . ..' ,'. L 
.': , .4. ~ 
2. Section 1248 empowers the Central "Government tp.carry out' . '1Be 
provisions of the said Chapter. The matters in fespei:t of which., rulei 
may be made relate, among others, to the matters . referred to in silb-&ec!~ 
· ~on (2) of .Hctlon 124E (conditions and restrictions as to dete'ntlonilnd 
facilities to persons \Ulder detention), the limit subject to which' moftei. 
tary 'relief may be granted to families of detenus under sub-section·' (I) 
of the said section and other matJers relating to such relid. an~ .. the 
matters which. should be dealt with in the reports referred to in. Secti~ 
124R. . .. ' , 
. .... '; ." ,.-; 
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made· unGer iecU6n 
1248 and the ma~tel"S in respect of which orden may be ma4e'. under 
· Section 124E are matters of detail and procedure and it i8 not practicable 
to provide for them in the Bill itself,- The delegation of legislative power 
is, therefore, of normal character. 
" 
.; ~ ," 
: ........ . 
'.J .... 
" 
,.oi,. 
. ; 

ANNEXURE 
ErntACT FROM 'l'HB CODE OF CltI!4INAL PRocSOURE, 1973 
(2 OF 1974) 
• ... • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State Of. Jammu and 
Kashmir: 
Provided that the provisions of this Code, other than those relattlll 
to Chapters VOl, X and XI thereof, shall not apply-
(Q.) to the State of Nagaland, 
(b) to the tribal areas, 
but the concerned State Government may, by notiftcation, apply IllCb 
provisions or any of them to the whole or part of the State of Nagaland 
or such tribal areas, as the case may be, with such supplemental, inci-
dental or consequential modifications, as may be specified in the noti-
ftcation. 
E~ticm.-In this section, "tribal areas" means the territories 
which immediately before the 21st day of January, urn. were included 
in the tribal a.reas of Assam, as referred to in paragraph 20 of the Sixth 
Schedule 'U):""lhe ConsUtution; other than those within. loea} limits of 
the municipality of Shillong. 
(3) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April. 1974 . 
• • • • • 
. : . ., . .......: .... ,' ',.... ~ 
15 
Short 
UtJe, 
extent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 

'" 
.,f.> 
I._~' . . 
.... . 
(lltri ~ Smgh, Mttltmr of II".".. A,." 
,~ i 
.. /" .. 