As INTRODUCED In Lox SaBHA on

Bill No. 155 of 1986
—— as

THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING)
AMENDMENT BILL, 1986

AS
BILL

further to amend the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act,
4 4937.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce (Grading and
Marking) Amendment Act, 1986.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 2 of the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking)

1 of 1937. Act, 1937 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) —
(a) in clause (h), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be
1° omitted;
(0) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely: — है

“@ an article is said to be misgraded if—

(i) the article is not of the quality prescribed for tne
15 grade designation with which it is marked;

Short title
and com-
mencement.

Amendment
of section
2,


Amendment
of section
छः

Tasertion of
mew sec-
tions

3A and
3B.

Powers of
entry,
inspec-
tion and
search,

Powers of
the autho-
rised
officer to
seize agri-
cultural
produce.

2

(ii) the composition of the article offered for grading is
altered in any way after a sample has been drawn for ana-
lysis and determination of the grade designation of the article
in accordance with the rules made under this Act;

(iii) the article is tampered with in any manner; and

(iw) any false claim is made for the quality prescribed
for its grade designation, upon the label or through advertise-
ment or in any other manner.”.

3. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in the opening paragraph, for the words “make rules—”,

the following shall be substituted, namely: —
“make rules to carry out the provisions of. this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera-
lity of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all
or any of the following matters, namely: —”;

(id) in clause (f), the word “and” occurring at the end shall
be omitted;

(iii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely: —

“(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, prescribed.”;

(b) sub-section (2) shall be  re-numbered as sub-section
(3) thereof. rE

4, After section 3 of the principal Act. the following sections shall be

inserted, namely: —

“3A. (1) Any officer of the Central Government or a State Gov-
ernment or any authority, being an officer of a gazetted rank or of
equivalent rank, authorised by the Central Government may, if he has
reason to believe that any provision of this Act or the rules made
thereunder has been, or is being, contravened, enter any premises at
any reasonable time and make necessary inspection of, and search
for, the agricultural produce in relation to which such contravention
has been, or is being, made.

(2) Every authorisation made under sub-section (1) shall be

deemed to be a warrant referred to in section 93 of the Code‘of,Cri- _

minal Procedure, 1973

3B. (1) An officer authorised under sub-section (1) of section
3A may seize and detain any agricultural produce in relation to which
an offence under’ this Act or the rules made thereunder is being, or

५ appears to have been, committed, or. which. is intended or likely to

be used in the commission of. such, offence:

2

0

09

4

)

5

5

2 of 1974,


2 of 1974,

3

Provided that where any agricultural produce seized under this
sub-section is subject to speedy or natural decay, the officer so autho-
ised may dispose of such produce in such manner as may be pres-
cribed. if

(2) The provisions of section 102 of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1973 shall apply to every seizure made under this section.”,

5. In section 4 of the principal Act, for the words “with fine which may

extend to five hundred rupees”, the words “with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding six months and fine not exceeding five thousand ru-

10 pees” shall be substituted.

15

20

35

3०0

35

6. In section 5 of the principal Act, for the words “with imprisonment

which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both”, the words
“with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and fine
not exceeding five thousand rupees” shall be substituted.

7. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be

inserted, namely: —

‘SA. Whoever sells any scheduled article which is misgraded shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months
and fine not exceeding five thousand rupees.

5B. (1) Where the Central Government is of opinion that it is
necessary in the public interest or for the protection of consumers that
any scheduled article or class of articles shall not be sold or distribu-
ted except after such article or class of articles is marked with the
grade designation mark, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make a declaration to that effect,

(2) Any notification issued under sub-section (1) shall specify
the area or areas in relation to'which the notification shall have effect.

(3) Where a notification under sub-section (1) is issued in res-
pect of any area or areas, no person shall sell or offer ‘to sell or dis-
tribute or offer to distribute any scheduled article or class thereof in
the area or areas except in accordance with the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder.

(4) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months
and fine not exceeding five thousand rupees,

Amendment
of section

Amend-
ment of
section 5.

Insertion of
new sections
SA, 5B and
5c

Penalty for
selling mis-
graded
articles.

Power to
prescribe
compulsory
grade
designa-
tion in,
respect
of cer-
tain
articles,


4

Institu- 5C. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
tion of under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by—_
prosecu-

tion, 1 (a) the Central Government or the State Government or any

officer authorised by it in writing; or
(b) the person aggrieved; or न

(०) a recognised consumer association, whether the person
aggrieved is a member of that association or not.

Explanation For the purposes of this section, “recognised eon-
sumer association” means a voluntary consumer association registered

under the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for the time yo 1 of 1956.

being in force.’, t

ES


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937 provides
for the grading and marking of agricultural and other allied commodities
with the objectives of making available quality agricultural produce in-
cluding horticulture and livestock produce to the consumers, Under this
Act, the Central Government has been authorised to make rules fixing
grade designation to indicate the quality of any scheduled article, defining
the quality indicated by every grade designation; specifying grade desig-
nation mark to represent particular grade designation; authorising inte-
rested parties to grade; specifying conditions regarding manner of mark-
ing, packaging etc. and providing for the confiscation and disposal of pro-
duce marked otherwise than in accordance with the prescribed conditions
with a grade designation mark. The insignia used for grading is
‘AGMARK’. Grading under this Act is purely voluntary in nature. Des-
pite the elaborate procedures prescribed in the rules under the Act, com-
plaints have been received about the quality of Agmarked goods.

2. With a view to protect the interests of the consumers and to ensure

that there is no misgrading of articles, the following major amendments
are proposed:—

(a) misgraded article is proposed to be defined as one not of the
quality prescribed for the grade designation with which it is marked;

(b) the punishment prescribed under sections 4 and 5 of the Act
for unauthorised or improper marking with grade designation mark
and counterfeiting grade designation mark is proposed to be increased
from Rs. 500 as fine to a penalty of imprisonment upto six months
and fine up to Rs. 5,000 and from the existing penalty of imprison-
ment upto two years or fine or both to imprisonment upto three years
and fine up to Rs. 5,000 respectively;

(c) it is also proposed to impose a fine not exceeding Rs. 5,000
and imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months for selling or
distributing misgraded articles or articles not conforming to the pres-
cribed. grade or standard; *

(d) it is proposed to empower the Central Government to intro-
duce compulsory grading with respect to commodities where such
grading is deemed to be in the public interest and for the protection
of consumers, The compulsory grading is proposed to be introduced
in respect of any article or class of articles notified for any specific
area or areas, The penalty proposed to be imposed for contravention

of this provision is imprisonment upto six months and fine up to
Rs. 5,000;

(e) no court shall take cognizance of the offence punishable
under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by Central
Government, State Government, any officer authorised to do so, and
also by recognised consumer associations and the aggrieved person;

5


6

(f) it is also proposed that powers of inspection, search and sei-
zures may also be vested in officers belonging to Central Government,

or State Government or other authorities authorised by the Central
Government.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects and to make some other
consequential and clarificatory amendments jn the Act,

New Dezuz; RAMANAND YADAV

The 2nd December, 1986.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to insert a new clause (j) in section 2
of the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937, so ४5 to
define misgraded article. Such article will be considered to be misgraded
if the article is not of the quality prescribed by rules for the grade desig-
nation with which it is marked, where the composition of the article
offered for grading is altered after a sample has been drawn for analysis
and determination of the grade designation of the article in accordance
with the rules framed under the Act and where false claim is made for
the quality prescribed for the grade designation of the article upon the
label or through advertisement or in any other manner,

2. Clause 4 of the Bil] proposes to insert new sections 3A and 3B in
the Act. Sub-section (1) of section 3B proposes to empower an officer
authorised under sub-section (1) of section 3A to seize and detain any
agricultural produce in relation to which an offence under the Act or
the rules made thereunder has been committed. The manner of disposal
of the agricultural produce, where such produce is subject to speedy or
natural decay. will be prescribed by rules, Clause 3 of the Bill proposes
to amend section 3 of the Act which empowers the Central Government
to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Act so as to enable that
Government to make rules for the ‘purposes covered by the aforesaid new
provisions.

3. The matters in respect of which the said rules may be made are
essentially matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.


Explana-
tions.

Prescrip-
tion of
grade desig-
nation.

Penalty for
unauthorised
marking
with grade
designation
mark,

Penalty for
counterfeit.
ing grade
designation
mark,

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE AGRICULTURAL PRopUCE (GRADING AND MARKETING)
Act, 1937
(1 or 1937)
* * * * *

2. In this Act, unless the contrary appears from the subject or context.

* * * * *

(A) “scheduled article’ means an article included in the Sche-
dule; and

* कर * * *

3. (1) The Central Government may, after previous publication by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules—

(a) fixing grade designations to indicate the quality of any sche-
duled article;
% * * * *

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one:session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before ihe expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however: that any such
modification or annulment shall not without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.

4. Whoever marks any scheduled article with a grade design nation
mark, not being authorised to do so by rule made under section 3, shall
be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

5. Whoever counterfeits any grade designation mark or has in his
possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of counter-
feiting a grade designation mark shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

* रू * * *


LOK SABHA

A
Br

further to amend the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act,
1937.

(Shri Ramanand Yadav, Minister of State in the Department of Rural
Development in the Ministry of Agriculture.)