As rnTRoDUcED IN Lox SABHA ON
F LSEh 149)

Bill No. 155 of 1991

THE PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES (REGULATION
AND PREVENTION OF MISUSE) BILL, 1991

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement,
2, Definitions,
CHAPTER II

Recuration or GENETIC COUNSELLING CENTRE, GENETIC LABORATORY
AND GENerIc Cuinic

3. Regulation of Genetic Counselling Centres, Genetic Laboratories
and Genetic Clinics.

CHAPTER II

REGULATION OF PRE-NATAL DraGNoStIc TECHNIQUES

>

. Regulation of pre-natal diagnostic techniques.

कर

. Written consent of pregnant woman,

6. Determination of sex prohibited.
CHAPTER IV

CENTRAL SuPERvisorY Boarp

x

. Constitution of Central Supervisory Board.

9

. Term of office of members.
. Meeting of the Board.

Py

10. Vacancies, ete., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board,

11. Temporary association of persons with the Board for particular
purposes,

12. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Board.
13. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Board.
14. Disqualifications for appointment as member.

15, Eligibility of member for reappointment,
6, Fi

‘unctions of the Board.

6)


(ii)
Causes
CHAPTER V
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY

17. Appropriate Authority.
CHAPTER VI

REGISTRATION OF GENETIC COUNSELLING CENTRES, GENETIC
LABORATORIES AND GENETIC CLINICS

18. Registration of Genetic Counselling Centres, Genetic Labora-
tories or Genetic Clinics.

19. Certificate of registration.
20. Cancellation or suspension of registration.
21, Appeal.

CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

22. Prohibition of advertisement relating to pre-natal determination
of sex and punishment for contravention.
23, Offences and penalties.

24. Presumption in the case of conduct of Pre-natal diagnostic
) techniques.

25. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of the Act or ruies
for which no specific punishment is provided.

26. Offences by companies.
27. Offence to be cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.

28. Cognizance of offences.

CHAPTER VIII
MIscELLANEOUS

29, Maintenance of records.

30. Power to search and seize records.

31. Protection of action taken in good faith.

32. Power to make rules,

33. Power to make regulations.

34. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.


Bill No. 155 of 1991
THE PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES (REGULATION
AND PREVENTION OF MISUSE) BILL, 1991

A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of the use of pre-natal diagnostic techniques
for the purpose of detecting genetic or metabolic disorders or chromo-
somal abnormalities or certain congenital malformations or sex-linked
disorders and for the prevention of the misuse of such techniques

for the purpose of pre-natal sex determination leading to female
foeticide; and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques
(Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1991.

(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
10 May, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Short
title,
extent
and com
mence-
ment.


2

Defini- 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
tions,
(a) “Appropriate Authority” means the Appropriate Authority
appointed under section 17;

(७) “Board” means the Central Supervisory Board constituted
under section 7; : as

(c) “Genet’c Counselling Centre” means an Institute, Hospital,
Nursing Home or any place by whatever name called, which provides
for genetic counselling to patients and for performing obstetrical or
gynaecological procedures such as foetoscopy, taking samples of
amniotic fluid, chorionic villi, blood or any tissue of a pregnant 10
woman for being sent to genetic clinic or laboratory for conducting
pre-natal diagnostic test;

(d) “Genetic Clinic” means a clinic and includes a place used
for the purpose of conducting the activities of Genetic Counselling
Centre or Genetic Laboratory or both; 15

. (e) “Genetic Laboratory” means a laboratory and includes a
place where facilities are provided for conducting analysis or tests of
samples received from Genetic Counselling Centre for pre-natal diag-
nostic test;

(f). “gynaecologist” means a person who possesses a post-graduate 59
qualification in gynaecology;

(g) “medical geneticist” means a person who possesses a degree
or diploma or certificate in medical genetics in the field of pre-natal
diagnostic techniques or has experience of not less than two years in

such field after obtaining— 25

(i) any one of the medical qualifications recognised under
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956; or

(ii) a post-graduate degree in biological sciences;
(h) “pre-natal diagnostic procerlures” mems all gynaecological
or obstetrical or medical procesiures such as foetoscopy. taking or re~ 30
moving samples of amniotic fluid, chorionic villi, blood or any tissue

of a pregnant woman for being sent to a Genetic Labouratory or
Genetic Clinic for conducting pre-natal diagnostic test;

102 of 1956

(0 “pre-natal diagnostic techniques” include all pre-natal diag-
nostic procedures and pre-natal diagnostic tests; 5

(j) “pre-natal diagnostic test” means any test or analysis of am-
niotic fluid, chorionic villi, blood or any tissue of a pregnant woman
conducted to detect genetic or metabolic disorders or chromosomal
abnormalities or congenital anomalies or haemoglobinopathies or sex-
linked diseases;

(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;

(1) “registered medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner

who possesses any recognised medical qualification as defined in

clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, and 45

whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register; 102 of 1956

40

(m) “regulations” means regulations framed by the Board under
this Act.


43%; 3 =
CHAPTER II ॥
REGULATION OF GENETIC COUNSELLING CENTRES, GENETIC LABORATORIES

AND GENETIC CLINICS

3. On and from the commencement of this Act,—

5 (1) no Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or
Genetic Clinic unless registered under this Act, shall conduct or
associate with, or help in, conducting activities relating to pre-natal
diagnostic techniques;

(2) no Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Gene-
10 tic Clinic shall employ or cause to be employed any person who does
not possess the prescribed qualifications;

(3) no medical geneticist, gynaecologist. registered medical practix
tioner or any other person shall conduct or cause to be conducted
or aid in conducting by himself or through any other person, any

15 pre-natal diagnostic techniques at a place other than a place registered
under this Act.

CHAPER III
REGULATION oR PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES

4. On and from commencement of this Act—

20 (1) no place including a registered Genetic Counselling Centre.
or Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic shall be used or caused to be
used by any person for conducting pre-natal diagnostic techniques
except for the purposes specified in clause (2) and after satisfying any
of the conditions specified in clause (3);

25 (2) no pre-natal diagnostic techniques shall be conducted except
for the purposes of detection of any of the following abnormalities,
namely: —

(i) chromosomal abnormalities;
(ii) genetic metabolic diseases;
30 (iii) _Haemoglobinopathies:
(iv) Sex-linked genetic diseases;
(v) congenital anomalies;

(vi) any other abnormalities or diseases as may be specified

by the Central Supervisory Board; ॥|

35 (3) no pre-natal diagnostic techniques shall be used or conducted
unless the person qualified to do so is satisfied that any of the follow-
ing conditions are fulfilled, namely:—

(a) age of the pragnant woman is above thirty-five years;
(ii) the pregnant women has undergone two or more sponte-
40 neous abortions or foetal loss;

(iii) the pregnant woman had been exposed to potentially
teratogenic drugs, radiation, infection or hazardous chemicals;

Regula-
tion of
Genetic
Counsel-
ling
Centres,
Genetic
Laborato-
ries
and
Genetic
Clinics.

Reguta-
ton of
pre-
natal dia-
gnostic
techni-
ques.


Written
consent
of preg-
nant

woman.

Determi-

nation
ofsex
prohibi-
ted,

Constttu-
tion of
Central
Supervi-
sory
Board.

}

नि -
(iv) the pregnant woman has a family history of

retardation or physical deformities such as spasticity
other genetic disease;

(०) any other condition as may be spqcified by the
Supervisory Board.

(4) no person being a relative or the husband of the pi
woman shall seek or encourage the conduct »f any pre-natal diagné
techniques on her except for the purpose specified in clause (2).

5. No person referred to under clause (2) of section 3 shall con
the pre-natal diagnostic procedures unless he has explained all possibl
side and after effects of such, procedures to the pregnant woman concerned
and has obtained her consent in writing to undergo such procedures, in
the prescribed form,

6. On and from commencement of this Act,— i

(a) no Genetit Counselling Cenire or Genetic Laboratory or
Genetic Clinic shall couduct or cause to be conducted in its Centres,
Laboratory or Clinic pre-natal diagnostic techniques including ultra
sonography, for the purpose of determining the sex of a foetus;

(b) no person shall conduct or cause to be conducted any pre-
natal diagnostic techniques including ultrasonography for the purpose 20
of determining the sex of a foetus.
CHAPTER IV
Cenrrat, Supervisory Boarp
7. (1) The Central Government shal! constitute a Board to be known

as the Central Supervisory Board to exercise the powers and perform the 25
functions conferred on the Board under this Act,

(2) The Board shall consist of—

(a) the Minister in charge of Family Welfare, who shall be the
Chairman, ex officio;

(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of Family 39
Welfare, who shall be the Vice-Chairman, ex officio; ।

(०) two members to be appointed by the Central Government to
represent the Ministries of Central Government in charge of Woman
and Child Development and of Law and Justice, ex officio;

(4) eight members to be appointed by the Central Government, 35
two each from amongst— रु

(४) eminent medical geneticists;
(ii) eminent gynaecologists;
(iit) eminent social scientists; and
(iv) representatives of women welfare organisations;
(०) two members to be appointed by the Central Government 40

by rotation in alphabetical order to represent the States and the
Union territories:


5

Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made
except on the recommendation of the State Government, or as the
case may be, the Union territory;

(f) an officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary or equiva-
5 lent, of the Central Government, in charge of Family Welfare, who
shall be the member-secretary, ex officio. \

8. (1) The term of office of a member, other than an ex officio mem-
ber, shall be three years.

(2), If a casual vacancy occurs in the office ot any other member,

10 whether by reason of his death, resignation or inability to discharge his

functions owing to illness or other incapacity, such vacancy shall be filled

by the Central Government by making a fresh appointment and the mem-

ber so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office
of the person in whose place he is so appointed.

15 (3) ‘The Vice-Chairman shall perform such functions as may be as-
signed to him by the Chairman from time to time.

(4) The procedure to be followed by the members in the discharge
of their functions shall be such as may be prescribed.

9. (1) The Board shall meet at such time and places, and shall

20 observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of busi-

ness at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) as may
be provided by regulations;

Provided that the Board shall meet at least once in six months,

(2) The Chairman and in his absence the Vice-Chairman shall pre-
25 Side at the meetings of the Board,

(3) If for any reason the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman is unable to
attend any meeting of the Board, any other member chosen by the mem-
bers present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.

(4) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board

30 Shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and
voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in his
absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise छ second or cast-
ing vote,

(5) Members other than ex officio members shall receive such allo-
35 Wances, if any, from the Board as may be prescribed,
10, No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by

reason of—

(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Board; or

; (0) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a
40 member of the Board; or

(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting
the merits of the case. है Sere |

Term

of office

of mem-
bers.

Meetings
of the
Board.

‘Vacan-
cies,

ete,

not to
invalidate
proceed-
ings of
the

Board.


Tempo-
rary
associa-
tion of
persons
with

the
Board
for
particu-
lar
purposes.

Appoint-
ment of
officers
and
other
emplo-
vyees of
the
Board.

Authenti-
cation

of orders
and
other
instru-
ments
ofthe «>
Board.
~Disquali-
fications
for
appoint-
ment as
member,

Eligibility
of
member
for re-
appoint
ment.

6

वा, (1) The Board may associate with itself, in such manner
Such purposes as may be determined by regulations, any person wh
assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the provisic
of this Act.

(2) A person associated with it by the Board under sub-section (1)
for any purpose shall have a right to take part in the discussions relevant
to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the
Board and shall not be 2 member for any other purpose.

12. (1) For the purpose of enabling it efficiently to discharge its
functions under this Act, the Board may, subject to such regulations as
may be made in this behalf, appoint (whether on deputation or other-
wise) such number of officers and other employees as it may consider
necessary:

Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may
be specified in such regulations, shall be subject to the approval of the
Central Government.

(2) Every officer or other employee appointed by the Board shall be
subject to such conditions of service and shall be entitled to such re-
muneration as may be specified in the regulations.

13. All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by 20
the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by the
Board in this behalf, and all other instruments issued by the Board shall
be authenticated by the signature of the Member-Secretary or any other
officer of the Board authorised in like manner in this behalf.

14. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member 5
if, he— i

(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an
offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves
moral turpitude; or

(0) is an undischarged insolvent; or 30

(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court; or

(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the
Government or a Corporation owned or controlled by the Govern-

ment or; 35

(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such
financial or other interest in the Board as is likely to affect pre-
judicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member.

15. Subject to the other terms and conditions of service as may be
prescribed, any person ceasing to be a member shall be eligible for re- 4
appointment as such member.


7
16. The Board shall have the following functions, namely: —

(i) to advise the Government on policy matters relating to use of
pre-natal diagnostic techniques;
(ii) to review implementation of the Act and the rules made

5 thereunder and recommend changes in the said Act and rules to the
Central Government:

(iii) to create public awareness against the practice of female
foeticide; |

(iv) to lay down code of conduct to be observed by persons
10 working at genetic counselling centres, genetic laboratories and
genetic clinies.

(०) any other functions as may be prescribed under the Act.

CHAPTER V
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY

15 17. (1) The Central Government shall appoint by notification in the
Official Gazette one or more officers as Appropriate Authorities for each
of the Union territories for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The State Government shall appoint by notification in the
Official Gazette one or more officers as Appropriate Authorities for the

20 purposes of this Act.

(3) The officers appointed as Appropriate Authorities under sub-
section (2), shall be of and above the rank of the Joint Director of
Health and Family Welfare of the State Government or of the Union
territory, as the case may be.

25 (4) The Appropriate Authority shall have the following functions,
namely; —

(i) to grant registration, suspend or cance] registration of a
Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory and a Genetic
Clinic;

30 (ii) to enforce standards prescribed for the Genetic Counselling
Centres, Genetic Laboratories and Genetic Clinics; and

(iii) to investigate complaints of breach of the provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder and take appropriate action.

(5) (i) The Central Government or the State Government shall, as
the case may be constitute an Advisory Committee to aid and advise
35 cach Appropriate Authority in the discharge of its functions.

(ii) The Advisory Committee shall consist of two gynaecologists or
medical geneticists and three eminent social workers of whom not less
than one shall be from amongst representative of women’s organisations:

40... (४0 The terms and conditions subject to which a person may be
appointed to the Advisory Committee and the procedure to be followed
by such Committee in the discharge of its functions shall be such as
may be prescribed.

Func-
tions

of the
Board.

Appro-
priate
Authority,


Registra-
tion of
Genetic
Counselling
Centres,
Genetiy
‘Laborato-
ries or
Genetic
Climes,

Cortifi-
cate ot

tian,

Cancella-
tion or
spen-
ion of
registra
tion,

CHAPTER VL

REGISTRATION OF GENETIC COUNSELLING CENTRES, GENETIC
Lasoratorieés AND GENETIC CLINICS

18. (1) No person shall open any Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic
Laboratory or Genetic Clinic after the commencement of this Act, unless |
such Centre, [:)sratory or Clinic is duly registered under this Act.

(2) Every application for registration under sub-section (1), shall be
made to the Appropriate Authority in sich form and in such manner and
shall be secompanied by such fees as may be prescribed,

(3) Every Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or a 10
Genetic Clinic engaged, either partly or exclusively, in conducting pre-
natal diagnostic techniques for any of the purposes mentioned in section 4,
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall apply for regist-
ration within sixty days from the date of such commencement.

(4) Subject to the provisions of section 6, every Genetic Counselling
Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic engaged in conducting pre-
natal diagnostic techniques shall cease io conduc! any such technique on
the expiry of six months from the date of cormencqment of this Act
unless such Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic
Clinic has applied for registration an‘ is so registered or till such appli- 20
cation is disposed of, whichever is earlier.

(5) No Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic
Clinic shall be registered under this Act unless the Appropriate Authority
is satisfied that such Centre, Laboratory or Clinic is in a position to provide

such facilities, maintain such equipment and standards as may be prescri- 25
bed. rok

5

19. (1) The Appropriate Authority shall, after holding an inquiry
and after satisfying itself that the applicant has complied with all the

requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder, grant a certi-
ficate of registration in the

prescribed form to the Genetic Counselliig 30
Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic, as the case may be.

(2) If, after the inquiry and after giving an opportunity to the
applicant of being heard, (he Appropriate Authority is satisfied that the
applicant has not complied with the requirements of this Act and the
rules, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in Writing, reject the application 35
for registration.

(3) Every certificate of registration shall be renewed in such manner
and after such period and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.

(4) The certificate of registration shall be displayed by the registered
Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic in a 40
conspicuous place at its place of business.

20. (1) The Appropriate Authority may suo moto, or on complaint,
issue a notice to the Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or
Genetic Clinic to show cause why its registration should not be sus-
pended or cancelled for the reasons mentioned in the notice. 45
(2) If, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the
Genetic Counselling Centre, Genctic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic, the ”
Appropriate Authority is satisfied that there has been a breach of the
Provisions of this Act or rules, it may, without prejudice to any criminal
action that it may take against such Gene*ic Counselling Centre, Genetic 50
Laboratory or Genetic Clinic suspend its re;

‘gistration for such period as
it may think fit or cancel its registration, as the case may be.



9

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and

(2), if the Appropriate Authority is of the opinion that it is necessary

or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, for reasons to be

recorded in writing, suspend the registration of any Genetic Counselling

5 Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic without issuing any such
notice referred to in sub-section (1).

21, The Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic
Clinic may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the order of
suspension or cancellation of registration passed by the Appropricte

10 Authority under section 20, prefer an appeal against such order to—

() the Central Government, where the appeal is against the
order of the Central Appropriate Authority; and

(ii) the State Government, where the appeal is against the
orders of the State Appropriate Authority;

15 in the prescribed manner.
CHAPTER VIL
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

22. (1) No Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic

Clinic shall issue or cause to be issued any advertisement in any manner

20 regarding facilities of pre-natal determination of sex available at such
Centre, Laboratory or Clinic.

Explanation.—In this section, “advertisement” includes any notice,
circular, label, wrapper or other document and also includes any visible
representation made by means of any light, sound, smoke or gas.

25 (2) Any person, who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1),
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.

23. (1) Any medical geneticist, gynaecologist, registered medical
practitioner or any person who owns a Genetic Counselling Centre,
30 a Genetic Laboratory or a Genetic Clinic or is employed in such a Centre,
Laboratory or Clinic or who renders his services to or at such a Centre,
Laboratory or Clinic, whether on an honorary basis or otherwise and
who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or rules made there-
under shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
35 extend to three years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees end on any subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may
extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.

(2) The name of the registered medical practitioner who has been

40 convicted by the court under sub-section (1), shall be reported by the

Appropriate Authority to the respective State Medical Council for

taking necessary action including the removal of his name from the

register of the Council for a period of two years for the first offence and
permanently for the subsequent offence.

Appeil.

Prohibi-
tion

ot adver-
tisement
relating
to” pre-
natal
deter=
mination
of sex
and
puinish-
ment

for
contra-
vention.

Offences
and
penalties.


Presump-
tion in
the case
of con-
duct of
pre-nat-
al diag-
nostic
techni-
ques.

Penalty
for con-
travention
of the
provisions
of the
Act or
rules
for
which
no
specific
punish-
ment is
provided.

Offences
by com-
pantes,

10

(3) Any person who seeks the aid of a Genetic Counselling |
Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic or of a medical ge
gynaecologist or registered medical practitioner for conducting
natal diagnostic techniques on any pregnant woman (including
woman unless she was compelled to undergo such diagnostie techn
for purposes other than those specified in clause (2) of section 4,
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and on any
subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to five.
years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 10

24, Notwithstanding anything in the Indian Evidence Act, 172 the
court shall presume unless the contrary is proved that the pregnant
woman has been compelled by her husband or the relative to undergo
pre-natal diagnostic technique and such person shall be liable for abet-
ment of offence under sub-section (3) of section 23 and shall be punish-
able for the offence specified under that section.

25. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any
rules made thereunder, for which no penalty has been elsewhere pro-
vided in this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months or with fine, which may extend to
one thousand rupees or with both and in the case of continuing contra-
vention with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after
conviction for the first stich contravention,

26. (1) Where any offence, punishable under this Act has been com- 25
mitted by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, end was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 30

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 35
any offence punishable under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 40
guilty “of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly. |

Explanation—For the purposes of this section,— प्र

(a) “company” means-any body corporate and includes a firm

or other association of individuals; and 45


u
(७) “director”, in elation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

27. Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable, non-bailable
and non-compoundable. }

28. (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act
5 except on a complaint made by,—

(a) the appropriate Authority concerned or any officer authorised
in this behalf by the Central Government or State Government, as
the case may be, or the Appropriate Authority; or

(b) a person who has given notice of not less than sixty days,
10 in the manner prescribed, to the Appropriate Authority, of the
alleged offence and of his intention to make a complaint to the court.

(2) No court other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judi-
cial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under
this Act. |

15 (3) Where a complaint has been made under clause (b) of sub-
section (1), the court may, on demand by such person, direct the Appro-
priate Authority to make available copies of the relevant records in its
possession to such person.

CHAPTER VIL

20 MISCELLANEOUS

29, (1) All records, charts, forms, reports, consent Jetters and all
other documents required to be maintained under this Act and the rules
shall be preserved for a period of two years or for such period as may be
“prescribed:

25 Provided that, if any criminal or other proceedings are instituted
against any Genetic Counseiling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic
Clinic, the records and all other documents of such Centre, Laboratory
or Clinic shall be preserved iill the final disposal of such proceedings.

(2) All such records shall, at all reasonable times, be made available
30 for inspection to the Appropriate Authority or to any other person
authorised by the Appropriate Authority in this behalf.

30. (1) If the Appropriate Authority has reason to believe that an
offence under this Act has been or is being committed at any Genetic
Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic, such Autho-

35. rity or any officer authorised them in this behalf may, subject to such
rules as may be prescribed, enter and search at all reasonable times with
such assistance if any as such authority or officer considers necessary,
sueh Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic
and examine any record, register, document, book, pamphlet advertise-

40 ment or any other material object found therein and seize the same if
stich Authority or officer has reason to believe that it may furnish
evidence of the commission of an offence punishable under this Act.

Offence
to be cog-
nizable,
non-bail-
able and

pound-
able,

Cogni-
zance of
offences,

Mainte-
nance of
records,

Power to
search
and seize
reeords
ete.


Protec-
tion. of
action
taken in
ood
faith.

Power to

rules.

12

(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal i
to searches and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to
or seizure made under this Act.

31, No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
the Central or the State Government or the Appropriate
any officer authorised by the Central or State Government or
Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended.
done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.

32. (1) The Central Goversment may, make rules for carrying:
the provisions of this Act,

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
going power, such rules may provide for—
(@ the minimum qualifications for Persons employed at a
registered Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic
Clinic under clause (1) of section 3;

(i) the form in which consent of a pregnant woman has to be
obtained under section 5;

(ii) the procedure to be followed by the members of the Central
Supervisory Board in the discharge of their functions under sub-

section (4) of section 8; 20

कर (iv) allowances for members other than ex-officio members
admissible under sub-section (5) of section 9;

(०) the terms and conditions sulfject to which a person may be
appointed to the Advisory Committee under clause (iii) of cub.
section (5) of section 17; 25

(vi) the form and manner in which an application shall be made

for registration and the fee payable thereof under sub-section (2) of
section 18;

(vii) the facilities to be provided, equipment and other standards
to be maintained by the Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Labo- 30
ralory or Genetic Clinic under sub-section (4) of section 18:

(viti) the form in which a certificate of registration shall be
issued under sub-section (1) of section 19;

(é2) ‘the manner in which and the period after which a certificate
of registration shall be renewed and the fee payable for such renewal
under sub-section (3) of section 19; 35

(६) the manner in which an appeal may be preferred under
section 21;

(vi) the period up to which records, charts ete, shall be preserv-
ed under sub-section (1) of section 29;

(vii) the manner in which the seizure of documents, records,
objects ete. shall be made and the manner in which seizure list shall
be prepared and delivered to the person from whose custody such

its, records or objects were seized under sub-section (1) of
section 30.

45
(ziti) any other matter that is required to be or may be

prescribed.


20

25

13

33. The Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central Gov-
ernment, by notification in the Official Gazette make regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made there-
unter to provide for,— 3

(a) the time and place of the meetings of the Board and the
procedure to be followed for the transaction of business ai such
meetings and the number of members which shall form the quorum
under sub-section (1) of section 9;

(b) the manner in which a person may be temporarily assoviat-
ed with the Board under sub-section (1) of section 11;

(c) the method of appointment, the conditions of service and
the scales of pay and allowances of the officer and other employees
of the Board appointed under section 12;

(d) generally for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the
Board. 4

34. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be afier it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in iwo or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session im-
mediately following the session aforesaid both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or regulation as the case may be or both
Houses agree that the rule or regulation as the case may be should not
be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without preiudice
to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be done
under that rule or regulation

Power

regula-
tions.

Rules and
vegula~
tions to
be laid
before
Parlia-
ment,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND 7 4
It is proposed to prohibit pre-natal diagnostic techniques for
mination of sex of the foctus leading to female foeticide. Such
of techniques is discriminatory against the female sex and affects!
dignity and status of women. A legislation is required to regulate

use of such techniques and to provide deterrent punishment to stop
inhuman act.

The Bill inter alia provides for:—

(i) prohibition of the misuse of pre-natal diagnostic techniques
for determination of sex of foetus, leading to female foeticide;

(i) prohibition of advertisement of pre-natal disgnostic tech:
niques for detection or determination of Sex;

(ii) permission and regulation of the use of pre-natal diagnos-
tic techniques for the purpose of detection of specific genetic abnor-
malities or disorders;

(iv) permitting the use of such techniques only under certain
conditions by the registered institutions; and

(९) punishment for violation of the provisions of

the proposed
legislation.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives,

New Dain;
The 6th September, 1991. ML. FOTEDAR.

14


Notes on clauses

Clause 2-—This clause seeks to define the various expressions used in
the Bill.

Clause 3—This clause provides that no Genetic Counselling Centre,
Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic shall conduct any pre-natal diag-
nostic technique unless it is registered under the proposed Act. It also
provides that such Centre, Laboratory or Clinic shall not employ any
person who does not possess the prescribed qualifications. It also pro-
vides that no medical geneticist, gynaecologist or registered medical
practitioner or any other person shall conduct any pre-natal diagnostic
technique at a place other than the placed registered under the Act.

Clause 4.—This clause provides that no Genetic Counselling Centre,
Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic shall be used for pre-natal diag-
nostic techniques except for the purposes mentioned in that clause and
subject to the fulfilment of the conditions specified in that clause. ‘It
also provides that no person shall seek or encourage the performance of
any pre-natal diagnostic technique on any pregnant woman except for
the purposes mentioned in that clause.

Clause 5.—This clause provides that before the pregnant jwoman is
subjected to pre-natal diagnostic technique the person conducting, such
test shall qxplain all the side and after effects of undertaking such
tests and has obtained for consent in writing to undergo such procedures.

Clause 6—This clause imposes an absolute prohibition on the use of
pre-natal diagnostic technique including ultra-sonography for the pur-
poses of determining the sex of foetus. .

Clause 7—This clause provides for the constitution of ‘Central Super~
visory Board with the Minister in charge of Family Welfare as its
Chairman. H a ,

Clause 8—This clause provides for term of office of members appoin-
ted to the Central Supervisory Board. :

Clause 9.—This clause provides for meetings of the Board and the
procedure to be followed for such meetings.

Clause 10—This clause provides that vacancies in the Board shall
not invalidate proceedings of the Board.

Clause 11.—This clause provides for temporary association of persons
with the Board for particular purposes.

Clause 12—This clause provides for appointment of officers and
other employees of the Board.

Clause 13—This clause provides for authentication of orders and
other instruments of the Board.

15


Clause 14.--'This clause provides for disqualifications for appointment
85 members of the Board.

Clause 15.—This clause provides for eligibility of members for re-
appointment.

Clause 16—This clause provides for the functions of the Board which
shall include advising the Government on policy matter relating to the
use of pre-natal diagnostic technique, to review implementation of the
Act and the rules made thereunder and to create public awareness against
‘the practice of female foeticide.

Clause 17—This clause provides for the appointment of Appropriate
Authorities for discharging the functions of granting registration enfore-
ing standards prescribed for such Centres, Laboratories and (Clinics,
Suspension or cancellation of a Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic
laboratory or Genetic Clinic and to enforce standards prescribed for such
Centres, Laboratories and Clinics. It also provides for the appointment
vf Advisory Committees to advise the Appropriate Authorities in the
discharge of their functions.

Clause 18.—This clause provides for registration of all Genetic Coun-
telling Centres, Genetic Laboratories and Genetics Clinics engaged in con-
Sucting pre-natal diagnostic techniques. It also provides for the period
within which such clinic should be registered with the Appropriate
Authorities. It also provides that no person shall open in Genetic Coun.
selling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic after the commence-
ment of the proposed Act unless it is registered,

Clause 19.—This clause provides for the grant of certificate of regis-
tration. the procedure for rejection of the application for such
registration.

Clause 20—This clause provides for cancellation and suspension of a
certificate of registration granted to a Genetic Counselling Centre, Gene-
tie Laboratory or Genetic Clinic.

Clause 21.—This clause provides for appeal against the order of
suspension or cancellation of registration,

(70७९ 22.—This clause bans advertisements relating to pre-natal Giag-
nostic techniques and also provides for the punishment for its contra-
vention.

Clause 23.—This clause Provides for offences and penalties. Any
medicai geneticist, gynaecologist, registered medical practitioner, any
person owning the Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or a
Genetic Clinic or who is employed in such Centre, Laboratory or Clinic
and who renders services as such Centre, Laboratory or Clinic shall be
punishable with imprisonment extending up to three years and with fine
extending up to 10,000 rupees for any contravention of the provisions of.
the proposed Act and the rules made thereunder and for subsequent
conviction with imprisonment which may extend to five years and fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. It also provides that the
name of the registered medical practitioner who has been convicted by
the court shall be reported to the respective State Medical Council for
removal his name from the registers of the Council for a period of
two years, for the first offence and permanently for the subsequent
offences. It also seeks to punish any person who seeks the aid of the


17

Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory, Genetic Clinic, medical
geneticist, gynaecologist or a registered medical practitioner for conduct-
ing pre-natal diagnostic technique at any pregnant woman, including
such pregnant woman unless she was compelled for any purpose other
than those specified in the proposed Act shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to three years and fine which,
may extend to ten thousand rupees and for subsequentconviction with
imprisonment which may extend to five years and fine which may extend
to fifty thousand dupees.

Clause 24.—This clause provides that the court shall presume unless
the contrary is proved that the pregnant woman has been compelled by
her husband or the relative to undergo pre-natal diagnostic technique
and such person shall be liable for abetment of the offence under sub-
section (3) of section 23.

Clause 25.—This clause provides for penalty for contravention of the
proposed Act or the rules made thereunder for which no provision has
been elsewhere provided in the Act.

Clause 26.—This clause provides for punishment for offences by
companies.

Clause 27.—This clause provides that every offence under this Act
shall be cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.

Clause 28.—This clause provides that the court shall take cognizance
of an offence under the Act only on a complaint made by the Appro-
priate Authority or any officer authorised by the Central Government
or State Government or the Appropriate Authority or by a person who
has given notice of not less than sixty days to the Appropriate Authority
of the alleged offence and his intention to make a complaint to the court.

Clause 29,—This clause provides for maintenance of records, charts.
forms, reports, etc., for a period of two years.

Clause 30.—This clause confers power upon the Appropriate Autho-
rities to seize records and search premises of any Genetic Counselling
Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic.

Clause 31.—This clause provides for protection of action taken in
good faith.

Clause 32.—This clause confers power upon the Central Government
to frame rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. प्र

Clatise 33.—This clause confers power upon the Central Supervisory
Board for framing of regulations not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder with the previous permission
of the Central Government.

Clause 34.—This clause provides, for the laying down of rules and
regulations before the Parliament. 3


ers
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM, . 2 Dao

The Bill provides for the constitution of a Central Supervisory Board
fo exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assign
ed to it under pe Proposed legislation. ‘The Central Supervisory Board,
with the Minister in charge of the Ministry of the Central Government

dealing with the Family Welfare, as its Chairman will include’ 14
members. ,

Ciause 9 of the Bill provides that members other than the ex officio.
members of the Board, shall receive such allowances, if any, As may be
Prescribed by the Board. The Bill also provides that at least two Meetings
of the Board shall be held during every year. Out of the eight experts,
Tepresenting different disciplines, four experts can bé expected to repre-

in respect of payment of DA/TA to the four experts belonging to non-
governmental sector. The estimated expenditure, covering the cost of
air travel and payment of per diem to these four experts will be of the
order of Rs. 41,200 for holding two meetings in a year. In respect of
the remaining four experts as also the representatives of States/UTs,
there will also be cash outgo. The extent of cash outgo is estimated to
be of the order of Rs. 1,23,600 making a total of Re. 1,64,800 per annum,

2. The Bill also envisages constitution of Appropriate Authorities for
the UTs as well as for the States, These Appropriate Authorities’ shall
have the powers of granting registration, suspension or cancellation of
the registration. Though one of the existing officers in States and
UTs is expected to take over this responsibility to start with, yet with the
passage of time, he may be requiring additional secretarial assistance
for his effective functioning under the Act, which’ will depend?upon the
workload which the concerned officer will have to shoulder under the
Act. It is, therefore, not possible at this stage to indicate precisely how
much secretarial assistance is needed and what will be the financial
liability on this account. Likewise for the effective functioning of Cent-
ral Supervisory Board, there may be a need for giving -additional or
exclusive secretarial assistance for handling ‘this work. No precise
estimates about the likely expenditure: on this account can be ‘given at
this stage.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may, among
other things, provide for any of the following matters, namely:—

(0) minimum qualifications of the person employed in regis-
tered Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory and Genetic
Clinic;

(ii) the form and manner of application for registration, records
to be maintained, consent of pregnant woman to be obtained at
such registered Centre, Laboratory or Clinic;

(iii) minimum equipment necessary and the standards to be
maintained by the Centre, Laboratory or Clinic;

(iv) the manner in which an appeal may be filed to the Central
or State Government against the order of refusal, cancellation or
suspension of registration;

(०) the duration of validity, procedure of renewal and fee to be
charged for registration; and

(vi) the records, charge, report and the other documents to be
maintained by the Genetic Counselling Centre, Laboratory or Clinic.

Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Central Supervisory Board to
frame regulations. Such regulations, among other things, may provide
for the time and places of meetings of the Board, the procedure to be
followed for the transaction of business at such meetings, the number
of members which shall form a quorum and the conditions of service of
the employees of the Board.

2. As the matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be
made are matters of procedure or administrative detail, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the regulation of the use of pre-natal diagnostic techniques
for the purpose of detecting genetic or metabolic disorders or chromo.
sonal abnormalities or cdrtain congenital malformations or sex-linked

disorders and for the prevention of the misuse of such techniques
for the purpose of pre-1

foeticide; and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri M. L, Fotedar, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

natal sex determination leading to female’

3339-००

11 a i