5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 155 of 2022 
THE RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS (FOR SCHEDULED CASTES 
AND SCHEDULED TRIBES) BILL, 2022
By
Dr. Manoj Rajoria,  M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for setting  up of residential schools for children belonging to the  
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters  
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the  Residential Schools (for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes)  Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It extends to  the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “appropriate Government” 
means in the case of a State, the Government of that State  and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
Short title,  
extent and  
commencement.
Definition
.

 3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a residential school in every area 
having such high population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes  as it may 
deem appropriate.  
  ( 2)  The residential school  shall cater to the schooling need of children  belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes only.
  ( 3)  The residential school shall  conduct  classes from nursery to twelfth standard.
  ( 4)  The medium of instruction shall be  English, Hindi and the language  of the 
State  in which the school  is located.
  ( 5)  No fees  or other expenses, whatsoever,  shall be charged  from any student and 
the education shall be imparted free of cost to the children. 
 4. The  appropriate Government  shall provide land free of cost for setting up of 
residential  schools within its territorial jurisdiction and shall not charge any money for 
providing essential services like electricity and water.
 5. ( 1) The residential schools shall be affiliated to Central Board of Secondary 
Education, New Delhi and shall follow the curriculum prescribed by it. 
  ( 2) The  students shall also be  given training in vocational courses of their choice.
 6. The residential schools shall have all  basic infrastructure  facilities like  playground, 
library, laboratories, hostels, dining facilities, etc. 
 7.  ( 1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the  purposes  of this Act.
  ( 2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.
Central Government 
to set up residential 
schools for the 
Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled 
Tribes.
Appropriate 
Government to 
provide land 
for setting up 
of residential 
schools.
Residential 
schools to be 
affiliated to 
CBSE.
5
10
25
20
15
Residential 
schools to have  
basic facilities.
Power to make 
rules.
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are residing in 
large number in certain areas.  But  there are not enough  educational facilities in those areas.   
The children belonging  to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, being  generally 
poor, cannot  afford good education in private schools and the number of good Government  
schools are limited in number.
 Therefore, it is proposed that  free residential schools should be set  up exclusively for 
children belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with all facilities in those 
areas where the population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes is significantly 
high.
 Hence this Bill.
 New Delhi;   MANOJ RAJORIA
5 July, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to  set up residential schools exclusively for children belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in areas where their concentration is high. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is likely to involve an annual  recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred 
crore. 
 A  non-recurring expenditure  of about rupees three hundred crore would also be 
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING   DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
 Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for setting  up of residential schools for children belonging to the  
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters  
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria,  M.P.) 