1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2.  In article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(2A ) No citizen shall, on ground of sex, be denied access to any place of religious
worship.
Short title.
Bill No.  155 of  2016
Amendment of
article 15.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Explanation.— For the purpose of this clause, the expression ‘place of religious
worship’ means a temple, mosque, gurudwara, church, monastery or any other place of
public religious worship of any religious denomination or any section thereof, by whatever
name called.”.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Of late, there has been a controversy that women are not allowed into sanctum
sanctorum of many temples in the country. The recent examples are Sabarimala temple in
the State of Kerala and Shani temple  at Shignapur in the State of Maharashtra. When
women protested against such discriminatory practice, the past conventions and hereditary
practices were mentioned as the reason for prohibiting them to enter the sanctum sanctorum
of religious places. When Constitution came into effect, this ancient discriminatry practice
should have specifically been done away with. However, this was not done at that time. The
Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide that there shall be no
discrimination on the ground of sex in the matter of access to religious places opened for
general public.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE
April 18, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained
wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.
* * * *
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1043LS(S3)—02-07-2016.