CORRIGENDA
to
THE BENGA.LCH8vUCALAND PH.;RIvlACEUTICi'.LWORKS LIMITED
("CQUISITILN "I'JDTRANSFER OF UNJERTAKINGS) -BILL,1980
Ll?betAsintroducedinL?k Sabha.,7
1. Page 9, line8,-
af!er "Cus'tcdian" insert. . "Or Custodians"
2.. Page 10, line42,-
for"ensure"!~a9 "enurs''
3.Page 11, inthemarginalheadingtoclause18,-
for"Government,of" read"Governmentor"
4. Page 14, inthemarginalheadingtoclause27,-
omit"the".rA - •
R PriQc 16, line2,-
,S!fter"Cus+odian" insert"orcustodians"
6. Page 17,-
agai,nstline16, insertthemarginalcitation_
II65 0 f 1951."
7. Page 18, line3 frombottom,-
for"incidential"read"incidental"
-8. Page 19, line3,-
after,"ChapterVI" i,n.ie~t-l~,.Oftl'
9. Page 20, line9,-
aftes"Custodi<3n"inser,i"orCustodians"
NEW SELHI,
,Augu..§i..l...LlJ8o
Sravana 16, l'~9~O~2~(~S-a~k-a~1


" As lNTRODUCED IN LOK $ABltA, QN 
• "2 AUb 19Aff 
!!!! '~',151'of 1_ 
THE BENGAL CHEMICAL AND, PHARMACEUTICAL WORKS 
LIMITED (ACQUISmON AND TRANSFER OF UNDER-
TAKiNGS) ~ILL, 1980 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMIN ARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSIlI'ER OF '11IE trNDEKTMCDms or 'THIS' COMPANY 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, Central Government of the under-
takings of the Company. 
4. General e!Iect of vesting. 
5. Central Government, or existin,g, or new, Government company, 
not to be liable for certain prior liabilities. 
6, Power of Central Government to djrect vestiDgof the under-
takings of the Company in an existing Govemmiellt company. 
7. Transfer of the undertakings of the Company frOm an existing 
Government company to a new Government company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. Payment of amount. 
9. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERT',KINGS OF THE COMPANY 
10. Management etc., of the underbkings of the Company. 
11 Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings 
. of the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
b dered by the Company or any other ,ereon. 12. Accounts to e ren 
13. Accounts and audit. 

(il) 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER V 
PRoVISIONS RELAnNG TO THE EMPlJOYEES OF THE COMPANY 
14. Employment of certain employees to cont;nue. 
15. Provident fund and other funds. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTs 
16. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
17. Payment by Central Gove!'mnent to the Commissioner. 
18. Certain powers of Centrnl Government, or existing, or new, 
Government company. 
19. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
20. Priority of claims. 
21. Examination of da!ms. 
22. Admission or rejection of claims. 
23. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants. 
24. Disbursement of amounts to the Company and possession of 
certain machinery, equipment, etc. 
25. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
26. Act to have overriding effect. 
27. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central 
Government, or exist;ng, or new, Government company. 
28. Penalties. 
29. Offences by companies. 
30. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
31. Delegation of powers. 
32. Power to make rules. 
33. Power to remove difficulties. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

.of 1951. 
.. of 1951. 
5 
Bill No. 15$ of 1980 
THE BENGAL CHEMICAL AND PHARMACEUTICAL WORKS 
LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDER-
TAKINGS) BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer, in the public mterest. of the 
undertakings of the Bengal Chemical and PharmaceuticaZ Works 
Limited, and tOrr ma/tters cownected therewith or incidental thereto, 
WHEREAS the Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Limited 
were engaged in the production and distribution of articles specified in 
the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951, namely, chemicals (other than fertilizers), drugs, pharmaceuticals 
and other products, which are essential to the needs of the general public; 
AND WHEREAS the Central Government, being of opinion, after an 
investigation into the affairs of the Company, that the affairs of the Com-
pany have been managed in a m&nner highly detrimental to the public 
interest, had authorised, under section 18A of the Industries (Develop-
10 ment and Regulation) Act, 1951, a body of persons to take over the 
management of the Company; 
AND WHEREAS fOl' the purpose of reconstructing and rehabilitating tho 
undertakings owned by the Company so as to subserve the interests 
of the general public by the augmentation of production and diatri-
t 5 bution of different varieties of chemicals (other than fertilizers), 
drugs, pharmaceuticals and other products which are essential to the 
needs of the general public and to secure the continued supply thereof, 
it is! necessary to acquire the undertak:ngs of the Company; 

Short 
title 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Deftni-
tiona. 
Tranafer 
to, and 
vesting in 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
of the 
under-
takings 
of the 
Com-
pany. 
~E it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Rapubiic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceuti- S 
cal Works Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date on which this Act comes 10 
into force; 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
appointed under section 16; 
(c) "Company" means the Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical 
Works Limited, being a company as defined in the Companies Act, I 5 
1956, and having its registered office at 6, Ganesh Chunder Avenue, lot 1956. 
Calcutta-7000l3; 
(d) "e¥isting Government com:.:>any" means a Government com-
pany which is carrying on business on the appointed day; 
(e) "new Government company" means a Governmenteompany 20 
formed and registered on or after the appointed day; 
(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(g) "prescribed" means 9rescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(h) "specified date" means such date as the Central Government 25 
may, fQr thE'. purpose of any of the provisions a.f this Act, by notifi-
cation, specify. and difterent dates may be ,specified fOf difter~nt 
provisions of this Act; 
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but _ 
d$ed in the Comr;anies Act, 1956, have the meanings, .respectively, 30 lot 1 
ass~ed to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
i AeQUlSITlON .AND TRAHlWER OF THE V~P'DtTAIWI~S OF 11IE.CQut>.uIY 
,31 Qn..~e ~lPpnjnted. Qy,tbe ulldertU,i,gs of th~, C»JlllNlQY, uuI .~ 
rW~' ~ 8Ild ilnterest, of. til. COQlpany in 1:"lation to its ~r~ .. 3S 
~,by virt\le 01 this Act. stand traQIlf,errM. to, au4. ve,t. in, the CcIp,~ 
tral Gover,nment. .. 

a 
, to. .(1) The undertakings, bf ; the Company shall ,be· ae.ed . tc> mdude 
all assets, rights" lease-hoids, powers, authorities and privileges, and all 
property, movable ·aDd immovabie, includillg laads, buUc:lingw, o4I.ces, 
factories, workshops,stores, instruments, plants, machinery ed-equip. 
s ment, installations, laboratories, "ftlce furniture,. stationery· and equip-
ment, vehicles, patents, trade marks, cash balances, cash ion hand,' reserve 
fnnds, investments, book debts and all other rights and interests in, or 
arising out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed 
day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the Company, 
10 whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers atld 
all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto. 
(2) .All prOt~erties and aasets as aforesaid which have vested in the Qen-
tral Government under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed. 
and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
I 5 other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, 
decree or order of any court or other authority restricting the use of such 
properties or assets in any martner or appointing any receiver in rc:spect 
of the whole or any part of such properties or assets shall be deemed to 
have been withdrawn. 
2~ (3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act 
10 the Central Government and every person holding any charge, lien 
or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, within 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intim.tion to 
the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
25 (4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby dedared that the. mort.. 
, gagee of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other pelSOR 
holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and,fnte-
rests, payment of the mortgage money Or other dues, in whole or in part, 
30 out of the amount specified in section 8, and also out of the. amounts 
determined under section 9, but, no such mortgage, charge, lien or other 
interest shall be enforceable against any property which has vested in 
the Central Government. 
(5) Any licence or. other instrument granted to the Company in 
35 relation to any undertaking which'has vested in the Central Govern-
ment under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and tnf()rce 
immediately before the appointed day shall continue to b~ in force on 
and aiter such day in accordance with its tenor in relation to and for 
the purposes of such undertak~ng, and, on and from the date of vesting 
40 of such undertaking, under section 6, in an existing Gilvenunent 
company, or 'UDder section 7, in a new Government company, the exist-
ing, or new, Government c~mpany, as the ~ase may be, s~ll be d~med 
to be substituted in such lIcence Cir other Instrument as If such licence 
or other instrument had been granted to such existing, or new, Govern-
ment company and such existing, or new, Government company shall 
45 hold it for the remainder of the period for which the Company would 
twwe;beld it.,under the terms thereof. 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or oth~ proceeding, 
at -whatever nature-,· in relation to any property or asset winch has vested 
. th Central Government undereecnon 3, inlJtituted or jp!'eferred by So In· e .. h 11 be be di . 01' aga'inst the Company is pending, the same s a not a te, scontr-
nued or be in any way, prejudicially atfectedbyrealGn of 'the trarrsfer 
of the un~ of 'the Company or of anythiqCODtainecHn thittAct, 
General 
effect 
of ve.t-
in" 

Cen-
tral 
Govern-
ment, or 
existing, 
or 
new, 
Govern-
ment 
com-
pany, 
not to 
be lia-
ble for 
certain 
prior 
liabili-
ties. 
but .ih. sijit, appeal or other proceeding may becoaiinued, proaecutec1 
or enforced. by or against the Central Government, or where the under-
takings of the Company are directed under section 6 to velt in an exist-
ing Government company, or become transferred by virtue of the pro-
visions of section 7 to a new Government company, by or against such S 
Government company. 
5. (1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior 
to the 1st day of April, 1979, shall be the liability of the Company and 
shall be enforceable against it and not against the Central Government, or, 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, I 0 
to vest in an existing Government company, or become transferred by 
virtue of the provisions of section 7, to a new Government company, 
against such Governm~nt company. 
(2) Any liability incurred by, or arising against, the Company on or 
after the 1st day of April, 1979, including the liability to repay loans l5 
advanced to the Company by the Central Government on or after that 
day, together with the interest due thereon, shall be the liability,-
(a) where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under 
section 6, to vest in an existing Government company, of that exist-
ing Government company; or 20 
(b) where the undertakings of the Company become transferred 
by virtue of the provisions of section 7, to a new Government com-
pany, of that new Government company, 
and shall be discharged by such Government company as and when the 
discharge of such liability becomes due. 25 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability 
of the Company in relation to its undertakings in respect of any 
period prior to the 1st day of April, 1979, shall be enforceable against 
the Central Go\-ernment, or, where the undertakings of the Company 30 
are directed, under section 6, to vest in an existing Government 
company, or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of section 
7, to a new Government ::ompany, against such Government 
company; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 3S 
authority in relation to the 'Undertakings of the Company, passed on 
or after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute, 
which arose before the 1st day of April, 1979, shall be enforceable 
against the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the 
Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in an existing 40 
Government company, or become transferred, by virtue of the 
provisions of section 7, to a new Government company, against such 
Government company; 
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the 1st day of 
April, 1979, for the contravention of any provision of law for the 45 
time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Govern-
ment, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, 
under section 6, to vest in an existing Government company, or 
become transferred, by virtue of the provisions of seetion 7, to I new 
Government (:IOlDpany, against IUch Government company, ,0 

• 
~. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, and 
subJect to the provisions of section 7, the Central Government may, 
it it is satisfied that an existing Government company is willing to 
comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that 
5 Government may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, .t~t 
the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of 
the Company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 
~entral Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest 
, In the Central Government, vest in that existing Government company 
1 c; either on the date of publication of the notification or on such earlier 01' 
later date (not being a date earlier than the a}:Qointed day) as may be 
specified in the notification, 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
its undertakings vest, under sub-section (1), in an existing Government 
15 company, that Government company shall. on and from the date of such 
vel'ting be deemed to have become. and until the transfer of the under-
takings by virt-.le of the provisions of section 7 to a new Government 
company, be deemed to be, the owner in relation to such undertakings 
and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to 
2" such undertakings shall, on ~nd frnm the date of such vesting, be deem-
ed to have become, and until the date of such tran'Sfer he deemed to be, 
the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that existing Government 
company. 
7. (1) Notwithstandin~ anything contained in se~tions a and 4, where 
25 the undertakings of the Company have been directed, under sub-section 
(1) of section 6, to vest in an existing Government company, the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied that a new Government company is 
willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conrlitions as 
that Government may think fit to impose, declare, by notification, that 
~,: the undertakings of the Company be transferred to that new Government 
company, and on the issue of such declaration, the rili{ht. title and 
interest of the Company in relation to its undertakinf,!s which hed been 
directed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to vest in an existing Gov-
ernment company, shall, instead of continuing to vest in that existing 
~" Government company, vest in that new Government company with effect 
. - from the date on which such declaration is made. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the existing Government 
company in relation to the undertakings of the Company vest under sub-
section (1) in a new Government compaTly, that new Government 
40 company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have 
become the owner in relation to such undertakings and all the rights 
and liabilities of the existing Government company in relation to such 
undertakings shall, on and from th(; date of such vesting, be deemed to 
have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that new Govern-
45 ment company. 
. . CHAPTER III , .. 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
Power 
of Cen-
tral 
Govern-
ment 
to di-
rect 
vest-
ing 
of the 
under-
iukinga 
of the 
Com-
pany 
in an 
exist_ 
ing Gov_ 
ernment 
com-
pany. 
Transfer 
of the 
under-
takinaa 
of the 
Company 
from an 
existini 
Govern_ 
ment 
company 
to. 
new 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
8 For the transfer to, and vettlDtr in, the Ceatral Govenaaent, .... _ PaYment 
sedi~ 3, of the andertakiDp of the Company and the right, title ani of amount. 
interest of the Company in reIadoll to its 1IDdertaldnp, there shall be 
So given by the Central Government to the Company, III eash. and ta tile 

Payment 
ofturlher 
amoWlt. 
Mana&e-
ment, 
etc.,of 
the under-
takiB8& 
of the 
Con,pany. 
• 
a" .... I-.peaIfled·ta eMpt. VI, ....... t of 'ra ........ · ........ 'uti 
twu"I~.IID.·fou tbou.-d. 
t. (1) For the deprivatiOll of the Company of·the manqementuf Ib 
UJHIertaldftp, there shall be giveD to the Company by the Cefttnl Ga\"· 
emmet an amount calculated at the rate of t... t'ho1l88ftd rupees per 5 
month for the period commencing on the date on wbieh the management 
of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by the persnns 
authorised by the Central Government under seetlon 18A of the Indus-
tries (Development and Regulation) Ad, 1951, and endln, on the 05 of 19111. 
appointed day. I 0 
(2) The amount specified in ~n 8. Rnd the amount d"e~ned 
unde!'~ulM;eedon (1). shall earrysimple intereslt at the rate of four JIU 
eewt. ~r anntUD fO'r the period ~ on the aPlJOinted ·d...,., ..... 
en.., OR the date on whieSt payment of such amoents Is ftlade by the 
CeMraI Gonmment to the Ctmunlsslener. 1 ~ 
(3) The 811'lolmts determint"ri In A('corriancr. with the 'Provisions of 
sub.sections (1) and (2) shall be ltiven bv the Central Government to 
tlie Company in addition to the anmunt specified in section 8. 
(4) For the removal of doubts. it is hereby declared that the liabi-
lities of the Company in relation to its undertakin~~ which have vested 20 
in the Central Government under section 3 shall be discharged frbm the 
amount referred to in section 8, and also from the amounts determined 
under sub-sections (1) and (~), in accordance with the rights and fn-
terests of the creditors of the Company. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMf!NT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKIN('.S OF nm COMPANY 
10. (1) The general surerintendence, directian, control and manage-
ment of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, 
the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3, shall,-
(a) where a direction has ~n gi'Ven by the CentralGOVem-
m~nt under sub-section (1) of seelion 6, vest. on and from the date 
specified in such direction, in the existing Government company 
speclfied therein; or 
'(b) where a declaration has been made under sub-section (1) 35 
of section 7, vest, on and from the date of such dec1aration, , in the 
new Government company specified therein; or 
(e) where no direction referred to in clause (a) t1r declaJlatfon 
under cl8'USe (b) has been ~iven or made, vest, on and from the 
appointed day, in one oll·more CusWians appointed by the Central 40 
Government under sub-section (2), 
and thereupon the existing, or new, Government company so specified 
·«the Ctllkdian Or'Custo(iians 8t) appein~,..sthe·(!aae-ma~ he"lhall be 
eDtiUtd ,-to' e.reraife to·· the exoluston·.iJf all .~,petaonSt. til 'Iuch JIO\M1'8 
Idld:"" all·.och thbtgs'" ·'ke· C~pan,:'ta '1l\tth0J'iae4. ~ ellel'<Ue '·Pd.·tie 45 
in·re.-. to ,ita 1U1detakiaga.· { . '. ,', 

, 
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals 
or ~ Government company as the Custodian or Custodians of the UDder-
takmgs of the Company in relation to which no ~tion has been made 
by i~, under sub-section (1) of section 6 or no declaration bas been made 
S by It under sub-section (1) of gection 7, 
(3) The Custodian or Custodians so appointed shall receive from 
the funds of the undertakings of the Company such remuneration as 
the Central Government may fix and hold office during the pleasure of 
the Central Government. 
10 11. (1) On the vesting of the management ot the undertakings of 
the <:ompany in an existing, or a new, Government C()IIIlpany or on the 
apPOIntment of a Custodian or Custodians, all persons in charge of the 
management of the undertakings of the Company immediately before 
such vesting or appointment shall be bound to deliver to such Govern-
15 ment company, or Custodian or Custodians, as the case may be, all asnts, 
books of account, registers and other documents in their custody relating 
to the undertaking!'; of such COmr,Jany. 
(2) The Central liovernment may issue such directions as it may 
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the existing, or new, 
20 Government company or the Custodian or Custodians as to the powers 
and 'duties of such Government company, or Custodian or Custodians 
and such Government company, or Custodian or CustocliaDll may 
also, if it is considered necessary Sf) to do, apply to the Central Govern-
ment at any time for instructions as to---the manner in which the under-
25 takings of the Company shall be conducted or in relation to any other 
matter arising in the course of such management. 
(3) Any person, who on the appointed day has in his possession or 
under his control any books, documents or other papers relating to the 
undertakings of the Company which haVe vested in the C ,mtral Gov-
ernment or in any existing, or new, Government company and which 
30 belong to the Company, or, would have so belonged if the undertakings 
of the Company had not vested in the Central Government or the exiat-
ing, or new, Government company, shall be liable to account for the 
said books, documents or other papers to the Central Government or 
35 the existing, or new, Government company, as the case. may be, and 
shall deliver them up to the Central Government or the eXIsting, or new, 
Government company or to such person or body of persons as the Central 
Government or such Government company may specify in this behalf. 
(4) The Central Government or the existing, or new, Governm~t 
take or cause to be taken, all necessary steps 'for secunng 
40 comp~y mafy all u~dertakings which have vested in the Central Govern-possess. on 0 • --..:I this A_t ment or the existing, or new, Government company u.u.uer ~ • 
C any shall within such· period as the Central Govern-
(5) The nomp. thIS' b~half furnish to that Government a eomplete t may a ow In' i J?en all its properties and assets, as on the appo nted day, per-
4S ~v~ntory of undertakings which have vested in the Central Govern· 
talnlng to the t' 3 and for this purpose the Central Govemment or 
ment under sec Ion 'Go~rnment company' shall dord to the Company 
the existing, or new, 
all reasonnb1e facilities. 
Dutyot 
persona 
incharp 
dtmana .. 
gement 
of under-
takJ.np 
Olthe 
COllllP8DJ' 
todellver 
all ..... 
•• 

Account. 
lobe 
rendered 
by the 
Company 
Or any 
other 
perIOD. 
-' It.; '(l,Wbere, in p!mueee of any deeree, order or injunction of any 
c01lt't. ~1" «lier w lie-
. - (e}the -authbrise'd' persons were, a'f~ t~ date on which the 
mal'i«gelfteilt of the' ~'dertak'ings of the Company was taken' over 
by them under section 18A of the Industries (Development aDd Hegtt· 5 
lation) Act, 1951 and before the appointed day; or 65 of 1861. 
(b) the Central ~vernment or the existing, or new, GoVern-
ment company, as the case may be, is, on or after the appointed 
day, 
prevented from taking over the management of any part of the under- 10 
takiJqpt.o'1 the Company, the Company, or any other per&On ill-· poBleslion, 
CUitady 'Of coatrol-df such part, shall, in relation to the period commeno-
m,:' <II!. the date of s\K."b. taking over and ending on the date OD which 
SIICb:part~waa or is'handed over to the authorised persons or, aa tAe cue 
u.y- be, the Central Gevernment or the existing, or new, Govemment 15 
ceaIC*1Y, render', within a period of sixty days from the appointed ~ 
or·"WAere·St.lCh part was so handed. over after the appointed day, witkin 
a period of sixty days from the date of such handing over, accounts 
with regard to the-
(i) assets and stores of the undertakings or any part thereof, 20 
acquired, utilised or sold during the said period; and 
(iij income derived by the Company or any other person from 
the uDdertakings or any part thereof during the said period, 
te'iDe Ceatiral Governmea.t or the existing, or new, Government company, 
as !h'C8Se;JDay be. 25 
(~' If, on -examination of the accounts refen-ed to in sub-section (I), 
arty- income or other m&nies js or are found to have been derived. by 
the Company or any other person from such undertakings or any part 
thereof during the period referred to in that sub-section, or any other 
monies are found to be payable to the Company, such income or other 30 
monies .shall be recoverable by the Central Government or the existing, 
or new, Government company from the Company or such other person, 
as the case may be, and from the amount payable under this Act to 
the Company and the debt due to the Central Government or the exist .. 
ing. or new, Government company, as the case may be, on this accmmt 35 
shall rank as an unsecured debt. 
(3) If no account is rendered by the Company or such other person 
in· respect of tbe undertakings or any part thereof within the period' 
r~ tc)ia sub-aection (1) or if the Central Government or the 
exilJti11.8, or new, GO¥ernment company. as the case may be, has any 40 
reason to believe that the account rendered by the Company or such 
other person is incorrect or false in any material particular, the Central 
GOvemm:ent or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case 
may be, may refer the matter to the Commissioner and thereupon the 
CODnnJsa1aner shall determine the income derived by the Company or--45 
such'dther person from sttch undertakings or any part thereof duriDa 
tb&t,peetod:relwred, to ,in sUb-section (1) and take steps to recover the 
saW! mcome or other m0nies from the Company or such other perSon and 
fnmt- tIte, -amount .-payable to the Company under this Act as if the debt 
d~'1Ie- the-Oentral Government or the existing, or new, Government So 
campay, .a the cue may be, on this account were an unsecured' debt. 
(4) No JDCjrtaaPj c:~ge, lien or other iueumbrance in relation to 
the undertakings ot the Company or any part thereof shaUbe binding OD. 

lof 1956. 
140f 1947. 
• 
the- Central Government or the existing, or new, Go:v~t "'~' 
as the case lllay be, if such mortgage, charge, lien .or otber~clUJl~ 
w~ created, at any time dUring Ute period in which the ~_ 
persons were and the Cent~al Government or thee¥i,$t.j~, or .1l.w~<Gov-
S emment company, as the case may be, is, prevented, by ~y .~, 
order or injunction of any court or otherwise, from taking over ~ 
management of such undertakings or any part thereof . 
. 13. The Custodian of the undertakin~ of the CQlllP~Y w.u 1IPU- Account. 
tam an account Of the undertakipgs of the Compan.y in s"Ch, fwm .aJ).ci and 
I 0 ~aImer and under such conditions as may be prescriQf:d ap,d the I ~_ audit 
vIsions of the Companies Act, 1956, shall apply to the autUt.()f.tQe 
account so maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts df a 
company. 
IS 
20 
CHAPI'ER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF TJIE Co~~ 
14. (1) Every person who has been, imm~ly .... :re ,*,-,;epofat-
ed day, employed in any of the undertakiQls.f· tl1e~,-...u 
become,-
(a) on and from the appointed c1ay,an .8Jnp)oyee.o.Ij.;Qe1\tftl 
Government; and 
(b) where the undertakiugs of. the Company. are . .uc.c:Md .... 
sub-section (1) of section 6, to vest in an existing Government 
company, or are transferred by virtue of the. provisicms .1 seetion 
7, to a new Government com?any, an employee of auch ~_t 
25 company on and from the date of such vesting or tranaler, 
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, with the 
same rights and privileges ~s to pension, gratuity and .otber matters as 
would have been admissible to him if there had .been no. such vestble 
30 or transfer and shall continue to do so unless and untilbis en)pJ~ep,t 
under the Centr.al Government or the existing, or new, Government com-
pany, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration 
and other conditions of service are duly altered by tfte Oenml Gov-
ernment or the existing, or new, Government company, .as the,c;ue 
35 may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in ,thellMiustria} IDisputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer 
of the services of any officer or other person employed in the under-
takings of the Company to the Central Government or the existing, or 
40 new Government company, as the case may be, shall not entitle such 
offt~r or other employee to any compensation under tl1ts~ct or under 
any other law for the time being in force anctno such elaiJn Shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other ~ority. 
15 (1) Where the Company has establilhec:l a· provident fund, '8UJ'8PIl!l-
4S nuat"')n fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the ,pefJona 
emp~.'yed in the undertakings of the Company,the monies relatlJble t" 
the employees, whose services have become transferred by or und-er ~s 
Emtlclr-
meftt-M 
certalD. 
emple.. 
yeasiD' 
continu •. 
Providet 
fund 
and 
nther 
~. 

Appoint-
meotof 
Commia-
liooer 
otPq-
menta. 
Plyment 
by 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to the 
Commi.I-
skIDer. 
te) 
( 
Act to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government com-
pany,as the case may be, shall, out of the monies standing, on the 
appointed day, to the credit Of such provident, superannuation, welfare 
or other fund, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Gov-
ernment or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may S 
be. 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to 
the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, 
as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Govemment or the 
existing, or new, Government company in such manner as may be 10 
prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
16. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of disbursing 
the IUD01IIlts payaWe un_ sections 8 and 9, by notification, appoint a 15 
Comm ...... uer of Payments.; 
(2) The Central GoverDmeDt may appoint such other persons as it 
may tbIuk &t to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissionet' 
may authorise one or more of soch persons also to exercise all or any of 
the powers exercisable by him under this Act and difterent persons may 20 
I.e authorised to exercise different powers. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as i.f they have been con-
ferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authori- 25 
sation. 
(4) The salaries and allowance6 of the Commissioner and other 
peI'IODa appointed under this sedion shall be defrayed out of the COII8O-
lldated Fond of India. 
17. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the 30 
specifted date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company- ~ 4_, 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8; and 
(b) an amount equal to the amounts payable to the Company 
under section 9. 3S 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government 
in favour of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of India, and every 
amO\Mt paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 
him to the credit of the said account and the said deposit account shall 
be operated by the Commissioner. 40 
(3) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the 
uposit aocount referred to in sub-section (2) shal1 ensure to the said 
~t. r .. --, 

11 
• 18. (1) The Central Government or the existing, or new, Govern-
ment company, as the case may be, shall be entitled \0 receive up to the 
specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to 
the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 
5 Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as 
the case may be, and realised after the a?pointed day, notwithstanding 
that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day. 
(2) The Central Government or the existing, or new, Government 
company, as the case may be, may make a claim to the Commissioner 
I 0 with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for 
discharging any liability of the Company, in relation to any period prior 
to the 1st day of April, 1979; and every such claim shall have priority in 
accordance with the priorities attachlng, tmder this Aet, to the matter in 
relation to which such liability has been discharged by the Central 
15 Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the cue 
may be. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the 
Company in respect of any transadion prior to the 1st day of April, 1979, 
which have not been discharged on or before the specified date, shall be 
20 the liabilities of the Company. 
19. Every person having a claim against the Company shall prefer 
such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the speci-
fied date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the clafm within the said 
25 period of thirty d'IYS, he may entertain the claim within a further period 
of thirty days and not thereafter. 
35 
ZOo The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule 
shall have priorities in accordance with the following princlples:-
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories 
and Category II shan have precedence over Category III, and. so on;! 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank: 
equally and be paid in full, but if the amount is insuftlcient to 
meet such claims in full, tht'~r shall abate in equal proportions and 
be paid accordingly; 
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only it a surplus 
is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately 
higher category. 
Certain 
poweraof 
Central 
Govern-
ment, of 
existing, 
arnew, 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Claims 
to be 
made 
~the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Prio-
rity 
of 
claims. 
21. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 19, the Commis-
40 sioner shall arrange the claims in the order. of priorities speclfled in 
the Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such or.u;~o~ 
priorities. 
Exa-
mina-
tion of 
claims. 
(2) If on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is ot the 
pinion that the amount paid to him under this Act is not suftlcient to 
4S ':neet the liabilities specified in any lower category. he shall not bE' 
required to examine any claim in respect of such lower category. 

Admis-
.. or 
rejec-
tion·of 
c~ 
.13. (1) Af~ uamiaing the· claims with ftfereo.ce to;the lpriwities 
cAt ,-out in . the -Scbedule, the. CCHBJAisaioner sball fix.a. date. 4U. or ~ 
which every claimant sAall Ale 1iae proof 'id his ,claims, .faUtqwb1ch 
'be _aU . be ezeluded from the HReiit C)f tbe di&ba.U'semeu.ta . Wt.t1e by 
. the Commissioner. S 
(2) Not less than fourteen da'ys' notice of the date ,so. fixed shall· be 
given by advertisement in such issue of any daily newspaper in the 
t~ language and in such jssue of daily aew~ in such 
regioDallanguageas the COllUftissioner may conaid,er.suitable, and every 
such Ilotice shall caUupontbe datmant to fUe thepro.of of,bis daim 10 
wtth'the Commissioner within the timp. sneeified in the ...advertiBe~eQt. 
(is) Every claimant· who fails to file the proof of h.is elaim wfthin 
~ time speoified by the Commissioner. shall be excluded. 'from the 
d.isbursements made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as JDey, in IS 
his opinion,· be . necessary and after givitig the Compeny an opportunity 
of . refu.tiJag the claim ,and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of lleing heard, by 8'::{e:: 1:1 writing, admit or rejeet the 
claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the p~'.ver to regulate his own 20 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge ~ hisfHnl"'tlons, 
including the place or places at WhiC:1 he will mId hissittlDp ,ad 
shall, for the purpose of making any investigation under this Aet, haw 
the same powers as are v.ested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1008. while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 2S 5 of 1908. 
namely:-
(a) the summoning and enforcing the atteaG8DCe of Bay 
witness and examining him on oath; 
(b) the di8covery aDd production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 30 
(c) the reception of evideBce on .mctavus; 
(d) the isS'Uing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the CommissioDerllball ,be. deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 35 
the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be· deemed to be a 
civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter'XXVY of the 'Code 
of Criminal Procedure. 1973. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Com-
missioner may prefer an appeal against'the tleeislon 'to [68 priDIlpal 40 
civil court of original jurisdletion within the loeal'ltndtB ,ot ..... 
juriSdiction the regisrered Offtce of theCOI'l'lpeBy '. 'si~: 
.Provided that where . a person who is a Judge of a High Court is 
appointed to be the CollllXlissioner, the appeal shaD lie to the '111gb 
Court at Calcutta and such appeal shall be heard and .dtspoled lif'lty 45 
not less than two Judges of tbat High Court. 
45 of 1860. 
2 of 1974. 

5 
• 
2l. After adinttttng a clldtn under this Act, the am01rlt1t due in 
respect of such claims shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person 
or persons to whom such amounts are due, and, on such payment, the 
liability of the Company in l'espect of such claim shall stand discharged. 
!t. {f) If, out of the me!liespaid to him in re1a1:cm. to the UDder-
takings of the Company, there is a balanee left after meeting the 
liabilities in accordance with the priorities specified in the Schedule, the 
Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the COIIII..."J8ny. 
(2) Where any machinery, equipment or' other property has vested 
r () ur.der this Act in the Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Government company, as! the case may be, but such machinery, equip-
ment or other property does not belong to the Company, it shall be 
lawful for the Central Government or the existing, or new, Govern-
ment company, as thE: case may be, to continue to possess such 
15 machinery. equipment and other property on the same terms.and condi-
tions under which they were possessed by the Company immediately 
before the appointed day. 
21:, Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed. 
or· unclaimed. on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
20 of1tc'e of the Commissioner is finally wound up shall be tr&nsfe!Ted by the 
Commissiofter to th'e .general-revenue account of the Central 'Government; 
blJt a-claim· to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central 
GOYernmeni by the persons entitled to such payment and shall be dealt 
wi·th as· if such transfer had not been made and the order, if any, for 
25 payment ottheclaim being treated as an order for the refund of the re-
ve!'lUe. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCF.I.LANEOUS 
28: ThetprcwisiGDs of this Act shall haw effect ne41withstanding 
30 aaythiIIg, inooDBistent theMwith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force or in any mstnJmentbaviAg effflCt by virtue of 
any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, 
tril!Rmai Of' 'other authortty. 
27. Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its 
35 undertakings for any service, sale or supply, and. in force immediately 
~fore the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred 
and eighty days from that day, cease to have effect unless su.ch contract 
is before the expiry of the said period, rattfied in writing by the 
C~ Government or, as the case may be, the existing~ or new, 
~o Govemtnent company, and in ratifying such conn-act, the· Central 
Government or, as the case may be, the existini. or new, Government 
Disbttr-
sement 
of money 
by COm .. 
mis-
sioner 
to clai-
mants. 
Disbur-
sement 
of 
amounts 
to the 
Com-
pany and 
poasession 
of certain 
machi-
nery, 
equipmeat 
etc. 
Undil-
bun-
ed or un-
claimed 
amount 
to be 
deposit- ' 
ed to the 
general 
r-eve-
nue ac-
count. 
Act to 
have 
over-
l'iciJn, 
effect. 
Con-
tracts 
to Ce&le<" 
to h.-
effect 
unleuo 
rat1fled 
by the 
Central 

Govern. 
ment, or 
the exis-
ting. or 
new. Gov-
ernment 
com. 
pany. 
Often-
Cf'S by 
com-
paules. 
14 
company may make such alterations or modifications therein u it may 
think fit; 
Provided that the Central Government or, as the case may be, the 
existing, or new, Government company shall not omit to ratify a 
contract and shall nut make any alteration or modification therein- 5 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous 
or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the 
interests of the Central Government or, as the case may be, such 
Government company; and 
(b) except. after giving the t?8I'ties to the contract a reason- 10 
able opportunity of being heard and except after recording in 
writing its reasons for its refusal to ratify the contract or for 
making any alteration or modification therein. 
28. A person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property J 5 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company, wrongfully 
withholds such property from the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, or any 
person or body of persons authorised by that Government or 
existing, or new, Government company; or 20 
(bI) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of any undertaking of the Company or wilfully with· 
holds or fails to furnish to the Central Government, or, as the case 
may be, the existing, or new, Government company or any person 
or body of persons authorised by that Government or Government 25 
company, any document relating to such undertakings which may 
be in his possession, custody or control or fails to deliver to the 
Central Government or, as the case may be, the existing, or new, 
Government company or any person or body of persons authoriaed. 
by that Government or existing, or new, Government company, any 30 
assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his p0sse&-
sion, custody or control relating to the undertakings of the Com-
pany; or 
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming 
part of the undertakings of the Company or prefers any claim 35 
under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe 
to be false or grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, 
or with both. 
29. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the bUSiness of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
40 
to . be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 4S 
and punished according'ly: 

is • 
Provided that noitJml/ contaiDed in thiSIUb-action, Ihall render 
any such ·pers01l liable to auy punishment, if he prevesthatUle/ oftence 
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exereisedall due 
diligence to prevent the commission of S'Uch offence. 
5. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
~nydfteIl1!e 'under thiS AHhas been cominitted by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
nivance of, or is attributable to any nejlect on the part of, any director, 
manager, seeretal'Y or other officer of the company, such director, 
10 manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 'that 
:offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against" and punished 
accordingly . 
EXplttnatirm..-F'or the purposes of this section,-
(a) 'company" me.ms any body corporate and includes a firm 
15 or other association·of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
fum. • 
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or ,the 
20 Custodian of the undertakings 6f the C'ompany or the existing, or new, 
Government company or any officer or other person authorised by that 
Government or existing, or new, Government company for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that 
2 ,M t:If any oftltepoWe'rS e:terdsable by it tlllclt!r this Act, other tftan 
5 the power conferred by this section or section 32 or s~ 33, may 
also be exercised by such person . or persons as may be sPecified in the 
notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under wb-section 
30 '(11), 'the person tn whOm such power ha~ . been delegated ·~~ct 
WIder the direction, control and SupervISlon of the Central Govern-
ment. 
Proted-
tion of 
action 
taken 
in IOOd 
faith. 
Dele-
lation 
of 
powers. 
32. (1) The Central Government rna;, by notification, make rules 
for carrying out the pI'Ovisiuns of this 'net. 
POTTer 
to 
make 
rul ... 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of ~ 
35 . wer such rules may provide for all or any of the follOWIng foregolng po , 
matters, namely:-
(a) the time within whic~, and the ma~r in which,an int~-
. £erred to in su~tIOD. (3) of 'Bectioa 4 ahal1 be"liven, matlOnre . 

Power 
to re-
move 
dJftlc\ll-
tia. 
· . 18 
(b) the form and the manner in which, 8lld the· conditions 
·:undel' which,· the Custodian shall maintain aceounts u required by 
section 13; 
(c) the manner in which monies in any provident fund or other 
fund referred to in section 15 shall be dealt with; S 
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
{3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each. House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 10 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
senions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 15 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any . ..auch modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
33. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 20 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the appointed day. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 20, 21, 22 and 24) 
OIlDllft OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHA~GE OF THE LlABlLITIES OF THE COMPANY 
Part A.-Post-take-over and pre-take-over periods J ., 
Category 1-
Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company 
for tlie post-taIte-over period as well as arrears in relation to wageI, 30 
salaries, provident fund and other dues of the employees fer the pre-
take-over period. 
Part B.-Poat.'t;GJc#-over period 
Category 11-
(a) Loans advanced by the Central Government and interest 35 
due thereon. 
('b) Loans, advanced by banks and financial institutions, guaran-
teed by the Central Government and interest due thereon. 

5 
17 
Category III-
(a) Credit avaUed of for purposes of trade or 
operations. 
(b) Any other dues. 
Part C.-Pre-take-over period 
Category IV-
• 
manufacturing 
(a) Revenue, taxes, CesBIeS, rates or other dues to the Central 
Government or a State Government. 
(b) Sales tax, rates and taxes, contributions to be made to 
10 the Employees' State InsurancE' Fund and additional de8l'll818 
allowance payable to employees. 
Categ(Yl'Y V-
Principal amount of the secured loans advanced by banks and finan-
cial institutions and interest due thereon up to and including December 
15 15, 1977, that is to say, the date on which the notified order uno.,r section 
18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, was 
published in the Official Gazette. 
Category VI-
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues .;>ayable to a local 
20 authority, or State Electricity Board. 
25 
Category VH-
Amounts due by way of i'1tercst on secured loans referred to in 
category V after December 15, 1977. 
Category VIII-
(a) Any other credit availed of for purposes of trade or manu-
facturing operations. 
(b) Any other dues. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ~ ~N.S 
The Bengal Chemical and PbarIXl8Ceutical Works Limited 
(BCPW) , Calcutta, were' engaged in the manUf8rture of drugs and 
pharmaceuticals, chemicals and home products which were essential to 
the needs of the country. The Company began to show steady decline 
~amithe·commer.cial, acUvity ot the ~y.\agDaMd. froq:L.1969-70 to 
1971-72. Though it showed an upw8lld1 ueod ijllll~15, it. ~~d..d,clin­
il)gthereaiter. The Company W8'S also being mismanaged. Af~r investi-
g~t19n .into the affairs of the Company thrQugh an Inves~ga~on Com-
mittee, the management of the Company was taken over on' the 15th 
December, 1977 by the Central GovemtneJlt acting under section 18A of 
the Inchtstries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. A Board of 
Management was appointed. It is necessary to acquire the undertakings 
of· the Company for the purpose ofreconstz:ucijRg and. ~~~U.ting 
it so as to 8ubsente the. inteneets ofl the· ~eral< puPlic; br; tbe alUl~taijon 
of 'production and distribution ofctif1erentvanetiea of ~a~u~ic.als 
and chemicals which are essential to the needs oftll~ s-wral,.publlc. 
The BHl seeks to achieve the said objects. 
NEW DELHI; VEEBENDBA PATIL. 
The 31st July, 1980. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 43013 (8) /79-DV, dated the Mh August, 1980 from 
Shri Veerendra Patil. Minister of Petroleum, ChemXalsandl Fertilisers 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The Pre~ident having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Bill to provide for, in the public interest, the acquisition and trans-
fer of the right, title and interest of the Undertakings of Bengal Chemi-
.:al and Pharmaceutical Works Limited, Calcutta, and for matters con-
nected therewith or incidential thereto, recommends under clauses (1 ) 
and (3) of article 117 of the Conltitutlon of India for Introduction and 
consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha. 
18 

~~, 
'~M&e,.8 ~,·VM, ~,prQvi4M for, the.,,~t.,.w ~ ... h., ~m, ~ 
IIUUN*. ~ed. in ~ter: VIa IJDQI,lAt of~., J~~,QQQ., r'~ 
five hundred and two lakhs and four thousand only'). W y~~jng,~, ~e 
Ce~tral Government, the right, title and interest of the Company, name-
ly,the ~ga1 Chemic,al and Pba~eutic:al 'WMb ,lIhnited (BCPW), 
Calcutta, in relation to the undertakings owned by it. 
2. ~q.b·dause (1) of clause 9 provides for payment of a further 
amo411t in cash, in Consideration fC'r the''C1eprivatibll Gf'the Company of 
the management of the undertakings, an amounf' arIcmlated at tht .... ,.te 
of Rs. 2,000 (Rupees two thousand only) per month f&r the pe,iodcom-
meQCing on tne dat.e on wh~~h the manag~ent of the unde~t~Iqngs of 
the Company was ta~en over by the Government aJld, ~ding wi.th the 
appointed day. It is estimated that' this amO'Wlt will be of the order of 
Rs. 64,000 ,(Rupees sixty-four thousand only). 
,3. SJlb,.Qlause (,2) of. clause 9, prqvldes f~ ~~nt Q£..&illl~e ~~t:t~st 
on the amounts specified in clal,lie 8 and ,8~lal1~8: (1) of c;"u se',9" 4~ 
the rate of 4! per cent. per annum for the period. commencing on the 
appointed day and ending with the day on which the payment of these 
amounts is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner of 
Payments. The interest payments in terms of the provisions of the said 
clause could be of the order of Rs. 1.68,000 (Rupees one 1akh and sixty-
eight thousand only) which is equivalent to interest for one month. 
4. Clause 16 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Commis-
sioner of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff to 
assist him f~. t.he PU~'pose of disbursing the amount payable to the 
Company. The salary and allowance!'; of the Co~missioner. of Payments 
and his staff and expendit.ure on office and establIshment WIll be defray-
ed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expenditure 
on this account is likely to be of the order of Rs. 3,000 (Rupees three 
thousand only) per month. 
5. The Bill. 'if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
19 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 32 ot the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions o! the Bill. Such rules may provide 
for matters, such as-
(a) the time within which and the manner in which aD inti-
mation referred to in sub-clau.o;e (3) of clause 4 of the Bill 8hall be 
given; 
(b) the form and the manner in which and the conditions 
under which the Custodian shalI maintain the accounts as provided 
in clause 13; and 
(c) the manner in which monies in any provident fund or other 
fund referred to in clause 15 shall be dealt with. 
2. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable 
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
20 

LCKSABHA -; 
A 
BILL 
to t;)rovide for the a;:quisition and transfer, in the public interest, of the 
undertakings of the Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works 
Limited, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Veerendm Patil, 
Mini&ter of Petroleum, 
Chemicals and Fertilisers.) 