5 
10 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 155 of 2026 
THE KERALA (ALTERATION OF NAME) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to alter the name of the State of Kerala. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Kerala (Alteration of Name) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “appointed day” means the date appointed under sub-section (2) of
section 1; 
(b) “appropriate Government” means, as respects a law relating to a
matter enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the 
Central Government, and as respects any other law, the State Government; 
Short title and 
commencement. 
Definitions. 

2 
Alteration of 
name of State of 
Kerala. 
Amendment of 
article 31A. 
Amendment of 
article 290A. 
Amendment of 
First Schedule to 
Constitution. 
Amendment of 
Fourth Schedule 
to Constitution. 
Power to adapt 
laws. 
Power to 
construe laws. 
Legal 
proceedings. 
(c) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law,
rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the 
whole or any part of the State of Kerala. 
3. On and from the appointed day, the State of Kerala shall be known as the
State of Keralam. 
4. In article 31A of the Constitution, in clause ( 2), in sub -clause ( a), in
item (i), for the word “Kerala”, the word “Keralam” shall be substituted. 
5. In article 290A of the Constitution, for the word “Kerala”, the word
“Keralam” shall be substituted. 
6. In the First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “I. THE
STATES”, in entry 5, under the column “Name”, for the word “Kerala”, the w ord 
“Keralam” shall be substituted. 
7. In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “TABLE”, in
entry 9, in the second column, for the word “Kerala”, the word “Keralam” shall be 
substituted. 
8. (1) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the name of the State
of Kerala by section 3, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of 
one year from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications 
of any law made before the appointed day, whether by way of repeal or amendment, 
as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect 
subject to the adaptations and modifications so made. 
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent
Legislature or other compet ent authority from repealing or amending any law 
adapted or modified by the appropriate Government under the said sub-section. 
9. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made
under section 8 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, 
tribunal or authority, required or empowered to enforce such law, may construe the 
law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper 
in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority. 
10. Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are
pending to which the State of Kerala is a party, the State of Keralam shall be deemed 
to have been substituted for the State of Kerala in those proceedings. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of Kerala forwarded to the Central Government, the 
resolution passed by the Legislative Assembly of Kerala on 24th June, 2024 stating, 
inter alia, that necessary steps may be taken to amend the First Schedule to the 
Constitution by modifying  the name of State of “Kerala” as “Keralam” in 
accordance with article 3 of the Constitution. 
2. As required by the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, the President
referred the Bill to the Legislature of the State of Kerala for expressing its views 
thereon. The Legislative Assembly of Kerala considered the Kerala (Alteration of 
Name) Bill, 2026 and adopted a unanimous Resolution agreeing with the Bill. 
3. The Kerala (Alteration of Name) Bill, 2026 provides for such alteration of
name of the Sta te of Kerala and contains necessary amendments to the provisions 
of the Constitution and also consequential provisions. 
NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 29th July, 2026. 
———— 
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 3 OF      
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
———— 
[Copy of letter No. 19012/01/2026 -SR dated the 07.08.2026 from Shri Amit 
Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation to the Secretary -General, 
Lok Sabha] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed 
“Kerala (Alteration of Name) Bill, 2026”, recommends the introduction of the Bill 
in the Lok Sabha under article 3 of the Constitution of India.  
———— 

4 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the State Government to adapt and modify 
existing laws for the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of name of the State 
of Kerala to Keralam by clause 3. This power will be available only for a period of 
one year from the appointed day. The adaptations and modifications cannot affect 
the substance of the laws adapted. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

5 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * 
31A. (1) * * * * * 
(2) In this article,—
(a) the expression “estate” shall, in relation to any local area, have the
same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the existing law 
relating to land tenures in force in that area and shall also include— 
(i) any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and in the States
of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, any janmam right; 
* * * * * 
290A. A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, 
and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala every year to the 
Travancore Devaswom Fund; and a sum of thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees 
shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the Stat e of Tamil 
Nadu every year to the Devaswom Fund established in that State for the 
maintenance of Hindu temples and shrines in the territories transferred to that State 
on the 1st day of November, 1956, from the State of Travancore Cochin. 
* * * * * 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1 and 4] 
I. THE STATES
Name Territories 
* * * * * 
5. Kerala The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 5 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
* * *   *   * 
FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)] 
Allocation of seats in the Council of States 
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of the following 
table, there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the second column 
thereof opposite to that State or that Union territory, as the case may be: 
TABLE 
* * * * * 
9. Kerala........................................................................ 9 
* * * * * 
———— 
Saving of laws 
providing for 
acquisition of 
estates, etc. 
Annual payment 
to certain 
Devaswom 
Funds. 

LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
to alter the name of the State of Kerala. 
———— 
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation) 