- .f"A. ~ •. 
• 
·BUt··'Ne. us of 1'" 'e , 
TIlE SALES PltONOTION ~MP~OYEE$ (CONDITI.ONS OF SERVICE) 
AMENDMENT BILL. '1985 
A 
BIU. 
fu.rther to amend the Sales Promotion Bmployees (Condititms of 
Service) Act, 1976. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-aUttb Year of the RepubUc 
~f India as follows:-· 
1. (l) This Act may be call~ the Sales Ptomotfon Employee. 
. 'Con~Uions of Service) Amendment Act. 1$85. 
Short 
5 (~) It shall come into force on such date as the €entral ~vernment. 
may, by notification in the Official GaZette. appoint. 
title aDd 
COIllIDeIWe-
meat. 
10 
Z. In section 2 of the Sales Promotion Employees (COnditions of Amend~ 
·SeMQe) Act, IH6 (hereinafter -referred to as the principal Act), for ment of 
~(-d),..tbefoUowing clause shall be subt;tituted, namely:- section 3. 
'(d) "Sales promotion employee" means any person by whatever 
nameca1led (Incl\ldiD' an apprentice) employed or engaged in any 
· ... hUtbment f8I' hUe ,or reward to do aI\J work _latipg to promo-
tion· "f -Ille. er bwIiaea,or both, .. but dees -DQt. include any such 
,per.on.- . ~ ,- 'I, , 
. .' (i) who, betn. employed • engaged in a' supervisory 
.. ~iM~ty, -~ wa, .. e....un'· sfdrte. huadrwd .rupees per' 
mensem; or 

AmeDd" 
meat of 
_tioa 4. 
2 
(d) who is employed or engaged- mainly in a man.~rlal or 
administrative capacity. . 
E3:Planation ........ For the purpoees of tlds clause. the wages per 
mensem of a person shall be deemed to be the amount equal to 
thirty times his total wlges (whether or not including, or comprising j 
only of, commission) in respect of the continuous period of his 
service falling within the period' of twelve months immediately, 
preCeding the date with reference to which thecalculatiod is to be 
made, divided by the number of days comprising that period. of 
Mrvie.;'. , 
3. Seciion 4 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered and sHall be 
deemed to have been re-numbered with effect from the 8th, day of March, 
, 1976 as sub-section (1) thereot. and-
(rr) in sub-~ction (1), as so re-numbered, in the opening portion, 
the words and brackets "drawing wageR (being wages, not including 15 
any commission) tt shal] be omitted: 
(b) after sub-section (1), as So re-numbered, the foUowing sub-
sections shall be Inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted 
with effect 'from the 8th day of March, 19'76, natnely:-
"'(2) The maximum limit up to which a sales promotion!Zo 
;,:,~,~.. :, 'eJD.plO~·1'I1ay accumulate earned leave shSlll be such u'may be 
prescrlbed. 
(3) The limit up t~ which the earned 1eave" maybe awUed 
of at a time by a sales promotion employee and the reasons fOr 
which such limit may be exceeded shall be such as' may be ~5 
pre~bed. . 
(4) A ,sales promotion employee shaU,-
(a) when he voluntarily relinquishes his post or retires 
. from service. or ' 
(b) when his services are tenninated for any reason 30 
whatsoever (not bl!ing termination as punis~ent), 
be entitled to cash compensation, subject to such conditions and 
restrictions .. as may be prescribed (including contUtions by way 
of specifying the maximum period for which 'Such CaSh cOmpen-
sation shall be payable), in respect of the earned leave earned 35 
by him and 'not availed of. . 
(5) Where a sales promotion employee dies whUe in . service, 
his heirs shall be entitl~ to cash compensation for the eamad 
leave earned by him and not availed of. 
. (6) 'nte cash ~ompensatlon which will bep.yable to 8 lalel 40 
promotion emp~oyee or, as the case 'may be, his ftehos in respect 
of any period ot'earned'leave tor Which he or hts:'hetrs, u the 
case may be, hi or are entitled. to cash compensatl~uilder sub. 
Netion C." Dr sub·slletian (8) ;81tbe c::8se may be, shall ~ 8Jl 
UioUnt'eqltaJ to' th;~' wac-· due -te such .. les premotton employM ... , 
tor sut'h periot'J." . 
.. 
" 

a ....... 
4. In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the follow.. Amead-
Ing sub-section shall be inserted,. namely:- ment of 
section 6. 
5 
'. 
10 
15 
II (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing IUb-
lectioap,- ' 
"(4) in the application of any Act 'referred to in any of the 
sat~ Bub-sections to sales promotion employees. the wages of a 
• '1i8~' promotion employee for. the purposes of such Act, shall be 
deemed to he his wages as computed in accordance with the 
provitions of this Act; 
(b) where an Act referred to in any of the said sub-sections 
provides for a ceiling: limit as to wages so as. to exclude from the 
'purview of the application of such Act persons whose wages 
exceed ,such ceiling limit, such Act shall not apply to any sales 
promotion employee whose wages as computed . in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act exceed such ceiling limit.". 
,.5. In section 12 of tbeprincipal Act,' in clause (a) of 'sub-section (2), 
,iter the words "sale:s promotion employee", the words OJ, the limit 
','UP tOI which he,may a-.:cq"lUlat, earned leave, ~.:li.mit up to which he 
Jnay avail of ,earned leave at a time and the reasons for which such 
20limlt may be exceeded, the conditions and restrictions subject to which 
he 'ml1Y be entitled to ·cash compensation" shall be inserted.aoo. &hall 
be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 8th.d.yof March, 
1976. . , 
Amend-
ment of 
IeClion 12. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANt> REASONS 
The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1978 
was enacted to regulate certain conditions of service of sales promotion 
employees as defined in that Act. This, definition of "sales promotion 
employee" is somewhat restricted as a covers only sales promotion 
employees drawing wages not exceeding the ceiling limits provided in 
the definition; the ceiling limits being RI. 750 per'mensem in the case 
of persons drawing wages not including any co~sion, tm8 'Rs. 9,000 
per annum in the aggregate in the case of persons drawing wages includ-
ing conimission, 'or cOmmission only. 
2. Section .4 of ·the Act makes specific provisions ~lating to conditions 
of service'-of sales"promoUon.elllploy.ees·as to leave, while section 5 ,of the 
Act provides .for issue of appointment "letters in the ,prescribed form to 
sales promotion employees. Section 6 of the Act makes the provisions 
of the Worlanen'!l Compensation Act, 1923, the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, the Minimum W~ges Act, 1948, the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, 
the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 and the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 
applicable to sales promotion employees in the same manner as those 
Acts are applicable to wor19nen or, as ·the case may be, employeel. 
3. In order to make available the benefits under the Act to a larger 
number of sales promotion employees, it is proposed to amend the 
definitiun of "&ales promotion employees" contained in the Act 80 as to 
bring within the purview of the definition all sales promotion employees 
other than persons who are employed in a supervisory capacity and 
who draw wages exceeding Rs. 1,600 per month, and persons employed 
or engaged mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity, and. 
make necessary consequential changes in section 6 of t~ Act (~ide 
clauses 2 and 4 of the Bill). 'I 
4. With a view to avoiding scope for any doubt or challenge, jt is 
proposed to avail of the present opportunity to amend seetinn " of the 
Act to cover expressly the various matters relating to earned leave and 
cash compensation in lieu of earned leave in respect of which rules have 
been made. This amendment is being given retros~ctive effect from the 
date of the making of the said rules (mde clauses 3 and 5 of the Bill). 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELIU; 
The 8th Auguat, 1985. T. ANJAIAH. 
, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to ame~ section 12 of the principal Act 
relating to the power to make rules to provide expressly for the power 
to make rules with respect to the limit up to which a sales promotion 
employee may accumulate earned leave, the limit up to which he ~y 
avail of earned leave at a time, the reasol1s for which such limit may be 
exceeded .and the conditions and reW,ictions subject to which a sales 
promotion employee may be entitled to cash compensation in lieu of 
earned leave .. 'The amendment is proposed to be made with retrospective 
effect from the 8th day of March, 1976 being the date on which the Sale. 
Promotion Employees ,(Conditions of Service) Rules, 1916 Were made. 
The mBttersin respect of which the rules may be made under these 
powers pertain to matters of detail and the delegation of power involved 
ll, therefore, of a normal character. For the purpose of avoicUng a:1Y 
scope of doubt and challenge, it is necuury to live setrospective et!eet 
to the amen,dment as the, aforementioned Rules ot 1~7rcOntatn provtliorlt 
with regard to these matters. 
• 

. . . 
J •. 
'. 
..... 
.' ExTRAcTS FROM THE SALBSPROMOTION EMPlJOYIZS (CONDITIONS 
OF SnUcE)' ACT, 1976 
(11011' 1976) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act,·.unINl the oonte.xt otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(d, "sales promotion employee" means any person by whatever 
name called (including an'· apprentice)" employed or engaged in any 
°estabUahment for hire or reward to do any work relating to pro-
•. JIlotion of sales or ~ess, or both, . an~ 
" " .. . ~ . 
.. (0 who draws wages (being wages, not includjng any com-
mission) not exceeding seven hundred and fifty rupees per 
mensem; or 
(ii) who had drawn ·wages (being wages, including com-
mission). or commission only, in either case, not exceeding nine 
thousand rupees in the aggregate in the twelve months imme-
diately preceding the month in which this Act applies to such 
establishment and 'continues to draw such wages or commis-
Bion, in the aggregate, not exceeding the amount aforesaid ina 
year, 
but does not include any such person who is employed or engaged mainly 
in a managerial or administrative capacity; 
• • .. • 
t __ 4. In addition to such holidays, casual leave or other kinds of leavet ~w. 
as may be prescribed, every sales promotion employee drawing wa .. 
(beina wages, not inducting anycommiasion) aJWl be aranted, if 10 
nMlUllttd Ior-
• • • • • 
12. (1). • • 
(2) In p81'tieular and without prejudiee to the genf!rallty of th. 
foregoinl power, iuch rules may provide for-
'. (a) the linda of leave that may be granted to a lales }!ttomotidii 
em.YH uncler _tion 4; 
• • ... 
• 
• 
', .. " . r' 

Lelt SABU. 
L •. 
.. 
BILL 
furtIaer to amend·tbe Sales Promotion Employees (ConcIttibDI of.&emce) 
'.\ct,19FIt . 
• 
.. , (!hri T. A";cHah, 
. Mb,''''' of Stote'.' of t1M 
~iBt"Y of LtJb .. ,..) 