1
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 156 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2018
BY
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for population control and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of the
State and in other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5

2
3. It shall be duty of the Central Government to encourage, promote and motivate
married couples to opt for small family norm with a view to control the rising population in the
country.
4. If either the husband or the wife in case of a married couple, who have only two
living children on the date of commencement of this Act, voluntarily undergoes sterilization,
the appropriate Government shall provide them with the following benefits, namely:—
(i) free education including higher education to one child and to the second
child, if any, born within one year from the date of commencement of this Act;
(ii) suitable employment to one child after he completes his education; and
(iii) such other benefits as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall introduce population control as a compulsory
subject in all educational institutions for all children who have attained the age of fifteen
years, irrespective of class in which they are studying and the course they are pursuing.
6. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Health Care Centre in every village of
the country with a view to create awareness about population control amongst the people.
(2) The Health Care Centres established under sub-section (1) shall disseminate
such information amongst, and provide such assistance to masses, with regard to population
control, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
7. No marriage shall be solemnized between a male who is less than twenty-seven
years of age and a female who is less than twenty-two years of age.
8. (1) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union Government
or of the State Government or in any undertaking or organization under the control of the
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, and,—
(a) who has only one living child or who has not procreated any child or who is
unmarried on the date of commencement of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he
shall not procreate more than two living children,
(b) who has two living children on the date of coming into force of this Act, shall
give an undertaking that he shall not procreate any child one year after the coming into
force of this Act.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be subject to such
disciplinary action as may be determined by the appropriate Government.
9. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 7 shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than five years and with fine which
shall be not less than rupees twenty thousand.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained
to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
Central
Government
to encourage,
promote and
motivate
small family
norm.
Benefits to
couples who
opt to undergo
sterilization.
Compulsory
subject relating
to population
control in
educational
institutions.
Establishment
of a Health
Care Centre in
every village
of the country.
Minimum age
for marriage.
Provisions
relating to
Government
employees,
etc.
Punishment.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Rapid increase in the population has given rise to many socio-economic problems like
poverty, food and housing shortage, unemployment, environmental degradation, etc. We
are the most populous country after China. If the present trend continues, it will not be
possible for us to tackle the growing socio-economic problems. It is, therefore, imperative
that certain effective steps are taken to check the increasing growth of our population. Since
our resources are limited, proper upbringing of children is possible only when we opt for
small family norm. Despite existence of various birth control measures and various family
planning programmes, the problem of over population still remains.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to promote voluntary sterilization among the married couples
having two children and also provides for certain measures like fixing the minimum age for
marriages, promoting small family norm, introduction of a compulsory subject on population
control in the school curricula for promoting and inculcating small family norm in the future
generation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VISHNU DAYAL RAM
July 27, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain benefits to be given to those persons who
undergo sterilization voluntarily. Clause 5 provides for introduction of a compulsory subject
relating to population control in all educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for
establishment of Health Care Centres in every village of the country to provide assistance
and information regarding population control. The Central Government shall have to incur
some expenditure for implementing the provisions of this Bill in respect of Union territories.
The State Governments will incur expenditure in respect of their States out of their respective
consolidated funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ninety crore is also likely to be involved for
establishment of Health Care Centres in every district.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

MGIPMRND—1844LS(S3)—11-10-2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for population control and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram,  M.P .)