As INTRODUCED In Lok SABHA oN

~Onca saa

Bill No. 156 of 1986

> cera mesat
THE COTTON, COPRA AND VEGETABLE OILS
CESS (ABOLITION) BILL, 1986

a
BILL

further to amend the Produce Cess Act, 1966 and the Coconut Deveiop-
ment Board Act, 1979 and to repeal the Copra Cess Act, 1979 and the
Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows: —

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY
iy 1. This Act may be called the Cotton, Copra and Vegetable Oils Cess
(Abolition) Act, 1986,
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE Propuce CEss Act, 1966

15 of 1966, 2. In section 2 of the Produce Cess Act, 1966 (hereafter in this
10 Chapter referred to as the Produce Cess Act) ,—

(a) clauses (b), (g) and (h) shall be omitted;

(b) in clause (k), the words “or the Second Schedule” shall be
omitted.

Short
title.

Amend-
ment of
section 2,


2

Omission 3. Sub-section (2) of section 3, sections 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, sub-section
of sec- (2) of section 15 and the Second Schedule of the Produce Cess Act shall
tions 3 2), ke omitted.
7, 8, 9, 10,
13, 14,
15(2)
and the
Second
Schedule. aaa! है
Amend. 4, In section 4 of the Produce Cess Act, the portion beginning with

ड़ 4. 4. “
ment of the words “and every duty of excise” and ending with the words “con- 5
section 4. sumed or extracted” shall be omitted.
Amendment 5. In section 5 of the Produce Cess Act, in sub-section (3), the follow-
of Section ing words shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
3.

‘and “produce” includes cotton,’.

Amend- 6. In section 12 of the Produce Cess Act, in the opening portion, the 10
ment of words “or excise” shall be omitted.
section 12.
Amend- 7. In section 16 of the Produce Cess Act, in sub-section (1), in clause
ment of (a), the words “or excise” shall be omitted,
section 16.
Amend- 8. In section 20 of the Produce Cess Act, in sub-section (2), clauses
ment of (a), (b), (०) and (d) shall be omitted, 15
section 20.
Amend- 9. In section 22 of the Produce Cess Act, for the words “two successive
ment of

sessions, “and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid”,

section22. the words “two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry

of the session immediately following the session” shall be substituted.

CHAPTER III ०
AMENDMENT TO THE Coconut DEvELopmentT Boarp Act, 1979
Amend- 10. In section 13 of the Coconut Development Board Act, 1979, in sub- 5 of 1979. :
ment of section (1), clause (a) shall be omitted.
section 13
CHAPTER IV
RereaL or THE Copra 0558 Act, 1979 AND THE VEGETABLE 07.8 CEss Act,
1983
Repeal of 11. The Copra Cess Act, 1979, is hereby repealed.
Act 4 of
1979,
cea 12. The Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983 is hereby repealed.
of Act
30 of 1983. CHAPTER V
COLLECTION OF ARREARS OF DUTIES OF EXCISE

Colles: 13. Notwithstanding anything contained in the amendments made to
tion: and the Produce Cess Act, 1986 or the repeal of the Copra Cess Act, 1979 or the
payment table Oils Cess Act, 1983, by this Act, any duty of excise, levied under
ol ee any of the said Acts immediately before the commencement of this Act
of

i. but has not been collected before such commencement, shall be liable to
be collected after such commencement in accordance with the provisions

of the said Acts for being paid into the Consolidated Fund of India as if
this Act had not been enacted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present under the Produce Cess Act, 1966, cess on cotton is being
levied at the rate of one rupee per bale of 181.4 kilograms of cotton
and in the case of unbailed cotton, at the rate of 28 paise per 50 kilograms
of cotton, consumed in any mill. The average annual collection of cess
on cotton is to the tune of Rs. 64 lakhs. The proceeds of this cess are
utilised to meet the expenditure incurred in connection with measures
to promote the improvement, development and marketing of produce
under the Act, which includes cotton. Similarly, cess on copra is being
levied under the Copra Cess Act, 1979 at the rate of five rupees per
quintal of copra, consumed in any mill. The collection of cess on copra
is of the order of about Rs. 70 lakhs per annum, It is the main source
of finance for the Coconut Development Board set up under the Coconut
Development Board Act, 1979. Cess on vegetable oils is also being
levied at the rate of five rupees per quintal of vegetable oil under the
Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983. The estimated’ total collection from the
cess on vegetable oils is of the order of about Rs. 7 crores per annum.
It is the main source of finance for the National Oilseeds and Vegetable
Oils Development Board set up under the National Oilseeds and Vege-
table Oils Development Board Act, 1983.

2. As an endeavour to reduce the number of cesses and multiplicity of
taxes, it is proposed to abolish the cess on cotton, copra and vegetable
oils and provide necessary funds through budgetary allocations for the
plans and programmes for the development of produce.

3. For the purpose of abolition of the cess, it is proposed to amend
the Produce Cess Act, 1966 and repeal the Copra Cess Act, 1979 and the
Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983. The amendments made to the Coconut
Development Board Act, 1979\by clause 10 of the Bill is of a consequential
neture. A provision is also being included in the Bill (vide clause 13)
for the recovery of uncollected cess,

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,

New Dena; : G. S. DHILLON.
The 3rd December, 1986. ;

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

“(Copy of letter No. 1-12|86-CA. V1|2629, dated the 2nd December,
1986 from Shri G. 8. Dhillon, Minister of Agriculture to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha).

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
Cotton, Copra and Vegetable Oils Cess (Abolition) Bill, 1986, recommends
under clause (1) of article 117 of the Constitution of India, the introduc-
tion of the Bill in Lok Sabha.


Definitions.

Imposition
of cess.

Persons
vho
shall be
liable
to pay
duty.

Applica-
tion of
proceeds
of cess,

ANNEXURE

ExTRACTS FROM THE Propuce Cess Act, 1966
(15 or 1966)
cd * * * *

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

* * * * *

(b) “cotton” means raw cotton, whether baled or loose, which
has been ginned;
* * * * *

(9) “mill” means,—

6) in relation to cotton, any place which is a factory as
defined in section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948, and in which, or
in any part of which, cotton is converted into yarn or thread
either for sale as such or for conversion into cotton goods,

* * * * *

(iii) in relation to any other produce, such place as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify; |

(h) “occupier” in relation to any mill, means the person who has *

the ultimate control over the affairs) of the mill and where the said
affairs are entrusted to a managing agent, such agent shall be deemed
to be the occupier of the mill;

* * * * *

(k) “produce” means any goods specified in the First Schedule
or the Second Schedule.

a) * * ie * *

(2) There shall be levied and collected as a cess, for the purposes
of this Act, on every produce specified in column 2 of the Second
Schedule, a duty of excise at such rate, not exceeding the rate specified
in the corresponding entry in column 3 thereof, as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify:

Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central Government,
the duty of excise shall be levied and collected at the rate specified in the
corresponding entry in column 4 of the said Schedule.

4. Every duty of customs leviable under this Act on any produce
shall be payable by the person by whom such produce is exported from
India and every duty of excise leviable under this Act on any produce
shall be payable by the occupier of the mill in which such produce is
consumed or extracted.

5. (1) * * * * *

(3) Tn this section, “crops” means crops or plants from which
any produce is obtained,
* * * * *

63 of 1948.


5
4. The occupier of every mill shall,—

(a) if the mill was established before the commencement of
this Act, within fourteen days from such commencement, and

(9) if the mill is established after the commencement of this
Act, within fourteen days from such establishment,

furnish to the Collector a statement containing the following particulars,
namely:—

(i) the name and situation of the mill;
(ii) the name and address of the occupier;

(iii) the address to which the communications relating to the
mill may be sent; and

(iw) the total capacity of the mill.

8. (1) Every occupier of a mill shall furnish to the Collector every
month a return stating the total amount of produce, specified in the
Second Schedule, consumed or brought under processing or extracted in
the mill during the preceding month.

(2) The return referred to in sub-section (1) shall be furnished
before the seventh day of each month together with such other infor-
mation as may be prescribed.

(3) Every such return shall be made in such form and shall be verified
in such manner as may be prescribed.

9. (1) On receiving any return made under section 8, the Collector
shall assess the duty of excise payable on every produce specified in
the Second Schedule, in respect of. the period to which the return
relates, and if the amount has not already been paid, shall cause a notice
to be served upon the occupier of the mill requiring him to make pay-
ment of the amount assessed within ten days of the service of the notice.

(2) If the occupier of any mill fails to furnish in due time the return
referred to in section 8 or furnishes a return which the Collector has
reason to believe is incorrect or defective, the Collector shall assess the
amount payable by him in such manner, if any, as may be prescribed,
and the provisions of sub-section (1) shall thereupon apply as if-such

assessment had been made on, the basis of a return furnished by the
occupier:

Provided that, in the case of a return which he has reason to believe
is incorrect or defective, the Collector shall not assess the duty of excise
at an amount higher than that at which it is assessable on the basis of
the return without giving to the occupier a reasonable opportunity of
proving the correctness and completeness of the return.

(3) A notice under sub-section (1) may be served on the occupier of
a mill either by registered post or by delivering or tendering it to the
occupier or his agent at the mill.

10. (1) Any occupier of a mill who is aggrieved by an assessment
made under section 9 may, within three months of service of the notice
referred to in sub-section (1) of that section, appeal to such authority
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint in this behalf, for the cancellation or modification of the

Oceupier
to supply
certain
particu-
lars to
Collector.

Delivery
of month-
ly returns,

Collec-
tion of
cess levi-
able on
produce
specified
in Second
Schedule,

Finality
of assess-
ment,


Recovery
of sum
due to,
Govern-
ment.

Power to
inspect
mills and
take copies
of account.

assessment and, on such appeal, the said authority may cancel or modify
the assessment and order the refund to such occupier of the whole or part,
as the case may be, of the amount paid thereunder:

Provided that the authority so appointed shall not be inferior in rank
to the Collector by whom the assessment was made.

(2) The appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant
was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting “the appeal within
the aforesaid period of three months, allow it to be presented within
a further period of one month.

(3) Where the appellate authority is of opinion that any duty of
excise has been short-levied, no order enhancing the duty of excise shall
be made unless the appellant has been given notice to show cause, within
one month from the date of service thereof, against the proposed order.

(4) The Central Government may, on the application of any person
aggrieved by any order made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3),
cancel or modify such order, if such application is made within six
months from the date of the order made under sub-section (1) or sub-
section’ (3), as the case may. be.

(5) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the applicant
was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the application within
the aforesaid period of six months, allow it to be presented within a
further period of one month.

(6) The decision of the Central Government, and subject to the
decision of the Central Government, the decision of the appellate
authority, shall be ‘final.

* * * * *

12, Where any duty of customs or excise demanded from any person
or any penalty payable by any person under this Act is not paid,—

* * * * *

13. (1) The Collector or any officer empowered by general or special
order of the Central Government in this behalf shall have free access
at all reasonable times during working hours to any mill or any part of
a mill. |

(2) The Collector or any such officer may, at any time during
working hours, with or without notice to the occupier, examine the
purchase, sale and stock records and accounts of any mill and take
copies of or extracts from all or any of the said records or acounts for
the purpose of testing the accuracy of any return or of informing himself
ag to the particulars regarding which information is required for the pur-
poses of this Act or any rules made thereunder:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize
the examination of any description or fomulae of any trade process.


1 of 1944.

7

14. (1). All such copies and extracts and all information acquired
by a Collector or any other officer from any inspection of any mill or
from any return submitted under this Act shall be treated as confidential.

(2) If the Collector or any such officer discloses to any person.
other than a superior officer, any such information as aforesaid, without
the previous sanction of the Central Government, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and
shall also be liable to fine:

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the disclosure
of any such information for the purpose of a prosecution in respect of
the making of a false return under this Act.

15, (1) * * * * *

(2) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and
the rules made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and
exemptions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the
levy and collection of duties of excise on any produce specified in the
Second Schedule as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of
duty payable to the Central Government under that Act.

16. (1) Whoever—

(a) evades the payment of any duty of customs or excise pay-
able under this Act, or

* _* * * *
20. (1) * * * * *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely: — पा

(a) conditions subject to which refund may be made of any
sums collected as duties of excise on any quantity of oil exported
from India;

(b) the form of the monthly return which every occupier of a

mill should submit to the Collector and the manner in which such

return shall be verified;

(c) information which every occupier may be required to
furnish in the monthly returns;

(d) manner in which assessment of duties of excise shall be
made where no return has been furnished or the return which has

been furnished is believed by the Collector to be incorrect ot
defective;

* * %* * *

22. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses

Informa.
tion ac-
quired

to be con-
fidential.

Provisions
of certain
Acts to

apply.

Offences,

Power to
make
rules,

Rules to
be laid
before
Parlia-
ment,


Constitu-
tion of
Coconut
Develop.
ment
Fund.

S 8

agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how-
ever, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.

* * - * *

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 3(2)]

Ss. Name of the The maximum rate Actual rate at which

No. produce atiwhich duty of duty of excise is to
excise may be be collected until a
collected different rate is*speci-

fied by the Central

Government

il 2 3. 4

1 Cotton consumed in One rupee per bale Seventy-five paise per
any millin India with of 181.4 kilograms, bale of 181.4 kilo-
a view to producing or in the case of un- grams, or in the case
or manufacturing any baled cotton, twenty- of unbaled cotton,
goods therefrom. eight paise per 50 twenty-one paise per

kilograms. 50 kilograms.

* * * * *

EXTRACT FROM THE CoconuUT DEVELOPMENT Boarp 2307, 1979
(5 or 1979)

* * * * *

13. (1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Coccnut
Development Fund and there shall be credited thereto—

(a) any sums of money which the Central Government may,
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf,
provide from and out of the proceeds of cess credited under section 4
of the Copra Cess Act, 1979, after deducting therefrom the expenses
of collection of the cess and the amount, if any, refunded;

ri * * *


LOK SABHA

A
Br
further to amend the Produce Cess Act, 1966 and the Coconut Develop-

ment Board Act, 1979 and to repeal the Copra Cess Act, 1979 and the
Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983.

(Shri G. S. Dhillon, Minister of Agriculture.)