Short title and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ SൺൻඁA
Bill No. 156 of  2022
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR ECONOMICALLY WEAKER
SECTIONS BILL, 2022
By
SHRI MIDHUN REDDY , M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute a National Commission for Economically Weaker Sections and to provide 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 
CHAPTER I 
Pඋൾඅංආංඇൺඋඒ
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Economically Weaker 
Sections Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, –
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission;
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission for Economically Weaker 
Sections as constituted under section 3; 
(c) “economically weaker sections” means such sections of citizens who fulfill 
criteria as may be specified by the Central Government;
(d) “Member” means a Member of the Commission; and 
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
CHAPTER II
Tඁൾ Nൺඍංඈඇൺඅ Cඈආආංඌඌංඈඇ ൿඈඋ Eർඈඇඈආංർൺඅඅඒ Wൾൺ඄ൾඋ Sൾർඍංඈඇඌ 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
a body to be known as the National Commission for Economically Weaker Sections to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions as signed to it under this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following Members nominated by the Central 
Government: – 
(a) a Chairperson, who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court; 
(b) a social scientist; 
(c) two persons, who have special knowledge in matters relating to economically 
weaker sections; and 
(d) a Member-Secretary, who is or has been an officer of the Central Government 
in the rank of a Secretary to the Government of India.
4. (1) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for a term of three years 
from the date he assumes office. 
(2) The Chairperson or a member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Central Government, resign from the office of Chairperson or, as the case may be, of 
Member at any time. 
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a 
member if that person– 
(a) becomes an un-discharged insolvent; 
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; 
(e) without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from 
three consecutive meetings of the Commission; or 
(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused the position of 
Chairperson or Member as to render that person’s continuance in office detrimental to 
the interests of Economically Weaker Sections or the public interest: 
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person has been 
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh 
nomination. 
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
of the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
Deﬁnitions.
Term of oﬃce 
and conditions 
of service of 
Chairperson 
and Members.
Conﬆitution 
of National 
Commission for 
Economically 
Weaker Sections.

5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such officers 
and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of 
the Commission. 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
of, the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the 
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers 
and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 12.
7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
8. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary at such time and place as the 
Chairperson may think fit. 
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure. 
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Member-
Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorized by the Member-Secretary 
in this behalf.
CHAPTER III
Fඎඇർඍංඈඇඌ ൺඇൽ Pඈඐൾඋඌ ඈൿ ඍඁൾ Cඈආආංඌඌංඈඇ 
9. (1) The Commission shall analyze suo-moto and examine requests relating to 
modification of criteria for inclusion of any section of citizen(s) under the Economically 
Weaker Sections list and hear complaints of over-inclusion or non-inclusion of any citizen 
and tender such advice to the Central Government as it deems appropriate. 
(2) The advice of the Commission shall ordinarily be binding upon the Central 
Government.
10. The Commission shall, while performing its functions under sub-section (1) of 
section 9, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular, in respect of the 
following matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of 
India and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
11. (1) The Central Government may at any time, and shall, at the expiration of ten years 
from the coming into force of this Act and every succeeding period of ten years thereafter, 
undertake revision of the criteria to be used to identify the Economically Weaker Sections. 
(2) The Central Government shall, while undertaking any revision referred to in 
sub-section (1), consult the Commission.
Oﬃcers 
and other 
employees 
of the 
Commission.
Salaries and 
allowances to 
be paid out of 
grants.
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
proceedings of 
the Commission.
Functions of the 
Commission.
Powers of the 
Commission.
Periodic 
revision of 
criteria by 
the Central 
Government.
Procedure to be 
regulated by the 
Commission.

CHAPTER  IV
Fංඇൺඇർൾ, Aർർඈඎඇඍඌ ൺඇൽ Aඎൽංඍ 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as 
the Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions 
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants 
referred to in sub-section (1).
13. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have 
the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government 
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the 
Commission.
14. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the 
previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
15. The Central Government shall cause the annual report, together with a memorandum 
of action taken on the advice tendered by the Commission under section 9 and the reasons 
for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such advice, and the audit report to be laid as soon as 
may be after they are received before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
Mංඌർൾඅඅൺඇൾඈඎඌ 
16. The Chairperson, Members and employees of the Commission shall be deemed to 
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45of 1860).
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:– 
(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (5) of section 4 and the 
officers and other employees under sub-section (2) of section 5; 
(b) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under 
sub-section (1) of section13; 
Grants by 
the Central 
Government.
Accounts and 
audit.
Annual report.
Annual report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament.
Chairperson, 
Members and 
employees of 
the Commission 
to be public 
servants.
Power to make 
rules.

(c) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under 
section 14; and
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for 
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid 
before each House of Parliament.
Power to remove 
diﬃculties.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Following the recognition of a special class of citizens under the Economically Weaker 
Sections category, there has been a need for a National Commission to be constituted with the 
objective of monitoring all the safeguards provided for the Economically Weaker Sections. 
There is also a need for frequent evaluation of the criteria required for inclusion in the 
Economically Weaker Sections list, as well as for investigation of complaints regarding the 
inclusion or exclusion of any person within the given category. 
Therefore, in order to safeguard the interests of the Economically Weaker Sections 
more effectively, it is proposed to create a National Commission for Economically Weaker 
Sections with statutory status at par with the National Human Rights Commission. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                  MIDHUN REDDY 
July 1, 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (2) of clause 3 of the Bill, inter alia, provides that the National Commission 
for Economically Weaker Sections shall consist of a Chairperson and four other Members 
and the conditions of service of tenure of the offices of the Chairperson and Members so 
appointed shall be such as the Central Government may, by rule determine. 
The expenditure would be largely met from the budgetary support by the Government 
to the Commission and would be shaped by a range of factors including the number of 
meetings of the Commission and therefore, recurring or non-recurring expenditure cannot 
be anticipated at this stage. 

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED LEGISLATION
  Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_________
A
BILL
to constitute a National Commission for Economically Weaker Sections and
to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
_________
(Shri Midhun Reddy, M.P.) 