AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA ON

. 1 SEP 1990

Bill No. 156 of 1990
ee न सलममलमक- कम से.

THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-FOURTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of
India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1990.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government

5
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2 After Part VIII of the Constitution, the following Part shall be
inserted, namely:—

PART IX
THE LOCAL AUTHORITIES
Cuaprer J.—GENERAL
243. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Committee” means a Committee constituted under
article 243F;

Short title
and com-
mence-
ment,

Insertion
of new

Part IX.

Defini-
tions,



Powers of
a Gr
Sabha,

Constitu-
tion of
‘Pancha-
yats.

Composi-
tion of
‘Pancha-
vats,

2 5

(b) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting of persons
tered in the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised v
the area of a Panchayat at the village level;

(c) “Local Authority” means an institution of self-govern-
ment constituted under article 243B or, as the case may be, und
article 243D;

(व) “Municipal area” means the territorial area of a Mt
cipality; ।

(०) “Municipality” means an institution (by whatever
called) of self-government constituted under article 243D;

(f) “Panchayat” means an institution (by whatever name
called) ‘of self-government constituted under article 243B, for th
Tural ‘areas;

(g) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of
Panchayat; |

(h) “population” means the population as ascertained at the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published;

(i) “village” means a village specified by the Governor by
public notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part 20
and includes a group of villages so specified.

Cuaprer प्र Pancuayars

248A. A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers at the village
level as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

243B. (1) There shall be constituted in every State Panchayats
at the village level in accordance with the provisions of this Part.

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
constitution of Panchayats at other level or levels in accordance with
the provisions of this Part. 1

2430. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature
of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the compo-
sition of Panchayats.

(2) All the seats in a Panchayat at the village level and not less
than fifty per cent. of the seats in a Panchayat at any other level, if
any, shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from terri- 35
torial constituencies in the Panchayat area. 4

(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
representation, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may
be specified in such law, of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at
the village level or of the Panchayats, if any, at any other level in the 49
Panchayats at the immediately next higher level.

(4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat shall be chosen by election
in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.


20

25

30

35

40

3 पु _
Cuaprer वी प्र MUNICIPALITIES
243D. (1) There shall be constituted in every State—

(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called) for a
transitional area, that is to say, an area in transition from a
rural area to an urban area;

(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and

(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area,
in accordance with the provisions of this Part.

(2) In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area”
and “a larger urban area” means such area as the Governor may,
having regard to the population of the area, the density of the popu-
lation therein, the revenue generated for local administration, the
percentage of employment in non-agricultural activitics, the cconomie
importance or such other factors as he may deem fit, specify by
public notification for the purposes of this Part.

2430, (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature
of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to the compo-
sition of Municipalities. |

(2) Save as provided in clause (3), all the seats in a Municipality
shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial
constituencies in the Municipal area and, for this purpose, each
Municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be
known as wards, 1

(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
representation, in a Municipal Corporation, of the Chairpersons of
Committees constituted at the ward or other level or levels under
article 243F in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be
specified in such law.

(4) The Chairperson of a Municipality shall be chosen by elec-
tion in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide. | +

2487, The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
constitution of Committees at the ward level or other level or levels
within the territorial area of a Municipal Corporation and such law
may contain provisions with respect to—

(a) the composition and the territorial area of such Commit-
tees;

(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall
be filled;

(c) the powers and functions of the Municipal Corporation
which may be delegated to such Committees;

(१) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Commit-
tees shall be elected.

Constitu-
tion of
Munici-
palities,

Composi-
tion of
‘Munici_
palities,

Constitu-
tion and
composi-~
tion of
Commit-
tees at
ward
leve] and
other
levels,


Reserva-
tion of
seats,

Powers

authority,

ete.,

of Local
Autho-
ities,

Duration
of the
Local
Autho_
rities,

4

Cuarrer IV,—MiscELLANEoUS

243G. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and |
the Scheduled Tribes in every Panchayat and Municipality and the
number of sea‘s so reserved shall bear, as neatly as may be, the
same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by election
in that Panchayat or Municipality, as the population of the Sche-
duled Castes in that Panchayat area or Municipal area, or of the
Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area or Municipal area bears to
the total population of that area.

(2) Not less than one-third (including the number of 10:
seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and*
the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by
election in every Panchayat or Municipality, shall be reserved for
women and allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a
Panchayat or Municipality. 15

(3) The reservation of seats under clause (1) shall cease to have
effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.

(4) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State
from making any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat
or Municipality in favour of any backward class of citizens, 20
243H. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature
of a State may, by law, endow—

(a) the Local Authorities with such powers and authority
(ineluding the power to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties,
tolls and fees in accordance with such procedures and limits as 55
may be specified in such law) as may be necessary to enable them
to function as institutions of self-government.

(b) the Commitees constituted under article 243F with such
powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to
carry out the irresponsibilities. rs 30

243-1. (1) Every Local Authority, unless dissolved under any
law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years from
the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the ex-
piration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution
of that Local Authority. 35

(2) Where a Local Authority is dissolved before the expiration
of its duration, an election to constitute the Local Authority shall
be completed, as soon as may be, and in any case, before the expira-
tion of a period of six months from the १8६९ of such dissolution:

Provided that if the remainder of the period for which the 49
dissolved Local Authority would have continued is less than six
months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this
elause for constituting the Local Authority.


10

25

35

5

(3) The Local Authority constituted upon the dissolution of a
Local Authority before the expiration of its duration shall continue
only for the remainder of *he period for which the dissolved Local
Authority would have continued under clause (1) had it not been so
dissolved.

243J. (1) There shall be constituted in every State a Finance
Commission, as soon as may be within one year from the commence-
ment of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990, and
thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, to review the financial
position of the Local Authorities and to make recommendations to the
Government of the State as to—

(०) the principles which should govern—

(® the distribution between the State and the Local
Authorities of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and
fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between
them under this Part and the allocation between the Local
Authorities of their respective shares of such proceeds;

(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees

which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Local
Authorities;

(iii) the grants-in-aid to the local Authorities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State;

(b) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission
by the Government of the State in the interest of sound finance of
the Local Authorities.

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the com-
Position of the Commission, the qualifications which shall be requi-
Site for appointment as members thereof and the manner in which
they shall be selected,

(3) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall
have such powers in the performance of their functions as the Legis-
lature of the State may, by law, confer on them.

(4) The recommendations made by the Finance Commission
shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are made, by the Govern-
ment of the State before the Legislature of the State together with
an explanatory memorandum as o the action taken thereon,

243K. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legisla-
ture of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all

matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Local
Authorities.

Constitu-
tion of
Finance
Commis-
sion to
review
financial
position,

Power of
Legisla-
ture of @
State to
make
provi-
sions with

to elec«
tions to
Local
Autho-
rities,


Applica.
tion to
Union
terri-
tories,

Part not
to apply
to certain
areas,

‘Continu-
ance of

e
Jaws and

Autho.
rities,

6

243L. (1) The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union
territories and shall, in their application to a Union territory, |
effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were references
to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article
239 and references 10 the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of
a State were references, in relation to a Union territory having a Legis-
lative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the President may,
by public notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall
not apply to any Union territory or any part thereof or shall apply
to any Union territory or part thereof subject to sucli exceptions and
modifications as he may specify in the notification.

243M. (1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled Areas
referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in clause
(2), of article 244. 15

(2) Nothing in this Part, in so far as it relates to Panchayats,
shall apply to—

(a) the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram;

(b) the Hill Areas in the State of Manipur for which Dis-
trict Councils exist, and the Hill Areas of the District of Darjee- 20
ling in the State of West Bengal for which the Darjeeling Gorkha
Hill Council exists, under any law for the time being in force.

(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution—

(०) the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a)
of clause (2) may, by law, extend this Part in so far as it relates 25
to Panchayats to that State, except the areas, if any, referred to
in clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State passes a
resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership
of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of
the members of that House present and voting: 30

(0) Parliament may, by law, extend the previsions of this
Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in
clause (1) subject to such exceptions and modifications as may
be specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be
an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 35
368. थे

243N. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of
any law relating to Local Authorities in force in a State immediately
before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1990, which is inconsistent with the provisions of 40
this Part, shall continue to be in force until the expiration of one year
from such commencement or until the expiration of the longest du-
ration of the Panchayats, at any level, or any Municipality, as the

case may be, existing in that State immediately before such

commencement, whichever is later: 45


10

20

25

30

35

>

Provided that all the Local Authorities existing immediately be-

fore such commencement shall continue till the expiration of their
duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect
by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State
having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of
that State.

243-0, (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and

for being, a member of a Local Authority or a Committee—

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of
India or the Government of any State, or a Local Authority or a
Committee in a State, other than an office declared by the Legis-
lature of the State, by law, not to disqualify its holder;

(0) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court;

(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;

(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquir-
ed the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknow-
ledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;

(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time

being in force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of
the State concerned;

(f) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the
Legislature of the State.

(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Local

Authority or a Committee has become subject to any of the disqua-

lifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall be referred

for the decision of the Governor and his decision shall be final.

243P. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—

(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies,
made or purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not
be called in question in any court;

(0) no election to any Local Authority or Committee shall
be called in question except by an election petition presented to
such authority and in such manner as may be provided for by
or under any law made by the Legislature of a State’.

Disqualifi-
cations

for mem-
bership.

Bar to
inter-
ference
by courts
in elec-
toral
matters,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Though Local Authorities, namely, Panchayati Raj Institutions and
urban local bodies have been in existence in the country for a long time,
it has been observed that these institutions have not been able to
acquire the status and dignity of viable and responsive people’s bodies
due to a variety of reasons including absence of regular elections, pro-
longed supersessions, inadequate representation of weaker sections like
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and women, insufficient
devolution of powers and lack of financial resources.

2, Article 40 of the Constitution, which enshrines one of the Directive
Principles of State Policy. lays down that the State shall take steps to
organise village Panchayats and endow them with such powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of
self-government. While this Directive Principle applies to village Pan-
chayats, it is felt that urban Yocal bodies should also be organised and
endowed with such powers and authority as are necessary to enable
them to function as units of self-government.

8. In the light of the experience in the last forty years and in view
of the shortcomings which have been noticed, it has been recognised that
there is a need to enshrine in the Constitution certain basic and essential
features of the Local Authorities to impart certainty, continuity and
strength to them, y

4. Accordingly, it is proposed to add a new Part relating to the Local
Authorities in the Constitution to provide for, among other things, “gram
sabha” in each village; constitution of Panchayats at village and other
level or levels; direct elections to all seats jn Panchayats at the village
Jevel and to not less than fifty per cent. of seats in Panchayats at other
levels; constitution of urban local bodies such as Nagar Panchayats for
such transitional areas, Municipal Councils for such smaller urban areas
and Municipal Corporations for such larger urban areas as may he speci-
fied by the Governor by public notification; direct elections te the urban
Jocal bodies; constitution of Committees at the ward level or other levels
in Municipal Corporations; representation of Chairpersons of such Com-
mittees in Municipal Corporations; reservation of seats for the Schedul-
ed Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population;
reservation of not less than one-third of the seats for women; conferring
powers and authority (including the power to levy, collect and appropri-
ate taxes, duties, tolls and fees) on Local Authorities; fixing tenure
of five years for Local Authorities and holding elections within a period
of six months in the event of supersession of any such Authority; setting
up of Finance Commission within one year of this amendment and
thereafter every five) years to review the financial position of Local
Authorities; powers of State Legislatures to make provisions with res-

8


9

pect to elections to Local Authorities; application of the provisions of
the said Part to Union territories; excluding certain States and areas
from the application of the provisions of the said Part; disqualifications
for membership of Local Authorities and barring interference by courts
in electoral matters relating to Local Authorities.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.

New DELHI; DINESH GOSWAMI
The 4th September, 1990. be


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Part IX in the Constitution
consisting of articles 243 to 243P. | i

2, Article 243H of the Bill envisages that the Legislature of a State
may confer such powers and authority (including the power to levy,
collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees) on the Local Autho-
rities as may be required to enable them to function as institutions of
self-government. Article 243J requires the constitution of the Finance
Commission by the States to review the financial position of Local
Authorities and recommend principles governing distribution of taxes
and grants-in-aid. The strengthening of Local Authorities as envisaged.
may call for the strengthening of the administrative capabilities and
training requirements of these Authorities in the States. As article 243L
of the Bill makes its provisions applicable to the Union territories, the
expenditure which may have to be incurred in relation to the Union
territories, will have to be met by the Government of India out of its
Consolidated Fund. It is, however, difficult to estimate the annual
recurring expenditure as it will depend on the powers and authority
conferred on these institutions.

3. The Bill, when enacted, will not involve any other recurring or
non-recurring expenditure.

10


es |

oer
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Dinesh Goswami, Minister of Law & Justice)