As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABUA ON 
BU. No. 156 Of 1978 
THE ANTI-APARTHEID (UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION) 
. BILL, 1978· 
A 
BILL 
-
to giVJe effect to the Internati0'1l41 Convention' on the SUpp"'usion and 
Pun.ishment of the Crime of Apartheid 
WHEREAS an International Convention on the Suppression and Punish-
ment of the Crime of Apartheid was adopted by the General Assembly 
of the United Nations on the Thirtieth day of November, 1973; 
AND WHEREAS India, having acceded to the said Convention, should 
5 make provisions for giving effect to it; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the 
RepUblic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anti-Apartheid (United Nations Short title 
Convention) Act, 1978. and ex-tent. 
10 (2) It extends to. the whole of India. 
2. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law, such of the provisions of the International Convention on the 
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid as are set out 
in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India. 
IS (2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in conformity with any 
amendments, duly made and adopted, of the prQvisio1'l& of the said Con-
vention set out therein. 
Applica-
tion of the 
interna-
tional 
Conven-
tion on 
the Sup-
pression 
and 
Punish-
ment of 
the Crime 
of Apar. 
theid. 

Punish-
ment for 
interna-
tional 
criminal 
respon-
sibility. 
. 
OJfences 
by com.. 
panies 
organi-
sations 
or insti-
tutions. 
P1Iace of 
trial. 
Previous 
sanction 
of the 
Central 
Govern-
ment for 
arrest or 
proaecu-
tion. 
Provi-
sions as 
to Extra-
dition 
Act. 
2 
3. Every person to whom international criminal responsibility appUes 
under article III of the said Convention, as set out in the Schedule, shall 
be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the reference in clause S 
(a) of article III of the said Convention to "article II" shall be construed 
as a reference to the provisions of article n of that Convention as set 
out in the Schedule . 
" Where an 'offence under this Act has been committed by a com-
pany or an organisation or an institution, every person who, at the time 10 
the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, 
the company, organisation or institution, as the case {"'lay be, for the' 
conduct of its business or affairs, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: IS 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves 
that tbeo1!el'Kle was comntitted without his knowledge or that he exer-
cised all due diligence to PDevent the commission of such offence. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "company" means 20 
any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of indi-
vidual,s. 
5. Any person. committing an offence under section 3 may be tried 
for the offence in any place in which he may be found or in such other 
place as the Central Government may, by general or special order,2S 
published in the Ofticial Gazette, direct in this behalf. 
6. No perBOll shall be arrested or prosecuted in respect of any offence 
under section 3 except with the previous sanction of the Central Gov-
ernment or such officer 'or authority as may be authorised by that Gov-
ernment by order in writing in this behalf. 30 
7. For the purposes of the Extradition Act, 1962, the offence under 
section 3 shall not be considered to be an offence of a political character. 34 of 1962. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2 and 3) 
Pacmm:OJrs OF TIll: IJm!:RNATIOINAL Cozcon:NnON ON THE SUPPRESSION 
AND PuNISHMI:NT OF THE CRIME OJ' ApARTHEID WlfiCU SHALL 
HAVE FORCE OF LAw 
Article II 
For the purpose of the present Convention, the term "the crime of 
apartheid", which shall include similar poliCies and practices of racial 
segregation and discrimination as practised in southern Africa, shall 
apply to the following inhuman acts committed for the purpose of 
eriablishing and maintaining domination by one racial group of persons 
over any other racial group of persons and systematically oppressing 
them: 
(a) Denial to a member or members of a racial group or groups 
of the right to life ad liberty of person: 
(i) By murder of members of a racial group or groups; 
(ii) By the infliction upon the members of a racial group er 
groups of serioUs bodily or mental harm, by the infringement of 
their freedom or dignity, or by subjecting them to torture or to 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; 
(iii) By arbitrary arrest and illegal imprisonment of the 
members of a racial group or groups; 
(b) Deliberate imposition on a racial group or groups of living 
conditions calculated to cause its or their physical destruction in 
whole or in part; 
• • • • • 
(e) Exploitation of the labour of the members of a racial group 
or groups, in particular by submitting them to forced labour; 
(/) Persecution of organizations and persons, by depriving them 
of fundamental rights and freedoms, because they oppose apartheid. 
Article III 
International criminal responsibility shall apply, irrespective of the 
motive involved, to individuals, members of 'organizations and institu-
tions and representatives of the State, whether residing in the territory 
of the State in which the acts are perpetrated or in some other State, 
whenever they: 
(/1) Commit, participate in, directly incite or con~e in the 
commission of the acts mentioned in article IT of the present Conven-
tion; 
(b) Directly abet, encourage or co-operate in the cOJIlmission of 
the crime of apartheid. • 
3 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill is to give effect to the provisions of the Inter-· 
national Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime 
of Apartheid, which wa.'1 adopted by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations on the 30th November, 1973, and to which India became a party 
on the 22nd October, 1977. The purpose of the said Convention is to dec-
lare that apartheid is a crime against humanity and that inhuman acts 
resulting from the policies and practices of apctrtheid and slmilar poli-
cies and practices of racial segregation and discrimination constitute a 
serious threat to international peace and security and to make it possi-
ble for the States Parties to the Convention to take more eifective mea-
sures at the national and international levels with a view to the sup-
pression and punishment of the crime of apartheid. 
2. The Bill gives effect to the Convention, in particular to Articles n 
and m thereof, as set out in the Schedule to the Bill which, respec-
tively, define the crime of apa'7'theid and apply international criminal 
responsibility, irrespective of the motives involved, to individuals, 
members of organisations, institutions, etc., who commit the said crime. 
The Bill also seeks to make the commission of the said crime punishable 
with death or imprisonment and fine. 
NEW DELHI; ATAL BIHAR I VAJPAYEE. 
The 14th July, 1978. 
.. 

LOK SABHA 
-r , 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the International Convention on the Suppression and 
Punishment of the' Crime of Apartheid. 
(Shri Atczl Bih4ri V4jpayee, 
Minister at E%tem41 A,...) 