As Intropucep IN Lok Sasa

२4 NOVA

Bill Ne

of 2000

THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF DAMAN AND DIU

BILL, 2000
By
Suet Dayana V. Pate, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
PART I

PRELIMINARY

Causes:

R

wee

exe

Short title and Commencement.
Definitions

PART IL
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY

Legislative Assembly and its composition.

Qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly.

Duration of Legislative Assembly.

Session of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.

Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from
office is under consideration.

Right of Lieutenant Governor to address and send message to Legislative Assembly.
Special address by the Lieutenant Governor.

Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly.

Oath or affirmation by members.

Voting in Legislative Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies
and quorum.

Vacation of seats.

Disqualifications for membership.

Disqualification on ground of defection.

Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or when not qualified
or when disqualified

Powers, privileges, etc. of members.

Salaries and allowances of members

Exemption of property of the Union from taxation.

Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with respect to certain matiers,
Special provisions as to financial Bills.

Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.

Assent to Bills.

Bills reserved for consideration.

Requirements as to sanction, etc,

Annual financial statement.

Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates.

Appropriation Bills.

Supplementary, additional or excess grants.



क्र

Clauses
31. Votes on accounts.
32, Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative Assembly.
33. Rules of procedure. है
34, Official language or languages of the Union territory and language or languages to be
used in Legislative Assembly.

35. Language to be used for Bills, Acts, ete.
36, Restriction on discussion in the Legislative Assembly,
37. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative Assembly.

PART HIT

Deummation oF Constituencies

38. Election Commission to delimit constituencies
39. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders upto
40. Elections to the Legislative Assembly.

PART IV

Certain Provistons RELATING 10 Lif UTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS
41. Matters in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion
42. Advice by Ministers.
43. Other provisions as to Ministers.
44. Conduct of business
45. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information, etc, to the Lieute-
nant Governor.
PARTV
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

46. Consolidated Fund of the Union territory.
47. Contingency Fund of the Union territory.
48. Audit reports.
49... Relation of Lieutenant Governors and his Ministers to President.
50. Period of order made under article and approval thereof by Parliament
51. Authorisation of expenditure by President,
52. Contract and suits.
53. Power of President to remove diflicultic
54. Laying of Rules before Legislative Assembly.
55. Amendments to the Constitution.
56. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 150.

THE SCHEDULE


Bill ४०, 156 of 2000

THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF DAMAN AND DIU BILL, 2000
By
Suki Dayanuat V. Pate, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the creation of a Legislative Assenibly for the Union territory of Daman
and Diu and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

PARTI
PRELIMINARY

1. (7) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territory of Daman and Diu
Act, 2000.

(2) It shall’ come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of the Act and
10 any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
areference to the coming into force of that provision

q

Short title an
commence-
ment,


Definitions.

Legislative
Assembly and
its composi-
tion

Qualifications
for member
ship of
Legislative
Assembly,

Duration of
Legislative
Assembly

Session of
Legislative
Assembly,
prorogation
and dissolu:
tion,

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “article” means an article of the Constitution;

$b) “assembly constituency” means a constituency provided under this act for
the purpose of election to the Legislative Assembly;

(0) *
article 324;

Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to in

(4) “Legislative Assembly” means the Legislative Assembly of the Union terri-
tory of Daman and Diu;

(e) “Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes” in relation to the Union territory means
Such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as
are deemed under articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution to be Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribe in relation to that Union territory; and
(0 “Union territory” means the Union territory of Daman and Diu,
PART II
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
3. (4) The total number of seats in the Legislative A:
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies s

mbly to be filled by persons
hall be forty.

(2) For the purposes of election to the Legislative Assembly, the Union territory
shall be divided into single-member assembly constituencies in accordance with the
provisions of Part II in such manner that the population of each of the constituencies
shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Union territory.

(3) Seats he reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly, and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may
be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population
of the Schediled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the Union territory bears to the total

population of the Union territory,

4. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assem-
bly unless he —.

(a) is a citizen of India and makes.and subscribes before some person authorised
in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the
form set out for the purpose in the Schedule:

(0) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and

(0) possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or
under any law made by Parliament
S. The Legislative Assembly unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first mecting and no longer and the expiration of the said
Period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assemb!

Provided that the said period may be extended as while a proclamation of emergency
issued under clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, by the President by order fora period
Rot exceeding one year at a time and not extending it in any case beyond a period of six
months after the proclamation has ceased to operate

6. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall, from time to time; summon the Legislative
Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first silting in the next
session.

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may, from time to time: —
(a) prorogue the Assembly;

(b) dissolve the Assembly.

10

15

20

30

40


10

30

5

40

7. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the
Assembly to be respectively the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the
office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose
another member to be the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, as the case may be,

(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly —

(a) shall:

acate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;

(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is
the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker (0
the Speaker resign his office; and

(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly passed by
a majority of all the then members of the Assembly;

Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless at
least fourteen days notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:

Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker shall not

vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the
dissolution.

(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed
by the Deputy Speaker, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of
the Assembly as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly, by the
Deputy Speaker, or if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of
procedure of the Assembly, or if no such person is present, such other person as may be
determined by the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.

(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislative
Assembly by law and until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allow-
ances as the Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order
determine.

8. (7) Atany sitting of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for the removal
of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution
for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy
Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub-section (4) of
section 7 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation toa sitting from
which the Speaker or, as the case may be the Deputy Speaker is absent

(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office
is under consideration in the Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 13, be
entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during
such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

9. (1) The Lieutenant Governor may address the Legislative Assembly and for that
purpose require the attendance of members.

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may send message to the Legislative Assembly whether
with respect to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or otherwise and when a message is so
sent, the Assembly shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the
message to be taken into consideration,

Speaker and
Deputy
Speaker of
Legislative
Assembly.

Speaker or
Deputy
Speaker not 10
preside while a
resolution for
his removal
from office is
under
consideration

Right of
Liewtenant
Govemor to
address and
send message
to Legislative
Assembly.


Special address
by the
Lieutenant
Governor.

Rights of
Ministers as
respects
Legislative
Assembly.

Oath or
affirmation by
member,

Voting in
Legislative
Assembly and
Power of
Assembly to
act notwith-
standing
vacancies and
quorum

Vacation of
seats

10. (/) At the commencement of the first session afier each general clection to the
Legislative Assembly at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Lieutenant
Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform it of the causes of its summons

(2) Provision shall be made by rules to be made by the Assembly regulating its proce-
dure for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in sucin address,

11. Every Minister who is not a member of the Legislative Assembly shall have the
Fight to speak in and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly
and to speak in and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of any cominittee of the Legis-
lative Assembly which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this section be
entitled to vote.

12, Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before taking his seat, make and
subscribe before the Lieutenant Governor or some person appointed in that behalf by him,
an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule.

13. (1) Save as otherwise provided in the Act, question at any sitting of the Legislative
Assembly shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting
other than the Speaker or person acting as stich

(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall
have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes,

(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in
the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall be valid
notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some Person who was not entitled so
to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Assembly shail be one-third of the total
number of members of the Assembly.

(5) Iatany time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quorum, it
shall be the duty of the Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the Assembly or
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

14. (1) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of the Legislative Assem-
bly and if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such Assembly, then at the
expiration of such period as is specified in or under the Representation of the People Act,
1951, and the rules made by the President under clause (2) of article 190, that person's seat
in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he had previously resigned his seat in the Legisla-
live Assembly.

(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly —

(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in section15 or
section 16 for membership of the Assembly; or

(0) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker and his
resignation is accepted by the Speaker,

his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in clause (0), 1 from the infor-
mation received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker is

satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine he shall not accept such resigna-
tion

(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is without
permission of the Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly.may declare his
seat vacant:

Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be taken of
any period during which the Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four
consecutive days,

10

20

30
43 of 1951

35

40

45


10

20

25

35

40

45

15. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
the Legislative Assembly—

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State or the Government of any Union territory other than an
office declared by law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of any State or by the
Legislative Assembly of any other Union territory not to disqualify its holder; or

(0) if he is for the time being chosen as, and for being, a member of cither
House of Parliament under the provisions of sub-clause (9) or sub-clause (c) of sub-
clause (1) of article 102 or of any kaw made in pursuance of that article.

(2) For the purpose of the section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of
profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or the Government of
any Union territory by reason only that he isa Minister cither for the Union or for such State
or Union territory.

(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the Legislative Assembly has
become disqualified for being such a member under the provisions of sub-section (1), the
4 r p
question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.

(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion

16. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall, subject to the
necessary modifications (including modifications for construing references therein to the
Legislative Assembly of a State, article 188, article 194 and article 212 as references,
respectively, to the Legislative Assembly, section 12, section 18 and section 37 of this Act),
apply 10 and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State and
according!

(ct) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed to form part of this
Act; and

(0) a person shall be disqualified for being a memebr of the Legislative Assem-
bly if he is so disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.

17. If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly before he has
complied with requirements of section 12 or when he knows that he is not qualified or that
he is disqualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which
he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the
Union,

18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and standing orders regu-
lating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly, there shall be freedom of speech in the
Legislative Assembly.

(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any proceedings in any
court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Legislative Assembly or any
committee thereof and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under
the authority of such Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.

(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assem-
bly and of the members and the committees thereof shall be such as are of the time being
enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees.

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (7), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons
who by virtue of this Act have the right to speak in, and otherwise to ike part in the
proceedings, of the Legislative Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply, in relation
to members of that Assembly.

Disqualifica-
tion for
membership,

Disqualifica-
tion on ground
of defection.

Penalty for sit-
ting and voting
before making
oath or affirma-
tion vr when
not qualified or
when disquali-
fied

Powers,
Privileges, etc.,
of members,


Salaries and
allowances of
members,

Exemption of
property of the
Union from
taxation,

Restrictioas on
laws passed by
Legislative
Assembly with
respect to
certain matters

Special
provisions as
to Financial
Bills,

Procedure as to
lapsing of
Bills.

19. Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive such sala-
ries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by the Legislative Assem-
bly by law and until provision in that behalf if'so made, such and allowances as
the Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order deter

Ie.

20. The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise
provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any law made by the Legislative
Assembly or by under any other law in force in the Union territory:

Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides,
Prevent any authority within the Union territory from levying any tax on any property of the
Union to which such property was immediately before the commencement of the Constitu-
tion liable or treated as liable, so long as the tax continues to be levied in the-Union territory,

21. (1) The provisions of articles 286, 287 and 288 shall apply in relation to any law
passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to in those
articles as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with respect
to those matters.

(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in
relation to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters
referred to in that article as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a
State with respect to those matters.

22. (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved in, the Legislative
Assembly except on the recommendation of the Lieutenant Governor if such Bill or amend-
ment makes provision for any of the following matters, namely: —

(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;

(6) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations under-
taken or to be undertaken by the Government of the Union territory;

(c) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Funds of the Union
territory;

(d) the declaring of any expenditure to the expenditure charged on the Consoli-
dated Fund of the Union territory or the increasing of the amount of any such expen-
diture;

(०) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
lerritory or the custody of such money:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this sub-section for the
moying of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax,

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary pen-
alties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licence or fees for services rendered, or by
teason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be passed by the Legislative
Assembly unless the Lieutenant Governor has recommended to that Assembly the consider
ation of the Bill.

23. (1) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Assembly.

(2) ABill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly shall, lapse on a dissolution of
the Assembly,

10

30

35

40

45


25

30

35

40

50

24. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative assembly it shall be presented to
the Lieutenant Governor and he shall declare either that he assents to thé Bill or that he
withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:

Provided that the Lieutenant Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation
of the Bill for his assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a
message requesting that the Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified provi-
sions thereof, and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such
amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the
Assembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly and if the Bill is passed again with or
without amendment and presented to the Lieutenant Governor for assent, he shall
declare either that he assents, to the Bill or that he reserves the Bill for the consider-
ation of the President:

Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor shall not assent to, but shall re-
serve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which —

(a) in the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor would, if it became law, so dero-
gate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court
is, by the Constitution, designed to fill; or

(0) the President may, by order, direct to be reserved for his consideration; or

(c) relates to matter referred to in sub-section (5) of section 7 or section 19 or
section 34 or sub-section (3) of section 43.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 25, a Bill shall be deemed
to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters
specified in sub-section (/) of section 22 or any matter incidental to any of those matters
and, in either case, there is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

25, When a Bill is reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the
President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds
assent therefrom:

Provided that where the Bill is nota Money Bill, the President may direct the Lieuten-
ant Governor to return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a mes-
sage as is mentioned in the first proviso to section 24 and, when a Bill is so returned,
the Assembly shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the Assembly
with or without amendment it shall be presented again to the president for his consid-
eration.

26. No Act of the Legislative Assembly, and no provision in any such Act, shall be
invalid by reason only that some previous sanction or recommendation required by this act
was not given, if assent to that Act was given by the Lieutenant Governor or, one being
reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the President, by the President.

27. (J) The Lieutenant Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to be
laid before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, a state-
ment of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the union territory for the Year, in this part
referred to as the “annual financial statement”,

(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall
show separately —

(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Act as expenditure
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory; and

(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue
account from other expenditure.

Assent to Bills.

Bills reserved
for considera
tion,

Requirements
as to sanction,
ete.

Annual
financial
statement,


10

(0) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the

following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory: —

(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Lieutenant Governor and other ex-

Penditure relating to his office as determined by the President by general or special
order;

(0) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the Union territory from
the Consolidated Fund of India including interest, sinking fund charges and redemp-
tion charges and other expenditure connected therewith:

(०) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly;

(d) any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any court or
arbitrator of tribunal;

(e) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by law made by Par-
Hament or by the Legislative Assembly to be so charged.

Procedure in 28. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consoli-
Legislative dated Fund of the Union territory shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative As-
जद अप with ~ sembly but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing the discussion in the
Sioate Legislative Assembly of any of those estimates,

(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in
the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembl 'y, and the Legislative Assembly
shall have the power to assent or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any
demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.

(3) No deemed for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the Lieu-
tenant Governor.

Appropriation 29. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have been made by the
Bills, Legislative Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of all moneys required to meet.

(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and

(6) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory but
Not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before
the Assembly.

(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative Assembly
which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant
made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund or the
Union territory and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is
inadmissible under this sub-section shall be final.

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this act, no money shall be withdrawn from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory except under appropriation made by law passed in
accordance with provisions of this section.

Supplemen- 30. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall,—
tary, additional 7 है हि ‘ शक
or ante (a) ifthe amount authorised by any law made in accordance with provisions of

grants. section 29 to be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is
found to be insufficient for the Purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during
the current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure-upon some new.
service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year, or


20

25

30

a5

40

45

i

(0) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in
excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year, cause to be laid before
the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, another Statement
showing be estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to the
Legislative Assembly with such previous sanction a demand for such excess, as the
case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to any such
statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the
appropriation of money out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such
expenditure or the grant in respect ‘of such demand as they have effect in relation to the
annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant
‘and the law to be made for the authorisation or appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to mect such expenditure or grant.

31.(/) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Legislative
‘Assembly shall have power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated
expenditure fora part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed
in eection 28 for the voting of such grant and passing of the law in accordance with the
provisions of section 29 in relation to that expenditure and the Legislative Assembly shall
have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of
the Union territory for the purposes for which the said grant is made.

(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to the making of
any grant under sub-section (1) or to any Jaw to be made under that sub-section as they have
cffeet in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the
‘anual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of
moneys, out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure.

32. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Lieutenant
Governor may authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory
as he deems necessary fora period of not more than six months beginning from the date of
the constitution of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, pending the sanction of
such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly.

433, (1) The Legislative Assembly may make rules regulating subject to the provisions
of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:
Provided that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly and with the approval of the President make rules—
(@) for securing the timely completion of financial business;
(b) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the Legislative
Assembly in relation to any finaneial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory;
(0) for prohibiting the discussion of, ण the asking of questions on, any matters
which affects the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as he
is required by or under this Act or any Jaw to act in his discretion.

(2) Until rules are made under sub-section (1), the rules of procedure and standing
orders with respect tothe Legislative Assembly of the State of Uuar Pradesh in force
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall have effect in relation to the
Legislative Assembly subject to such moditications and adaptations as may 08 made therein
by the Lieutenant Governor.

34. (1) The Legislative Assembly may by law adopt any one or more of the languages
im use in the Union territory or Hindi as the official language or languages to be used for all
or any of the official purposes of the Union territory:

Provided that the President may by order direct—

(0 that the official language ‘of the Union shall be adopted for such of the official

‘Votes on
account.

Authorisation
of expenditure
pending its
sanction by
Legislative
Assembly.

Rules of
jure.

Official lan-
guage or lan-
guages of the
Union territory
and Janguage ०
languages to be
vsed in Legisla-
tive Assembly.


Languages to
be used for
Bills, Acts, etc,

Restrictions on
discussion in
the Legislative
Assembly,
Courts not to
inquire into
proceedings of
Legislative
Assembly.

Election
‘Comunission to
delimit

constituencies,

12

purpos

(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted throughout the Union territory
or such part thereof for such of the official purposes of the Union territory as may be
specified in the order if the President is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the
Population of the Union territory desires the use of that other language for all or any
of such purposes.

s of the Union territory as may be specified in the order.

(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly shall be transacted in the official language
or languages of the Union territory or in Hindi or in English:

Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the person acting as such, as
the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of
the languages aforesaid, to address the Assembly in his mother-tongue.

35. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34 until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, the authoritative texts—

(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in the
Legislative Assembly;

(b) of all Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly; and

(९) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under any law made by
the Legislative Assembly shall be in English language:

Provided that where the Legislative Assembly has prescribed any language other than
the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislative Assembly
or in any order, rule, regulation or byc-law issued under any law made by the Legislative
Assembly, a translation of the same in the English language published under the authority of
the Lieutenant Governor in the official Gazette shall be deemed to be the authoritative text
thereof in the English language.

36. No discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly with respect to the
conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his
duties.

37. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall not be called
in question on the ground of any alleged imegularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers are vested by
or under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining
order in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect
of the exercise by him of those powers.

PART III
Deuimirarion oF Constituencies
38. (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute the
seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly under section 3 to single-member territorial
constituencies and delimit them having regard to the following provisions, namely:—

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be delimited in such manner
that the ratio between the population of each of such constituencies and the total
population of the Union territory is the same; and

(6) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as possible, be located in areas where the proportion of
the population to the total population is comparatively large.

(2) The Election Commission shall—

(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in the official
Gazette and also in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit together
with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to proposals and specifying
a date on or after which their proposals will be further considered by it;

20

25

35

40

45


10

is

20
43 of 1951

43 of 1950.
43 of 1951
25

30

35

40

4s

13

(b) consider all 002
before the date so specified;

ions and suggestions which may have been received by it

(0 after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received
by it before the date so specified, finalise delimitation of constituencies and cause
such order of orders to be published in the official Gazette; and upon such publication,
the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question
in any court.

39. The Election Com:
Gazette —

ission may from time to time, by notification in the offcial

(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 38 or any
error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; and

(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any
such order are or is altered, make such amendments as appear (o it to be necessary or
expedient for bringing such order up to date

40. (1) For the purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly, a general election
will be held as soon as may be after the delimitation of all the assembly constituencies under
section 38.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (/), the Lieutenant Governor shall, by one or more
notifications published in the Official Gazette, call upon all the said assembly constituencies
to elect members in accodance with the provisions of the Representation of the People Act,
1951 and of the rules and orders made or issued thereunder as applicable under sub-
section (3).

(3) The Representation of People Act, 1950, the Repesentation of the People Act,
1951 the rules and orders made or issued under the said Acts and all other laws for the time being
in force relating to the elections shall apply with necessary modifications (including modifications
for construing references therein to a State, State Governmentand Governor as including references
to the Union territory, Government of the Union territory and Lieutenant Governor, respectively)
to, and in relation to, the gencral election referred 10 in sub-section (1).

PARTIV
Certain Provisions RELatinG TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS
41. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall act in his discretion in a matter—

(i) which falls outside the purview of the powers conferred on the Legislative
Assembly but in respect of which powers or functions are entrusted or delegated to
him by the President, or

(ii) in which he is required by or under any law to act in his discretion or to
exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions.

(2) if any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Lieutenant Governor is by or under any law required to act in his discretion, the
decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

(3) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Licutenant Governor is required by any law to exercise any judicial or quasi-
judicial functions, the decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

42. The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the
Lieutenant Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.

43. (1) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Lieutenant Governor shall
administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the
purpose in the Schedule.

Power of
Election
‘Commission to
maintain
delimitation
orders up to
date.

Election to the
Legislative
Assembly.

Matters in
which
Lieutenant
Governor to
act im his
discretion.



Conduct of
business.

Duties of
Chief Minister
as respects the
furnishing of
information,
ete, to the
Lieutenant
Governor.

Consolidated
Fund of the
Union
territory.

14

(2) A Minister who, for any period of six months, is not a member of the Legislative
Assembly, at the expiration of that period, shall cease to be a Minister.

(3) The salaries and allowances of Ministers ‘shall be such as the Legislative Assembly
may from time to time by law determine and until the Legislative ‘Assembly so determines,
shall be determined by the Lieutenant Governor with the approval of the President.

44. (1) The President shall make rules—

(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers in so far as it is business with
Tespect to which the Lieutenant Governor is required to act ता the aid and advice of
his Council of Ministers; and

(0) for the more convenient transaction of business the Ministers, including the
Procedure to be adopted in the case of a difference of opinion between the Lieutenant
Governor and the Council of Ministers or a Minister.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive actions of the Lieutenant
Governor whether taken on the advice of his Mini ters or otherwise shall be expressed to be
taken in the name of the Lieutenant Governor.

(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Lieutenant
Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by
the Lieutenant Governor and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated
Shall not 0९ called in question on the ground that itis not an order or instrument made or
executed by the Lieutenant Governor,

45. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister—

(a) to communicate to the Lieutenant Governor all decisions of Council of
Ministers relating to the administration ofthe afairs of the Union territory and proposals
for legislation;

(2010 furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the
Union territory and proposals for legislation as Lieutenant Governor may call
for, and

(©) ifthe Lieutenant Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but
which has not been considered by the Council.

PART ५
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

46. (7) As from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues received in the Union terti tory by the Government
of India or the Licutenant Governor in relation to any matter with Tespect to which the
Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, and all grants made and all loans advanced to
the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India and all moneys received by the
Union territory in repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated Fund to be entitled “the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Daman and Diu—referred to in this Act as the
Consolidated Fund of the Union lerritory.

(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall be
appropriated except in accordance with and for the purposes and in the manner provided in
the Act.

(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory the payment of moneys
into such fund, the withcrawal of money therefrom and all other matters connected with or
ancillary to those matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Licutenant Governor with
the approval of the President.

10

20

25

30

35

40

45


15

25

30

35

40

45

15

47. (1) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be
entitled “the Contingency Fund! of the Union territory of Daman and Diu" into which shall
be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory such sums as may,
from time to time be determined by law maue by the Legislative Assembly and the said Fund
shall be held by the Lieutenant Governor to enable advances to be made by him out of such
Fund.

(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund referred to in sub-section
(J) except for the purposes of meeting unforescen expenditure pending authorisation of
such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly under appropriation made by law,

(3) The Lieutenant Governor may make rules regulating all matters connected with or
ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys into, and the withdrawal of moneys from
the aforesaid Contingency Fund.

48. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India relating to the accounts
of the Union territory for any period subsequent to the date referred in sub-section (1) of
section 46 shall be submitted to the Lieutenant Governor who shall cause them to be laid
before the Legislative Assembly.

49. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Lieutenant Governor and his Council of
Ministers shall be under the general control of, and comply with such pasticular directions,
if any, as may from time to time be given by, the President.

50. (7) Every order made by the President under article 239AB shall expire at the end
of one year from the date of issue of the order and the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of
article 356 shall, so far may be, apply to such order as they apply to a proclamation issued
under clause (/) of article 356.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the President may extend
the duration of the aforesaid order for a further period not exceeding two years from the date
of expiry of the order under sub-section (/) subject to the condition that every extension of
the said order for'any period beyond the expiration of one year shall be approved by resolutions
of both Houses of Parliament.

51. Where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved or its functioning as such Assembly
remains suspended on account of an order made by the President under article 239AB, it
shall be competent for the President to authorise when the House of the People is not in
session expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory pending the sanction
of such expenditure by Parliament.

52. For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that—

(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of the Union territory are
contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union; and

(0) all suits and proceedings in connection with the administration of the Union
territory shall be instituted by or against the Government of India.

53. (7) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transaction from the provisions of any
jaw repealed by the Act or in giving effect to the provisions of this Act and in particular in
relation to the constitution of the Legislative Assembly, the President may by order to anything
nol inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution or of this act which appear to him to
be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:

Provided that no order the sub-section shall be made after the expiry of three years
from the date of constitution of the first Legislative Assembly.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (/) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.

Contingency
Fund of the
Union
territory.

Audit Reports

Relation of
Lieutenant
Governor and
his Ministers
10 President.

Period of
‘order made
under article
239AB and
approval
thereof by
Parliament.

Authorisation
of expenditure
by President.

Contracts and
suits.»

Power of
President to
remove
difficulties.


Laying of rules
before
Legislative
Assembly.
Amendments
to the
Constitution

Special
provision with
respect to
Daman and
Diu.

16

$4, Every rule made by the Lieutenant Governor under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as it made, before the Legislative Assembly.

55. On and from the appointed day—
(a) after article 239A, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

“239AAA. (1) As from the date of Commencement of the Government of Union
territory of Daman and Diu Act, 2000 the adroinistrator of the Union territory
of Daman and Diu appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the Lieutenant
Governor.

(2) The provisions of articles 239AA and 23938 shall, so far as may be, apply
mutatis mutandis in relation to the Union territory of Daman and Diu, Lieutenant
Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation to the National Capital
Territory of Delhi and its Legislature respectively.”;

(b) in article 240, in clause (1), for the existing proviso, the following provisos
shall be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that when any body is created under article 239A or 239AAA to
function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Pondicherry or Union territory of
Daman and Diu, as the case may be the President shall not make any regulation for the
peace, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date
appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature:

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the
Union territory of Pondicherry or Union territory of Daman and Diu as the case may
be, is dissolved or the functioning of that body as such legislature remains suspended
on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of
article 239A or 239AB, as the case may be, the President may, during the period of
such dissolution or suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good
government of that Union Territory.”

(c) In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table,

(a) entries 26 and 27 shall be re-numbered as entries 27 and 28, respectively
and before the entry 27 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—

“26. Daman and Diu....

(b) for the figures, “233”, the figures “234” shall be substituted.

56. In section 27A of the Representation of People Act 1950, after sub-section (4), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“(5) The electoral college for the Union territory of Daman and Diu shall consist
of the elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territory under
the Government of Union territory Daman and Diu Act, 2000.”

THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 4, 12 and 43)
FORMS OF OATH OR AFFIRMATIONS
1

Form of oath or affirmation to made by a candidate for election to the Legislative
Assembly:—

“I, AB, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative
Assembly, do swear in the name of’ God/solemnly affirm that I bear true faith and

1s

25

30

35

40


20

7
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India.
I
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislative Assembly:—

“IAB, having been elected a member of the Legislative Assembly, do swear in
the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will faithfully discharge the duty
upon which I am about to enter.”

Il

Form of oath of office of a member of the Council of Ministers: —

1, AB, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that 1 will bear true faith
and allegiance to the Constitution of india as by law established, that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge
my duties as a Minister, and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance
with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”

Iv
Form of oath of Secrecy for a member of Council of Ministers:—

“I, AB, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister except as
may be required for the due discharge of any duties as such Minister”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Even after 52 years of Independence, the Union territory of Daman and Diu has not
been provided with a democratic set up with a Legislative Assembly for the governance of
the affairs of the Union territory Administration. All powers are vested in the Lieutenant
Governor and the bureaucracy continues to reign supreme. In the absence of Legislative
Assembly with devolution of powers, the people of the islands are not able to have a sense of
belonging and involvement in the developmental activities of the islands and de not have a
Say in the utilisation of the funds provided by the Central Government in proper perspective,

The type of administration provided to the Union territory is not at all befitting to a
democratic set-up and devolution of powers. The population of the Union territory has crossed
four lakhs mark and the literacy percentage is well over the national average and is steadily
heading towards achieving cent percent. literacy as per norms prescribed by the Govern-
ment of India.

However, despite of all these favourable points the people of the Union territory did
not get administrative set-up of their own choice mainly due to unforesighted views of the
Central Government. They deserve a political set-up on the same line as Delhi and
Pondicherry.

There have been series of demands from the people of the Union territory for Pprovid-
ing a Legislative Assembly on the line of the set-up in Delhi and Pondicherry, The people of
the island territory are unanimous in this regard. Now, since a three-tier Panchayati Raj
system is also in offing in pursuance of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act,
with the idea of devolution of powers at Panchayat, block and district levels, it is high time
that a Legislative Assembly was provided to set the tone and direction for the governance of
the Union territory Administration on democratic norms.

The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.

New Detut; DAYABHAI ४ PATEL
July, 28, 2000,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Legislative Assembly for the Union
territory of Daman & Diu, Clauses 7(5), 19 and 43(3) relate to payment of salaries and
allowances to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly and
the Ministers. The expenditure on such salaries and allowances and other expenditure of
incidental nature such as on the additional staff in the Legislative Assembly and Council of
Ministers will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Daman and Diu.

Clause 38 provides for the delimitation of thirty single member territorial constituen-
cies for the proposed Assembly of the Union territory of Daman and Diu. Clause 55 pro-
vides that Union territory of Daman and Diu will be represented by one’ member in the
Council of States. For this purpose, a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen
lakhs is likely to be incurred, This expenditure will be met from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a recurring or
non-recurring nature.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of
Daman and Diu to make rules, subject to the provisions of this Bill, for regulating its proce-
dure and conduct of its business. It also provides that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after
consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and with the approval of the
President make rules for securing the completion of the financial business, regulating the
procedure and conduct of business in the Legislative Assembly in relation to any financial
matter or to any Bill for appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory of Daman and Diu and for prohibiting the discussion of or asking any question
which affect the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as he is
required to act in his discretion.

Clause 44 empowers the President to make rules regarding allocation of business 10
Ministers and transactions of such business. It further empowers the Lieutenant Governor to
make rules providing the manner of authenticating the orders issued in his name.

Clauses 46(3) and 47(3) provide that the Lieutenant Governor may make rules regard-
ing the custody. ete, of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Daman and Diu and
the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Daman and Diu.

20


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

240. Power of President to make regulations for certain Union territories—(1) The
President may make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the Union
territory of—

(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(b) Lakshadweep;

(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;

(d) Daman and Diu;

(e) Pondicherry:

Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function as a Legisla-
ture for the Union territory of Pondicherry the President shall not make any regulation for
the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date
appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature:

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the Union
territory of Pondicherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature
remains suspended on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in
clause (1) of article 239A, the President, may, during the period of such dissolution or
suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that Union
territory.

(2) Any regualtion so made may repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any
other law, which is for the time being applicable to the Union territory and, when
promulgated by the President, shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament
which applies to that territory,

* * * * + *
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)}
Allocation of Seats in the Council of States

To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of the following
table, there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the second column thereof
opposite to that, State or that Union territory, as the case may be,

TABLE
* * * * ड +
[25.] Arunachal Pradesh 1
(26.] Delhi 3
(27.] Pondicherry 1
* * + * * *
* * * * * *

Total 233

21


if

\ \ LOK SABHA

A

BILL
10 provide for the creation of a Legislative Assembly for the Union territory of Daman
and Diu and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto,

(Shri Dayabhai V. Patel, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—4157LS—18-10-2000.

aad