THE FARMERS OF ARID AND DESERT AREAS (WELFARE AND
OTHER SPECIAL PROVISIONS)  BILL,  2016
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures and special facilities for the farmers of
arid, desert and drought prone areas, who are often affected by natural
calamities and vulnerable to indebtedness, diseases and physical
infirmities, exploitation by moneylenders and others, by extending
welfare measures such as removal of indebtedness among farmers,
giving remunerative prices for their produce, providing
hassle free bank loans, improving farming practices
through scientific means to grow less water
consuming crops and for compulsory  crop
and livestock  insurance and
for matters connected
therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called The Farmers of Arid and Desert Areas (Welfare and
Other Special Provisions) Act,  2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 156 of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “arid areas” means areas which remain affected by aridity due to scanty or no
rainfall;
(c) “drought prone areas” means any area which gets below normal rainfall in
any season of a calendar year and which in the opinion of the Central Government is
drought prone and declared to be so by notification in the Official Gazette, for such
period as may be specified in the notification;
(d) “desert area” means an area full of sand, mostly remains waterless with few
plantation and vegetations;
(e) “farmer” means a person who owns agricultural land and cultivates or causes
it to be cultivated for agricultural purposes or for horticulture purposes and includes
all farmers big, middle, small and marginal farmers as identified by the appropriate
Government;
(f) “natural calamity” includes drought, flood, excessive rains, storm, hailstorm,
winds, frost, winterkill, lightening, fire, earthquake, damage by wild animals, insect
infection, plant disease and such other natural causes as may be prescribed;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) “Fund” means the Arid and Desert Areas Farmers Welfare Fund constituted
under section 4.
3.  ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate a National Plan for the welfare of the farmers of arid, desert and drought
prone areas and take appropriate measures for proper implementation of such plan.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in
sub-section (1) the national plan may include provision of—
(a) immediate interim relief or ex-gratia payment to farmers affected by natural
calamity;
(b) diversification of crops requiring very less water developed by various
Agricultural Research Institutes suitable for arid, desert and drought prone areas;
(c) comprehensive crop and livestock insurance scheme for the arid, desert and
drought prone areas in which insurance premium of small and marginal farmers
shall be borne by the Central Government;
(d) ensuring remunerative prices for the agricultural produce of the farmers
through Minimum Support Price mechanism and other appropriate measures;
(e) making easy availability of fertilizers, manure, pesticides and quality seeds at
affordable prices;
(f) irrigation projects to provide requisite irrigation facilities and ensuring
timely completion of such irrigation projects;
(g) comprehensive measures for removing indebtedness, easy loans with nominal
interest from banks and other financial institutions, saving farmers from private
moneylenders, unscrupulous traders and middlemen.
(h) establishing agricultural farms to ensure timely and adequate supply of
quality seeds and saplings at affordable prices;
Definitions.
National Plan
for welfare of
farmers of arid
and desert areas.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(i) establishing Krishi Vigyan Kendras and Krishi Information Centres at
conspicuous places for promotion of less water consuming crops and horticulture;
(j) establishing modern veterinary hospitals and clinics in every block to assist
farmers in animal husbandry;
(k) promoting dairy sector, rearing of animals, poultry, piggery and bee keeping
to enhance farm income;
(l) promoting cultivation of vegetables, floriculture, horticulture, spices,
sericulture, herbals and plants of medicinal values alongwith handloom and handicrafts
and other village arts to supplement the income of farmers;
(m) promoting traditional water bodies like wells, ponds and lakes and rain water
harvesting and providing sprinklers and regular power supply to farmers; and
(n) providing such other facilities as may be necessary, incidental and expedient
as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Arid and Desert Areas Farmers Welfare Fund
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus of the fund shall be rupee ten thousand crore to be provided by
the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(3) The Central Government and the concerned State Governments shall contribute
to  the fund in such proportion and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) There shall also be credited to the Fund money received from the general public,
body corporate and domestic and foreign financial institutions as donations and gifts.
(5) The Fund shall be utilised for—
(i) providing immediate financial assistance, ex-gratia payments and
compensation to the distressed farmers covered under this Act affected by any natural
calamity or disaster resulting in loss of crops, in such manner, as may be prescribed;
and
(ii) providing special assistance to the children, women, physically challenged
or infirm farmers, old farmers and such other farmers affected by natural calamities,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide every farmer covered
under this Act,—
(a) medical facilities including medicines and hospitalization, wherever required
free of cost;
(b) educational facilities including higher education free of cost to the children
of such farmers;
(c) maternity facilities to the spouses of such farmers;
(d) adequate old age allowance which is sufficient to lead a dignified life;
(e) disability pension to the physically challenged farmers; and
(f) such other welfare and protective measures as may be deemed necessary and
appropriate, or as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite Funds to the concerned State Governments, from time to
time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Constitution
of Arid and
Desert Areas
Farmers
Welfare Fund.
Welfare
measures to
be undertaken
by appropriate
Government.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
7.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
8. (1) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Saurashtra and Kutch regions in the State of Maharashtra and Gujarat and major
parts of State of Rajasthan are having arid and desert areas. These areas face extreme heat in
summer and extreme cold in winter. Sometimes they face heavy rains but mostly the rainfall
is scanty and deficient. Similarly, large number of areas in various parts of our vast nation
particularly in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Jharkhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Odisha, etc. are frequently affected by unprecedented drought conditions
and desert is spreading in many of such areas. Despite the harsh natural conditions and
vagaries of nature, agriculture continues to be the main occupation in these regions and
areas of the country and farmers are the backbone of the economy in these regions and areas
too as is the case of the rest of the country.
Although the farmers of the entire nation depend on rains for their crops same is true
for the farmers of arid and desert areas and those face frequent drought conditions. But
farmers of arid and desert face extreme weather conditions and bear the brunt of such
weather conditions and generally lose their crops. With the damage of the crops, the hopes
and aspirations of the farmers too are lost. The farmers of such areas remain indebted and
distressed.
Ours is a welfare State and it is the duty of the State to protect the farmers of arid,
desert and drought prone areas by giving sufficient protection. The State should implement
comprehensive crop and livestock insurance, extending soft loans by banks and financial
institutions, providing timely adequate compensation when their crops are affected by natural
calamity. They must get remunerative prices for their produce and State should implement
welfare measures for them. A welfare fund should be set up for the farmers of arid and desert
areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
May 5, 2016.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the Constitution of  Welfare Fund for the farmers of
arid and desert areas with initial corpus of rupee ten thousand crore to be provided by the
Central Government. Clause 5 provides for certain welfare measures to be undertaken by the
appropriate Governments. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
requisite funds to concerned States.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupee twenty thousand crore may be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupee five thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

lLOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures and special facilities for the farmers of
arid, desert and drought prone areas, who are often affected by natural
calamities and vulnerable to indebtedness, diseases and physical
infirmities, exploitation by moneylenders and others, by extending
welfare measures such as removal of indebtedness among farmers,
giving remunerative prices for their produce, providing
hassle free bank loans, improving farming practices
through scientific means to grow less water
consuming crops and for compulsory  crop
and livestock  insurance and
for matters connected
therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1260LS(S3)—04-07-2016.