As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
  
Bill No. 156 of  2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By 
Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti, M.P.
a 
BILL
further to amend the Constitution  
of India.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, 
namely:–
“21B. The State shall secure the right to safer roads to all citizens by 
adopting and enforcing comprehensive measures including emergency 
medical and trauma facilities for road safety and prevents road traffic 
injuries and fatalities in such manner as the State may by law, determine.”. 
Short title and 
commencement.
Insertion of new 
article 21B.
Right to safer 
roads.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Road safety and fatalities resulting from it is a critical public concern in India, 
with the nation experiencing an alarming rate of road crashes and fatalities that far 
exceed many other public health crises. With over 1.68 lakh lives lost annually from 
road crashes, this poses a significant threat to the right to life and personal liberty, as 
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Indian Constitution. India has pledged to achieve 
SDG 3.6, that is, to reduce road crashes and deaths by 50 per cent by 2030. This 
singular issue of unsafe roads takes more lives than HIV and Malaria combined in 
India. 
 Further, the 2022 Road Accidents in India Report reveal that approximately 
45% of the accidental deaths in the country, amounting to 36.5 lakh people, died 
without receiving any medical attention, this is a stark reminder of the urgent need to 
address the deficiencies in our current healthcare infrastructure. The 2021 report of 
NITI Aayog and AIIMS found that 30% mortalities were due to delayed emergency 
care, 98.5% of ambulance runs were made only transporting dead bodies, 90% of 
ambulances were functioning without any equipment/oxygen, 95% of ambulances 
had untrained personnel and most ED doctors had no formal training in EMS. 
 The judiciary has repeatedly underscored the criticality of road safety and 
trauma care. In Ratan Singh vs. State of Punjab (1980 AIR 84), the Supreme Court 
called Indian roads “death traps” and emphasized on the need for stringent road 
safety measures. In MC Mehta vs. Union of India (13029 of 1985), the Court noted 
road safety as the fundamental right to life under Article 21, emphasizing that public 
safety measures should override individual rights when necessary. Similarly, on 
its own motion vs. State of NCT of Delhi [WP (CRL) 878/2007] the Delhi High 
Court took proactive steps to phase out dangerous Blue Line buses highlighting the 
precedence of the right to life (Article 21) over the right to conduct business [Article 
19(1)(g)], emphasizing that public safety and the right to life are paramount. In  
Pt. Parmanand Katara vs. Union of India (1989) and Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor 
Samity & others vs. State of West Bengal & Another, the court has interpreted 
emergency medical care as a right under Article 21.
 Despite these judicial pronouncements, the enforcement of road safety measures 
and development of a comprehensive trauma care framework remains inconsistent, 
and existing laws have not adequately curbed the growing menace. The courts have 
also emphasized that legislative and policy measures are imperative to address the 
systemic issues effectively. Therefore, the proposed bill seeks to recognize the Right 
to Safer Roads and Right to Trauma Care as a fundamental right for every citizen 
of India. Establishing this right will mandate that road safety is given paramount 
importance, not merely as a matter of policy but as an enforceable constitutional 
guarantee.
 Hence this Bill.
 New Delhi;                                                       KRISHNA PRASAD TENNETI                                          
January 3, 2025. 
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed article 21B provides for right to safer roads to 
all citizens by adopting and enforcing comprehensive measures that guarantee road 
safety and prevent road traffic injuries and fatalities. The Bill, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve 
a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen thousand five hundred crore per 
annum.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one lakh twenty thousand crore is 
also likely to be involved.
3

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution  
of India. 
(Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti, M.P .) 