26 of 1962. 
5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 156 of 2026 
THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:–– 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Co -operative Development
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2026. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the National Co -operative Development Corporation Act, 1962
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,–– 
(a) clause (aba) shall be omitted;
Short title and 
commencement. 
Amendment of 
section 2. 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Omission of 
section 2A. 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 3.  
 
 
Amendment of 
section 9. 
 (b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
‘(ba) “co-operative development” means planning, promoting and 
financing programmes, whether directly or through any intermediary 
entity, to co-operative societies;’; 
(c) in clause (c), for the words and figures “the Multi-State Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1984 or under any other law with respect to co -operative 
societies for the time being in force in any State”, the words and figures “the 
Multi-State Co -operative Societies Act, 2002 or under any other l aw with 
respect to co -operative societies for the time being in force” shall                           
be substituted; 
(d) in clause (da), after sub-clause (viii), the following sub-clauses shall 
be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ix) processed food and other edible products;  
(x) any other food items as may be notified by the Central 
Government;”; 
(e) in clause ( dba), for the words “in the rural area and includes any 
handicrafts or rural crafts”, the words “including any handicrafts or other 
crafts” shall be substituted; 
(f) after clause (dd), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
‘(de) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette and the expression “notify” or “notified” shall be construed 
accordingly;’. 
3. Section 2A of the principal Act shall be omitted.  
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 4), clause ( vii) shall                     
be omitted.  
5. In section 9 of the principal Act,–– 
(a) in sub-section (1),––  
(i) for the words “, through co-operative societies”, the words “for 
co-operative development” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause ( a), for the words “and notified commodities”, the 
words “, notified commodities and industrial goods” shall be 
substituted;  
(b) in sub-section (2),–– 
(i) for clause ( b), the following clause shall be substituted,                      
namely:–– 
“(b) provide funds to State Governments for financing                    
co-operative societies or any entity engaged in co -operative 
development, for the purchase of agricultural produce, foodstuffs, 
livestock, poultry feed, industrial goods, notified commodities and 
notified services on behalf of the Central Government, to the extent 
such funds are used for co-operative societies;”;  
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(da) provide loans and grants directly to co -operative 
societies or any entity engaged in co-operative development to the 
extent such funds are used for co -operative societies, subject to 
furnishing security, as may be required by the Corporation;”; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
51 of 1984. 
 
 
39 of 2002. 

3 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
(iii) after clause ( f), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“(g) with the approval of the Central Government, participate 
in the share capital of co -operative societies other than a                            
co-operative society referred to in clause (f), or any entity engaged 
in co-operative development.”; 
(c) after sub -section ( 3), the following sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“(4) The entity engaged in co-operative development shall be such 
as may be determined by the Board.”. 
6. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“9A. The Corporation may do all such things as may be necessary or 
incidental to or consequential upon the exercise of its powers, discharge of its 
functions and the performance of its duties, under this Act, or under any other 
law for the time being in force.”.  
7. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“13A. The Corporation may, for the purpose of the efficient discharge of 
its functions under this Act, collect from or furnish to the Central Government, 
the Reserve Bank or any banking company or such other financial institution 
as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, credit 
information or other information.”.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of 
new section 9A. 
 
Incidental 
powers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of 
new section 
13A. 
 
Credit 
information. 

4 
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962 was enacted 
to provide for the incorporation and regulation of the National Co -operative 
Development Corporation for planning, and promoting programmes, through 
co-operative societies, fo r the production, processing, marketing, storage, export 
and import of agricultural produce, foodstuffs, industrial goods, livestock and 
certain other commodities and services and for matters connected therewith.  
2. The Act was amended in the years 1973, 1974 and 2002 to diversify the
sources of funds of the Corporation, expand the scope of its activities, enable direct 
financing of eligible co-operative societies and include notified services within its 
mandate. The statutory framework continues to envisage financial assistance either 
through State Governments or directly to registered co-operative societies. 
3. The co-operative sector has expanded and diversified considerably in recent
years. Statutory bodies, State Government agencies and other specialis ed entities 
are increasingly engaged in providing infrastructure, technology, processing, 
marketing, financial and other services for the development of co-operatives. Since 
such entities may not be registered as co -operative societies, the Corporation is 
presently unable to finance them directly, even where their activities are intended to 
benefit the co -operative sector. Consequently, such proposals are required to be 
routed through State Governments or co-operative societies, resulting in procedural 
delays and limited uptake. 
4. The establishment of a separate Ministry of Cooperation in July, 2021 and
the initiatives undertaken by the Central Government in furtherance of the vision of 
“Sahakar se Samriddhi” have substantially enhanced the role of the Corporation in 
co-operative development.  
5. In view of the expanding requirements of the co -operative sector, it is
considered necessary to broaden the mandate of the Corporation from planning and 
promoting programmes through co -operative societies to plan an d promote 
programmes for co-operative development. It is proposed to enable the Corporation 
to provide loans and grants directly to co-operative societies or any entity engaged 
in co -operative development to the extent such funds are used for co -operative 
societies, subject to furnishing security as may be required by the Corporation. The 
National Co-operative Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2026, provides 
for the Corporation to participate in the share capital of any co -operatives or any 
entity e ngaged in co -operative development, with the approval of the Central 
Government. The co-operative societies shall continue to remain the primary 
beneficiaries, while the proposed Bill widens the institutional channels through 
which assistance may reach and strengthen the co-operative sector. 
6. Further, the National Co-operative Development Corporation (Amendment)
Bill, 2026, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:— 
(a) to expand the definition of “foodstuffs” to include any other food
items as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(b) to remove the geographical restriction applicable to industrial goods
so as to enable assistance for such activities irrespective of their location; 
(c) to update certain statutory references and omit obsolete provisions
relating to institutions and frameworks which are no longer in existence; 
(d) to confer upon the Corporation such incidental powers as may be
necessary for the effective discharge of its functions; 
(e) to enable the Corporation to collect and furnish credit information or
other information to specified authorities and financial institutions for the 
efficient discharge of its functions; and 

5 
 
  (f) to enable greater flexibility and legal clarity to the Corporation, 
facilitate timely and direct financial assistance for co -operative development 
and to respond effectively to the emerging and diversified requirements of the 
co-operative sector. 
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.  
 
 
NEW DELHI ;             AMIT SHAH. 
The 7th August, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The National Co -operative Development Corporation (Amendment) 
Bill, 2026, if enacted would not involve any expenditure either recurring or      
non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India. 

8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 of 1964. 
 
 
1 of 1956. 
 
 
7 of 1913. 
 
 
 
 
2 of 1912. 
 
51 of 1984. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1970. 
 
40 of 1980. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION       
ACT, 1962 
  (26 OF 1962)  
*   *   *   *   * 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
*   *   *   *   * 
(aba) “Central financing institution” means Industrial Development 
Bank of India established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Industrial           
Development Bank of India Act, 1964 or the Industrial Finance Corporation 
of India Limited, a company formed and registered under the             
Companies Act, 1956, or the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of 
India Limited, a Company formed and registered under the Indian 
Companies Act, 1913; 
*   *   *   *   * 
(c) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be 
registered under the Co -operative Societie s Act, 1912 or under the        
Multi-State Co -operative Societies Act, 1984 or under any other law with 
respect to co -operative societies for the time being in force in any State, 
which is engaged in any of the activities specified in  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 9 and includes a Co-operative Land Development Bank, by whatever 
name called; 
*   *   *   *   * 
(da) “foodstuffs”, include— 
*   *   *   *   * 
(viii) vegetables; 
*   *   *   *   * 
(dba) “industrial goods” means the products of industrial co-operatives 
or cottage and village industries or products of allied industries in the rural 
area and includes any handicrafts or rural crafts; 
*   *   *   *   * 
(dd) “nationalised bank” means a corresponding new bank constituted 
under section 3 of the Ba nking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970 or under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980; 
*   *   *   *   * 
2A. Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force, or any 
functionary not in existence, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall , in relation 
to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to 
the corresponding functionary in existence, in that State. 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
3. (1) *   *   *   *   * 
(4) The General Council shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
*   *   *   *   * 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Construction of 
references to any 
law not in force 
or any 
functionary not 
in existence in 
the State of 
Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
 
Establishment of 
the National  
Co-operative 
Development 
Corporation. 
 
 
7 

8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions of 
Corporation. 
 (vii) one member to be nominated by the Central Government from 
amongst the chairmen of one of the Central financing institutions, ex officio; 
*   *   *   *   * 
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the Corporation 
shall be to plan, pr omote and finance programmes, through co-operative societies, 
for— 
(a) the production, processing, marketing, storage, export and import 
of agricultural produce, foodstuffs, poultry feed and notified commodities; 
*   *   *   *   * 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provision, the Corporation may— 
*   *   *   *   * 
(b) provide funds to State Governments for financing co -operative 
societies for the purchase of agricultural produce, foodstuffs livestock , 
poultry feed, industrial goods, notified commodities and notified services on 
behalf of the Central Government; 
*   *   *   *   * 
  
 

  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation) 
 
 
  
 