As.

“Fe-er INTRODUCED ए Lox SABHA

Bill_No_ 156 of 1991

> ‘THE CANCELLATION OF GENERAL ELECTIONS IN PUNJAB
BILL, 199

a
BILL

to cancel certain notifications calling for general elections in relation
to the State of Punjab.

Be it, enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as-follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Cancellation of General Elections in short
Punjab Act, 1991. title.

5 2 The notification No. 5. 0. 268(E), dated the 19th April, 1991 issued Goong.
हे by the President under sub-section (2) of section 14 of the Representation tion of
las0r1951. of the People Act, 1951 in so far as it relates to the State of Punjab and certain
the not‘fication No. Elec-91-R: 4100, dated the 19th April, 1991 issued by —_motifica-
the Governor of the State of Punjab under sub-section (2) of section 15 a, a
10 of the said Act shall, on the commencement of this Act, stand cancelled, °
and upon such cancellation— Punjab.

(a) every deposit made under section 34 of the said Act in
relation to general elections called by the said notifications shall be
returned to the person making it or his legal representative; and

3 15 (b) भा the proceedings with reference to the said elections shall
be commenced anew in all respects as if for new elections under
the said Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Elections to the Tenth Lok Sabha and to certain State Assemblies ;
been announced in April last. However, the Election Commission, after
taking into account all relevant facts and the prevailing circumstances
in the State of Punjab and having been satisfied that it was not possible
to hold fair and free poll in that State on ‘the scheduled date, namely,
the 22nd June, 1991 (which itself was an extended date), extended the
time for the completion of elections in that State till the 30th September
of this year.

2. The terrorist activities in that State are on the increase and after
the announcement of elections large scale killings and massacre of
innocent people had taken place. Many candidates have also been
murdered necessitating the countermanding of elections in various
constituencies in the State. In view of this, long-term security arrange-
ments for the safety of candidates contesting the elections have become
imperative. It is becoming extremely difficult to make such arrangements
for ’a long period by deploying para-military forces who are already
under great strain as they had been sent to that State after they had
completed strenugus election duty in other States. In view of all the
aforesaid circumstances and difficulties and also to guard against further
loss of lives of the candidates and other innocent persons, it has become
necessary to cancel the notifications calling for general elections in the
State of Punjab for the present, Elections shall be held as soon as
proper arrangements are made.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Devut; K. VIJAYA BHASKARA REDDY.
The 6th September, 1991.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to cancel certain notifications calling for general elections in relation to
the State of Punjab.

re 8

(Shri K. Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy, Minister of Law,

Justice and Company
Affairs.)