BUI No.· 157 .~ 1990 
• 
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990 
Ii 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first. Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be !:alled the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1990. title. 
2. In article 356 of the Conshtution. in clause (4), in the third pro-
VISO, for the words "three years nnd six months", the words "four years" 
shall be substituted. 
Ament!-
ment ·o~ 
flrtlc1e 
356. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under clause (4) of article 356 of the Constitution. no Proclama-
tion issued under that article and approved by both the Houses or Parlia-
ment shall remain in force {'Or more than three years. However, under 
clause (5) of the said article, a resolution approving the continuance in 
force of a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of that article beyond 
a period of one year cannot be passed by either House of Parliament 
unless the two conditions relating to a Proclamation of Emergency 
being in operation in t.he whole or any part of the State and the certi-
ficate by the Election Commission that the continuation of the Procla-
mation issued under clause (1) is necessary on account of difficulties in 
holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State as 
specified in that clause are met. The three year period in the case of 
Proclamation issued on 11th May. 1987 w:th respect to the State of 
Punjab was extended to three years and six months by the Constitution 
(Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990 and clause (5) of article 356 was 
also suitably amended by that Act in the expectation that it would be 
possible to hold elections to the Lt>gislative Assembly of that State. The 
prevailing circumstan~es in the State. however. still do not. hold out 
prospects for free and peaceful elections to the State Legislative 
Assembly. Clause (4) of article 356 of the ConstituUon is, therefor~, 
proposed to be amen~ed ~o as to facilitate the extension of the said 
Proclamation up to a total period of four years in relation to .the State 
of I'unjab. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
MUFTI MOHAMMED SAYEED. 
I 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM 1 HE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
'" '" '" '" '" 
356. (1) '" '" '" '" '" 
(4) A Proclamation so apprcved shall, unless revoked, cease to 
operate on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of issue 
of the Proclamation: 
Provided that if and so often as a re~olution approving the continu-
ance in force of such <l Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parlia-
ment, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a 
further period of six montha from the date on which under this clause 
it would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such Proclamation 
shall in any case remain in force for more than three Yl'ars: 
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People 
takes place during any such period of six months and a resolution approv-
ing the continuance in force of such :Froclamation has been passed by the 
Council of States, but no l'esolutioa ~th respect to the continuance in 
force of such Prorlamation has been passed by the House of the PeopJe 
during the said perIbd, tl\e'~l~t!tm shall cease to· operate at the 
expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the 
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of 
the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the continuance in 
force of the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the 
People: 
Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation isaued under 
tJa1.lS8 ·f1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of 
Punjab the reference in the fll"st proviso to this clause t.o "three years" , ths" shall be construed as a reference to "three years and six mon . 
• • • • • 
Provisions 
in case of 
failure of 
constitu-
tional 
machi· 
nery in 
States. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
.". , , . ,';' 
(Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed; Minister of Home Affairs.) 