Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE PROVISION OF UNINTERRUPTED POWER SUPPLY TO INDUSTRIES IN
BACKWARD AREAS BILL, 2019
By
SHRIMA TI RAMA DEVI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for uninterrupted power supply to the industrial units operating in the
industrially backward areas of the country by the Central Government to ensure the
overall industrial development of such areas and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Provision of Uninterrupted Power Supply to Industries
in Backward Areas Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a backward State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "backward area" means an area notified by the appropriate Government
under section 3, which does not have the requisite industries proportionate to the size
and population of the area;
Bill No. 157 of  2019
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "industry" means an industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Electricity Act, 2003 shall have the meaning assigned to them in that Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall, within six months of the commencement of this
Act, notify the backward areas within its jurisdiction in such manner as may be provided.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide uninterrupted power supply to the
industrial units operating within the territorial jurisdiction of a notified backward area in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may, if it deems
necessary so to do invite and promote private sector in establishing power generating units
exclusively for the industrial sector in the notified backward areas.
5. The appropriate Government shall establish such number of new electricity
generating stations as it may deem necessary, from time to time, exclusively for providing
uninterrupted power to the industrial units operating within its territorial jurisdiction.
6. The Central Government shall, from time to time, carry out investigations and collect
and record the data concerning the generation, distribution and utilisation of power throughout
the country meant for the industrial sector and submit an annual report, in such form and in
such manner as may be prescribed and cause the report to be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is received by him.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide, from time to time, adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive seesions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall  thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Central
Government
to carry out
investigation
and collect
data about the
power
availability to
Industries in
the country.
Appropriate
Government
to notify
Backward
Areas.
Apppropriate
Government
to maintain
uninterrupted
power supply
of Industries.
Appropriate
Government
to establish
new
generating
stations
exclusively
for the
Industries.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
Savings.
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
36 of 2003.
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Industries are the backbone of every economy and the development of a country
depends upon the development of its industries. A strong economy requires good industrial
base. A developing country like ours needs a very solid industrial base in the modern
globalisation period to face the stiff competition in the world market. Apart from the national
level, industries are very vital at the State level also in a federal polity like ours to have a
balance at the State and National level. But at present in our country some States are industrially
backward. Take for instance the States of Bihar and Jharkhand and which having 40 per cent
of the country's wealth but industrially it is the most backward area of the Union. Such
backward States need rapid industrialisation but for a good industrial base one requires
infrastructure like electricity, raw material, latest technology, trained technicians, cheap labour
etc. apart from all round dedication for growth. But in our country unfortunately the basic
requirement like power is not available in abundance which is hampering industrial growth.
For instance the overall power generation is short due to poor performance of all the regions
of the country during the period. The situation is more alarming in industrially backward
areas like Bihar, Jharkhand and North-Eastern States. Apart from poor performance and less
utilisation of installed capacity by State Electricity Boards whatever energy is generated,
major share of it is consumed by domestic and agriculture sectors. The Industrial Sector is
always left to end itself. So in the absence of uninterrupted electricity supply a number of
industrial units have to close down in the recent past. For example hundreds of Electric Arc
furnaces which require uninterrupted electricity supply have been closed down in various
parts of the country. It has left thousands of workers jobless and affected the production
targets. Similar was the fate of other industries also.
According to Reserve Bank of India report as at the end of March 1991 there were
223809 sick/weak industries, both SSI and non-SSI with outstanding Bank credit of
Rs. 10767.82 crores and majority of them were in backward States. Shortage of power was one
of the reasons for the sickness/weakness of these industries. As such we have to give top-
most priority to electricity generation for the survival and development of our industries
particularly in the industrially backward State like Bihar etc. Hence it is proposed that it
should be made obligatory for the Central Government to maintain uninterrupted power
supply to the Industrial units of the country in general and of backward areas in particular.
For this purpose the Government may involve the private sector and also establish power
stations exclusively for the industrial sector in such States. The Central Government should
also make adequate funds available for this purpose.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMA  DEVI
June 26, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide uninterrupted
power supply to the industrial units operating in notified backward areas. Clause 5 provides
that the appropriate Government shall establish new electricity generating stations within its
territorial jurisdiction. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two
thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of  a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for uninterrupted power supply to the industrial units operating in the
industrially backward areas of the country by the Central Government to ensure the
overall industrial development of such areas and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Rama Devi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1186LS(S3)—09-07-2019.