As INTRODUCED IN La!c: SABKA ON 
~ \) I ''l~ 
Bill No. 157 of 1_ 
l'HE SREE CHI'l'RA TIRUNAL INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL SCIENCES 
AND TECHNOLOGY, TRIVANDRUM, BILL, 1980 
ARRA!,GEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
~. Declaration of the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society 
for Advanced Studies in Special'ties, Trivandl'um, as an insti-
tution of national importance. 
3. Definitions. 
4. Incorporation of Institute. 
5. Composition of Institute. 
6. Term of ohlce of and vacancies among members. 
7. President o! Institute. 
8. Allowances of President and members. 
~. MeetIngs of Institute. 
10. Governing Body and other committees of In5ij~:tte. 
11. Staff of Institute. 
12. Objects of Institute. 
13. Functions of Institute. 
14. Vesting of property. 
15. Payment to Institute. 
16. Fund of Institute. 
17. Budget of. Institute. 
18. Accounts and audit. 
19. Annual r€l:;:>ort. 
20. Pension and provident funds. 
~1. Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute. 
:l:l. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc. 
23. Grant of medical degrees, diplomas, etc., by institute. 
24. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Institute. 
:l5. Control by Central Government. 
:l6. Uisputes between Institute and Central Government. 
27. Returns and information. 
ZIt Transfer of service of existing employees. 
29. Continuance of facilities at Institute. 
30. power to remove difticultieS. 
31. power w make rules. 
32. power to make regulations. . . 
ul d regulations to b. laid be·fol'e ParUameat. 33. 1\ ell an 

8m N~< 157 ., lW 
t', , , ''Pi 
THE SltEE, ~}{rT~"TIRUNAL iNSTI,Tl!~ ~R MEDICAL SC&NCES 
AND tftHNOLOGY, TRlV ANDRUM, BtU, iWti 
A 
BILL 
to declClr8 th~ Stef C'hih'C Ttruncl Midieal CenWi soeiefij 1M AiiNneii 
Studjes in Spe~8; Trivcandr1cm. if1j the $ICe, of, Keowta;to b. an 
institution, C?f. national importcUJ,C8and to provide fOT its incorporCl-
tio~ and matters connected thertt"ith. 
• ".4 
BE, it. en~t~ by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
Jf Indi~ as follows:-
I l '", ~ - . ',' • ~ •. 
1, (1) This Act may be called the Sree ,C~tra T~nalrl~tlt.te for ~ 
Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum, Act, 1980. UU .... C~. 
" ,.',~. 
(Z) It sb~ cp,me into force on such, ,~a~ .. th~, Central Government 
by notification in the Offtela} Gazette, appoint. may, 

DeoIara-
UDIlof 
the Sret 
Chitra 
Tirunal 
Medical 
Centre 
Soclet7 
forAcl-
vance4 
StudleIlr. 
Speclall-
tl-. 'l'd-
vaDdrum, 
a miDI-
tttution 
ofutlonal 
Import-
.... 
Defini-
tiono! 
tion.s. 
lDcorpo-
.. aUono! 
Wtitute. 
Campoli-
etan of 
lftlUtute. 
2 
Z. Whereas the objects of the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre 
Society for Advanced Studies in Specialities, Trivandrwn, in the State 
of Kerala, are such as to make the institution one of national importance, 
it is hereby declared that the institution, known as the Sree Chitn 
Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced Studies in Specialities, 5 
Trivandrum, is an institution of national importance. 
3. In 4jUs Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Governing Body; 
(b) "Director" means the Director of the Institute; 
(c) "Fund" means the Fund of the Institute referred to in sec- 1 \) 
tion 16; 
(d) "Governing Body" means the Governing Body o£ the 
Institute; 
(e) "Institute" means the institution known as the Sree Chitra 
Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivancirum, IS 
incorporated under this Act; 
<f) "member" means a member of the Instibte; 
(g) "President" means the President of the Institute; 
(h) "regulation" means a regulation made by the Institute; 
(i) "ru1e" means a ru1e made by the Central Government. 20 
4. D6.. b,_Cbitta~ Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced 
Studies in ~pecialities.Trivandrum,is. hereby constituted a body c011J!O-
rate by tbe namt:!. of Sre~ Chitrao Tirun~ .Institute for .Medical $clences 
and Technology, Trlvahdrum. ~>nd as' su~h body corporate, it shall have 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the pro- 25 
visions of this Act. to acquire. hold and dispose of property and to con-
tract; ,and shall; by that name, sue 'and be sued. 
5. !!"he Institute sball~nsist of ~·CQllow.~ JYlemben, namely:-
(a) the ·Vice.Chancellor of the Kerala University, e:e ~. 
(b) the Director-General of Healih Servi~es Goverrdn.ent ot 30 
India, ex otJicio; .. '. \ .... ~ , , 
(c) the Director, ex officiO; 
(d)' 'foul' memb~rs to hI! nort;inatedby the Central Govertiment , .. 
to represent respectively the Departments or, as the case my be,:1: 
,.: .. :."Ministrles of- that Government dealing w1~h Science and T~o- ~S 
, " ; lOgy, Healthl,Fina~e and Education';" " . I ~ 
., '(r ,\ (e) two'members tobe nominated by the Govern..ment 'oftbe' 
State of Kvrala to represent relilpectively the Departments or, II 
.. CaM' mity 'be;"Ministrles of thilt Goverftl'n~nt dealing Wttb :Plan';' \ 
ning, Science and Tec!hnology' and Health:' 04C 

3 
U) three scientiiU of whGm two shall be medieal scientist. an4 
Qoe &hall. be a lOCial acientist, to be nominated by the Cenlral Gov-
ernment 1n the manner prescribed by rules; 
(g) three scientists representing en~ineering and technology to 
5 be nomlnated by the Central Government in the manner prescribed 
by rules; 
. (h). the Head of the Biomedical Technology Wing of the Institute, 
ex offielD; 
(i) three representatives of the medical far:-nlties of Indian Uni-
10 versities to be nominated by the Central Government in the manner· 
prescribed by rules; and 
(j) three members of Parliament of whom two shaH be elected 
from among themselves by the members o.f the House of the People 
and one from among themselves by the members of the COWlcil of 
IS States. 
6. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this secti')fi, the tenn of office d Tenn of 
a member shall be five ye~'r5 from the date of his nomination or election. omce of 
and va-
(2) The term of office of a member elected under clause (j) of section 
5 shall come to :m enn ,is soon as he ceases to be a member of the House 
20 from which he W:1S elected. 
(3)' The term of office of an ex-offico member shall continue so long 
as he holds the office by virtue of which he is such a member. 
4) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fin a 
casual vacancy shall continue for 'the remainder of the term of the mem-
25 ber in whose place he is nominated or elected. 
(5) An outgoing member other than a member elected under clause (j) 
of section 5 shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, conti. 
nue in office until another person is nominated as a member in his place. 
(6) An outfloin~ memher shlill be eligible for re-nomination or re-
30 election, -, 
35 
(7) A member may resilnl his office by writing under his hand address· 
l
ed to the Central Government but he shall continue in office until bf8 
resignation is accepted by that Government, 
(8) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as 
may be prescribed by rules. 
7 (1) There shall be a President of the Institute who shall be nomi-
nate~ by the Central Government ffom among the members other,th.a:, 
the Director. 
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discbarge such tunc .. 
. lal'd down in this A('t or as may be prescribed by rules or 
4 tIOns as are o . )'egulatJOns, 
P 'd nt ~nd other members shall receive such allowances, if &.The res! e , 1· 
h Institute RS may be prescribed by r.u el'l. nnv. from t e 
,canciel 
amon, 
memberL 

MeetIqJ 
of 
IJWtItute. 
Staft of 
IDltitute. 
0\ 
t. The tnstitute thall h()ld its ftrat meeuttg 'at such time aII4. plate u 
may be appointed by the Central Government and~aI1 ob8lhe ..... 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of bustneal at the tnt 
meeting as may be laid down by that Governmentj and therealterthe 
InstitUte shall meet at such times and places and observe such ruleI of S 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetinp u 
may be prescribed by regulations. 
10. (1) There shall be a Governing Body of the Institute which lball 
be constituted by the Institute in such manner as may be prescribed by 
regulations: 10 
Provided that the number of persons who are not membera of the 
Institute shall not exceed one-third of the total membership of the 
Governing Body. 
(2) The Governing Body shall be the Executive Committee of the lna-, 
titute and shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as the I 5 
lDstitute may, by regulations made in this behalf, confer or impose upon 
it. 
(3) The President shall be the Chairman of the Governing Body and 
as Chairman thereof shall exercise such powers and discharge IUCh 
functions as may be ?rescribed by regulations. 20 
(4) The procedure to be followed in the exercise of it9 powers an(! 
discharge of its functions by the Governing Body, and the term of otDce 
of, and the manner of fl11in~ vacancies among, the members of the 
Governing Body shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations. 
(5) Subject to such control and restrictions as m,y be prescrlbed bv Z5 
rules, the Institute may constitute as many standing committees and as 
many ad hoc committee~ ::Ie; it think"; fit for f>'Xf>t'c;~in!! anv power or dis-
charging any function of the Tm;titute or for inquiring into, or reporting 
or advising upon, any matter which the Institute may refer to them. 
(6) The Chairmar. and members of the Governing Body and Chairman 30 
and members of a standin!! committee or an ad hoc committee thanre-
ceive such allowances. if any, as may be prescribed by regulations. 
11. (1) There sh"n h(> ;:'I ('hipf executive officer of the Institute who 
shall be designated as the Director of the Institute and shall, IUbject to 
such rules as may be made in this behalf, be appointed by the Instttutt: 35 
Provided that the first Director of the Institute shall be appointed by 
the Central Government. 
(2) The DIrector shall act as the Secretary to the Institut~ as welJ as 
the Governing Body. 
(3) The Director shall exercise such powers and (Hschar~e such fw1~ 40 
tion!'! as Dtay be prescribed bv rellulations or as may be dele ~ated to him 
b'l the Institute or the President or by the Governing Body or the cha1r~ 
man. 
, I ' 
., 
. (4) Subject to such rulee; as may be made in this behalf. the Institute 
may appoint such number of other officers and employef'S as may be 4~ 
'n~sary for the exercise of fts powers and dtschar~e of its functions and 
~r determine the designations and grades of such other officers and em-
p1eyees. 

5 
(5) Subject to such rules as may be made in thia bebalf, the Dil'ector 
and o~;r oftlcers and employees of the Institute Rhall be entitled 'to such 
~alary and allowances and shall be gavel-ned by SUCh conditions of service 
~ respect of leave, p~Q.sion, gratuity, provident fund and other matters 
5 as may be prescribed by' regulations made in this behalf. 
10 
12. Tbe oQjects of the In~titute shall be-. , 
(a) to promote biomedical engineering and technology; 
Objects of 
Institute. 
(b) to I?rovide and demonstrate high standards of R'tit$t care in . 
ad.vanced medical speciaUties; and : ,",;'" 
(c) to develop post-graduate training progratmne8 attn", Qighest 
quality in advanced medical specialities and biomedical engineering 
and technology. 
13. With a view to the promotion of the objects specUlectm secti"n 12, ""etlons 
I 5 the Institute may- .'In.t!-
20 
(a) provide for post-graduate ·.chilli in tPe sci~c~ . Qt. modem 
medicine and other allied sciences, including physical and biological 
sciences; 
(b) provide facilities for research in the various branches oJ. SUQ):k 
sciences; 
(c) conduct experiments in integrated methods of post-graduate 
medical and technological educat'on in order tr- arrive at satisfactory 
standards of such education; 
(d) prescribe courses and curricula for post-graduate studies; 
tute. 
25 (e) provide for post-graduate teaching and training in biomedical 
30 
35 
scien.ces and technology; 
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, establish and maintain-
(i) one or more well equipped hospitals, and 
(ii) one or more centres for research and development in 
biomedical technology; 
(g) hold examinations and grant such degrees, dipl~mas ~~:.:., 
th demic distinctions and titles in pOit~aduate medical, educa-o er aea b 1 'd do . 'th gu1 t' , tion and biomedical technology a~ may e al wn m ,~J'e '. a IOns, 
(h) institute and appoint persons to professorships, readership', 
hi nd posts of any description in accordance with the lecturers ps a 
regulations; 
n receive grants from the Governments and gittIJ, dQnations, 
~ti ns bequests and transfers of properties, both mo~le BJld 
ben . bOI 'from donors benefactors, testators or tr,qll"~rs, 811 
imJnova e, ' 
the ena may be; 

V..., 
otpro-
per.,. 
Pundof 
InItltute. 
.. 
6 
(f) deal with any property belODging to, or veste<iin, ,the Insti-
tute in any manner which is considered necessary for promotiDg the 
objects specified tn section 12; 
(k) demand ~ltd reeeive such fees and other charges as tnay be 
prescribed by regulations; and ' 5 
(1) do all other acts and things as may be necesSary to further 
the objecb> specified in section 12. 
U. All properties which had vested In the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medi-
cal Centre Soc:i ;.:ty tor Advanced Studies in Specialitie., Trivandrum, im-
mediately bella 2 the commencement of this Act, shall, on and from such 10 
,commencement, vest in the Institute. " 
15. The Central Gov£mment may, aiter due appropriation IIlade by 
ParliaDa .. t by law ia iliis behall, pay to the Institute .. eaell financial 
year such sums of money anu in such manner as may be CODBiclwed 
necessary by that Govemment for the exercise of its powers and dil- 15 
eharge of its faetiOllI under this Act. 
16. (1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited-
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government and the 
Government of Kerala; 
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute; 
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, 
donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; and 
(d) aLl moneys received by the lnstitt.tte in any other manner or 
from any other source. 
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks z5 
or invested in such manner as the Institute may, with the approval of the 
Central Government, decide. 
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the 
Institute including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions under section 13. 30 
17. The Institute shall prepare, in such form and at such time every 
year, as may be prescribed by rules, a budget in respect of the financial 
year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Institute and shall forward 'to the Central Government IIUCh number of 
copies thereof as may be prescribed by rules. 
18. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other rele-
vant records and prepare an annual statement of acc<Nnts including the 
l!Ialance-sheet in such form as the Central Government may, by rules, 
prescribe, and in accord8.DCe with such general directions as,may be issued 
by that Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- 40 
General of India. 

7 
,. (2)~e accounts of the Institute shaLl be audited by the Comptro11et 
and At1:ditor-General of Iildia and any expenditure incurred by him in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
5 . (3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and allY person ap-
pomted by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Insti-
tute shall have the same rights, privileges and authorfty in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in pati;icWar, 
10 shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, c0nnect-
ed vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the o1Bcea 
of the Institute as well as' of the institutions established and maintained 
by it. 
(4) The accounts of the Institute as cer'tified by the Comptroller and 
J 5 Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in tl.i8 
behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded arumal-
ly to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same 
to be laid before both Houses of Panliament. 
19. The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities 
20 during that year and submit the report to 'the Central Government in 
such form and on or befo,re such date as may be prescribed. by rules and 
a copy of the report shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, 
before both Houses of Parliament. 
20. (1) Tile Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its ofBc;:ers, 
25 teachers and oti1.er employees in such manner and subject to such con~­
tioDS. as may be prescribed by regulations, such pension and provident 
funds as it may deem. fit. 
(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been conStituted, 
~. Central Government may declare that t~e ~rovisions of the Provident 
30 Funds Act, 1925, shall 8Qply to such fund as If 'It were a Government Pro-
vident Fund. 
All d and decisions of the Institu'te shall be autheR.ticated by Z1 or ers . : of the President or any other member authoriaed by tbe 
the SIgnature ther' trumenta shall be aultbenti",ted Institute in this behalf, and all 0 IDS . 
• ..III the Director or any other officer of the Institute autbo--35 by the SIgnature UJ. 
rised in like manner in this behalf. 
. taken by the Institute, G<>verning Body 
21. No act done or P=~rn!uttee 'Under this Act shall be 'lue&tioned 
fir' any standing or CI4 exiStence of any vacancy in, or defect in the 
on iDe· ground merely o~ t.be ~verning Body or such standing or ad hoc 
~ coMtitution of, the Institute, 
~. 
Autbentt. 
caUoDof 
ora.. 
1Ad_· 
trwMDta 
of 
IDltltute. 
Acta .. 
~ m,.JUJt 
to be 
iDvdda-
teclbJ' 
v.c·D ......, 
.. 

Grant of 
medical 
degrees. 
diplomu, 
etc., by 
Institute. 
Recogni-
tion of 
medical 
qualiftca-
tiOllS 
granted by 
Institute. 
Control 
by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Disputes 
between 
Institute 
and 
Cen~ 
GoVeln.. 
ment. 
Returns 
andinfor. 
matton. 
~er 
of .... 
otexiatin, 
emnl()yeea. 
.' " 
Continu-
ance 
of ta .. 'i1i-
tlea" 
l~o 
8 
0:0· '23. NotwithStanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
peing in °force, the Institute Sha1l have power to grant medical decree8, 
aiplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act. 
~ Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical Council 
Act, 1956, the medical degrees and diplomas granted by the I~titute S 112 et 1 •• 
under this Act shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes 
of tbRJ; Act and shall be deemed to be included in the First Schedule to 
that Act. 
~ ;: 
25. The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued to 
it from time to time by the Centra.! Government for the efticient adminls- J 0 
tratiOD of this Acto 
26. If 111, or in connection with, the erercise of its powers and discharge 
of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any dispute arises between 
the Institute and the Central Government, the decision of the Central 
Government on such dispute shall be final. 15 
21. The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, 
returns and other information as that Government may require from 
time to time. 
28. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person who was em-
ployed in the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced 20 
Studies in Specialities, Trivandrum, immediately before the commence-
ment of this Act shall, on and from such commencement, become an em-
ployee of the Institute and shall hold his office or service therein by the 
same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to leave, pen .... 25 
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the 
same on the date of commencement of this Act if this Act had not .~ 
passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is 
terminated or until such tennure, remuneration and terms and conditions 
are duly altered by reg1.llations: 30 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditiODl of 
service of any such person shall not be altered to his disadvantage with-
out the previous approval of the Central Government. 
29. The Institute shall continue to provide facilities to the Gonm-
ment aDd people of the state .f Kerala and the Central Government ad 3S 
s-.ch facilities shall not, in any respect, be less fav01l1'8We to the .... 
Governments and people than what were being provided to them Won 
the Commencement of this An· an' shalt be DIIlde .vaila'bie for .... 
periocl and. upon °such° tenns aDd conditio'" (Including th_ reJatta. to 
any contributions to be made for the provision of such f.eWti_) • IIIa7 40 
be nominated by the Central Government in the manner PftIICI'IIIed 
Kerat. and the Central Government. 

9 
•. If qy diIlc~ty arises in giving eftect to the provisions of this A.,ct, 
b Central Government may, within a period of.three years from··· the 
commencement of this Act, by order published in the OfDcial Gazette, 
make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent with the 
S provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for 
remOving the difficulty, . 
31, (1) The Central Government, after consultation with the Institute, 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Act: 
10 PrOvided. that consUltation with the Institute shall 'not be·nece'ssary' 
on the first occasion of the making o£ rules under this section, but the 
Central Government shall take into conSideration any suggestions which 
the Institute may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after 
they are made" 
15 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of' t~~ tore. 
ICing power, slreh rules may provide for all or any of the folloWiog 
matters, namely:-
(G) the manner of nomination of members under clauses (I), 
(g) and (i) of section 5; 
20 (b) the manner of filling of vacancies among members under 
25 
35 
section 6; 
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by 
the President under sub-section (2) of section 7; 
(d) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the President and other 
inembers under section 8; 
(e) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of 
standing and ad hoc committees under sub-section (5) of section 10; 
<f) the appointment of the Director under sub-section (1) of 
section 11; 
(g) the number of officers and employees that may be appointed 
by the Institute and the manner of such appointment under sub-
section (4) of section 11; 
(h) the Sialaries and allowances to be paid to the Director 'and 
other officers and employees of the Institute under sub.lleetion (5) 
of section 11; . 
(i) the form in whicl., and the time at which, the budget 'shall 
be prepared by the Institute and the number of copies thereof to be 
forwarded to the Central Government under section 17; 
(") the form in which an annual statement of accounts includ-
ing t~e balance--sheet shall be prepared by the Institute under sub-
section (1) of section 18; 
(k) the form in which and the date befor~ which, the report of 
t' "tl"es of the Institute shall be submitted to the Central Gov-
~~M ' 
ernment under section 19; 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
P~~.· 
make .. 
~i." 

POwtr. ........ 
IUIM"AI. 
10 
(I) the form and manner in whieh 1'eporta,. retUrbi and., o~r, 
inAIInation are to be furnished by the 'Institute to ' the Centfil 
GoYemment under section 27; . 
(m) any other matter which has to be or maybe prescribed 'by: 
rules. S 
31. (1) The Institute may, with the previous approval of the CIentI;~1 
Government, make regulations consistent with this Aet and tha .. ruleI 
made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without pre--
judice to the generality ot this power, such regulations may provide'far-
(a.) the powers and functions to be exercised and dilchargedby'IO 
the President under Bub·section (2) of section 7; 
(b) the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first 
meeting, of the Institute. under section 9, the time and place wbere 
such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meet-
ings and the number of members necessary to form a quorum; 15 
(c) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and stand· 
ing and ad hoc committees under section 10, the term of oftiae of, 
and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of, the Gov-
erning Body and standing and ad hoc committees; 
(d) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by 2C 
the Governing Body and the Chairman under sub-sections (2) and 
(3) of section 10; 
(e) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairman ,and the 
members of the Governing Body and of standing Rnd ad hoc com· 
mittees under sub-section (6) of section 10; 
(f) the procedure to be followed by the Govert;ling Body and 
standing and ad hoc committees in the conduct of their business, 
exercise of their powers and discharge of their functions under sec· 
tion 10; 
25 
(g) the powers and funct;ons to be exercised and discharged by 30 
tile Director under sub-sect;on (3) of section 11; 
(h) the tenure of· office, salaries and allowances and otber eondi. 
tions of service of the Director and other officers and employees of 
the Inltitute including teachers appointed by the . InstitUte under 
. nHection (5) of section 11; 3S 
(i) the management of the properties of the Institute under 
MCtion 13; 
(1) the degrees, diplomas, and other academic distinctioua ,and 
titles which may be granted by the Institute under clause (g) of 
s~Uool~ ~ 
(I:) the profeSSOTshtps, readerships, lecturershl~ arid otbAf :;Postl 
which may be instituted and persons who may be app'Dihted to such 
professorships, readerships, leclurershlps and other . pOlts under 
atause (h) of section IS; , 
(1) the feeB and other charges whloh may be denianded'aftd re-
ceived by the Institute under clause (1c) of section 13; 45 

s 
II 
~m) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to w1peb 
pensIon and provident funds may be constituted for the benefit of 
offlcers, teachers and other employees of the Institute under suI> 
section (1) of section 20; 
(n) matters relating' to te~ure o£ oftlce, r'e~~e'~~tion and terms 
• IiUld,coaQitio. of "J'~,of the rpenOD8''lefJlrTidlmlJi1 ~.; 
_, ' (o)any 'other ,matter for whichundeithis)!Ac(~rpy1s~pns mal: 
.. ~ trlade by regulations, '. 
I ~-;r ' I ) '. ~t .... -··. ,"I , 
.. (2) 1;io~withatanding anything contaaee (inl_~ien.;(l), ;tile &It 
I 0 ~tions under this ~t .. ha1lbe. made ,\ly the" Caatral .lGoftl'Blllalt; 
and any: regulations so made may . .be . altered tOf.racinded ,..,: ibe lDItiate 
in,eK.eI:cb~ of its power undersub.sec,tion (iJ)," ,l ;: . 
. ;:~! 
33, Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, Rules and 
as soon as may be after it is made . before 'eat!hH()UBe·ittf NUament reeuIatlons 
h'I 't·' '~ ttl .' d f th'rt d hi h be ' to be laid ] 5 WI£: I JS m seSSIOn, lor a 0 a perlo 0 1 Y ays W c may com- before 
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, [liRe! If; 'berore Parlia-
the Jexpiryrolt~ session immed.:ately following t;J:.,'.ell8im W fIhe auoees- ment. 
sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation 
20 should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only jn such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sr. Chltra Tinmal Medical Centre, Trivandrum, was set up as an 
autonomous body in 1974 under the Travancore-Cochin Literary Soeie-
tiel and Charitablct Societies Registration Act, 1955. The Centre is 
engaged in research in mec:tical field, biomedical engineering and 
taclmo1ogy. It is proposed to make the Centre a statutcary .body corporate 
and declare it 88 an inlUtution of national importance under entry M of 
Ltat I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India so that it may 
develop 8S 8 high level institution of medical sciences' and biomedical 
engineering and technology. 
This Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
New Dm.m:; 
The 4th August, 1980. . . C. P. N. SINGH. 
,& 

Clause 15 of the Bill provides fOl' giving grants to the Institute after 
due ap;»roprtatlon made by Parliament by law in thf, behalf. At the 
current leftt of aetivity (ineluddng the facilities to be provided uncler 
clause 29), the recurring annual grant-in-aid by the Centnll GovernmeDt 
to the Institute is estimated to be Rs. 75lakhs per annuin. 
In addition, provision required under plan resources for the ,,.noel 
1979-84, for construction of buildings and other non-recurring items of 
expenditure pertaining to developmental activitiest is estimated at 
Rs. 340 lakhs. 
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure o£ a recurriag or 
non-recurring nature. 
13 

MEMORANDUM ~ ~AR:D LEGISLATION 
, ,,~1~~ ,3,\t oj,;U~. Biij.,~~ws the CeJlk~ 'GowmlDel1tto, make, 
;~tefcon~~ij,on with ~ wtit~~, rules by ~Wication"m:;tbe,OfIcial 
~t~Jq./~ar.ry out. ~rPfO~s ,of tbeAct.,· Tbe\matten~,jn '·lepecX 
..Qf W.hichf\l~J'l~ ,may;'d).~~e aile speeitied.:Ulerei&l. ,Theae IIIMtelw 
relate, in.ter cW4, to the ,manner 'of llonimatioo of ceriaiB members,., the 
Institute, control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of 
~. an~l':"' hoccemmiMees of the Institute, ~C. ,( 
. ~'. , : .... ,'\ . 
+ ',CJ.,au8, .. a;. of ,the'BW ~wen .the IDstit~ to JPake". wi., the 
previous approval of the Central Government, regulatiOl1l, ,cc:malstat 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. The 
'm..-n' iJr'r.pect of Whiolf'Sueh regulations may 'be rnlade are speCified 
therein. These matters relate, in.ter o.lia, to the protJe8itre IDtcortducttng 
business at meetings other than the first meeting of the Institute, the 
manner of constituting the governing body and standing and ad hoc 
committees, powers and funcions of the governing body, and the Chair-
man thereof, etc, 
3. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made 
are matters of administrative detail and procedure and, as such, the 
delegation of legtslative power is of a normal character. 
14 

LOK SABHA 
BILL 
to declare the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced 
Studies in Specialities, Trivandrum, in the State of Kerala, to be an 
institution of national importance and to "rovide for its incorporation 
and matters connected therewith. 
(Shri C. P. N. Sin.gh. 
Minister of StGte in the 
MiniBtry of Defence c:md 
Department of Science and 
Technology.) 