1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 157 of  2016
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR
CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act,
2007, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 2.56 of 2007
5

2
(i) in clause ( h), after the words "sixty years or above", the words "and shall
include, irrespective of age, any elderly person or parent who is unable to operate his
bank account or attend matters relating to his property due to age, disease or disability"
shall be inserted; and
(ii) in clause ( k), for the words "health care", the words "shelter, mental and
physical health care" shall be substituted.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(3A) Notwithstanding anything in sub-sections (1) to ( 3), a senior citizen or
parent shall be entitled to make an application under section 5 against one or more of his
grandchildren if the children of such senior citizen or parent are either dead or themselves
entitled to make an application under section 5 by virtue of sub-section (1).
(3B) The maintenance of parents or grandparents under this section shall be the
obligation of those children who are entitled to receive the benefits of inheritance or
succession under the statutory law or personal law, as the case may be.".
4. In section 17 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"Provided that the senior citizen including parent or grandparent shall have the
right to be represented by a legal representative.".
5. In section 24 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months or fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees or with both", the words "shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment which may extend upto five years or fine which may extend upto one
lakh rupees or with both" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 24.
5
10
15
20

S-3\F\BILL 2016\LS\1147LS
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 was enacted to
provide for more effective provisions for the maintenance and welfare of parents and senior
citizens guaranteed and recognised under the Constitution. However, several thousand
cases of utter neglect or even abandoning of elders by members of family are continuing to
be reported daily.
Just as the children have the right to education and married women have the right to
maintenance, the elderly need a right to be maintained and provided with the basic essentials
of life. The responsibility rests on the children, grandchildren or next of kin of the aged
persons. However, such responsibility should be fixed in accordance with the right of
succession as per personal or other laws applicable to them.
Every old age person needs care and protection and the responsibility should be
casted upon society and Government with fear of punishment in case of failure.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 with a view to—
(a) include any elderly person or parent who is unable to operate his bank account or
attend matters relating to his property due to age, disease or disability within the definition
of ‘senior citizen’ under section 2;
(b) include shelter and physical and mental healthcare within the definition of ‘welfare’
under section 2;
(c) entitle a senior citizen or parent to make an application for maintenance against one
or more of his grandchildren if the children of such senior citizen or parent are either dead or
themselves entitled to make an application for maintenance;
(d) put an obligation on children who are entitled to receive the benefits of inheritance
or succession to maintain their parents or grandparents;
(e) provide a right to the senior citizen including parent or grandparent to be represented
by a legal representative; and
(f) enhance the penalty for abandoning senior citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN
April 22, 2016.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE
OF PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS BILL, 2007
(56 OF 2007)
* * * *
2. (a) * * * *
(h) "senior citizen" means any person being a citizen of India, who has attained the age
of sixty years or above;
* * * *
(k) "welfare" means provision of food, healthcare, recreation centres and other amenities
necessary for the senior citizens.
* * * *
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, no party to a proceeding before a
Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal shall be represented by a legal practitioner.
* * * *
24. Whoever, having the care or protection of senior citizen leaves, such senior citizen
in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning such senior citizen, shall be punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months or fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.
* * * *
Right to legal
representation.
Exposure and
abandonment
of senior
citizen.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1147LS(S3)—02-07-2016.