5 
10 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
THE SUGAR CESS BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
Bill No. 157 of ltSl 
to provide for the imposition of a cess on S'Ugar for the development of 
rugar industry and for matters connected therewith. 
B~ :it enacted by ;parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the 
Republic o't India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sugar Cess Act, 1981. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India; 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and (3) It shall come into force on su(;n date as the Central Government com-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2.. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "occupier", in relation to any sugar factory, means the per-
son who has ultimate control over the affairs at the sugar factory or 
the owner of the sugar factory in case he is not the occupier; 
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(c) "sugar factory" means any premises (including the precincts 
thereof) in any part of which sugar is manufactured by vacuum pan 
process; 
meme-
ment. 
DefIni-
tions. 
15 (d) "sugar" means any form of sugar including crushed sugar 
. or lagar in ~taliHd" or powder form, containing ninety per cent. 
or more ofsuerose and produced by the vacuum pan process and 
includes raw sugar produced by the said process. 

Imposi-
tion of 
cess. 
Crediting 
pro-
ceedsof 
duty to 
Consoli-
dated 
Fund of 
India. 
Power 
to call 
for 
;reports 
and 
returns. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
2 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected as a Cels. for the purposes 
of the Sup!' Development Fund Act, 1981, a duty of excise on all sugar 
produeejd by any sugar factory in India, at such nte not 'exoeedlDr ten 
rupees per quintal of sugar, as the Central Government may, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time: 5 
Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central Government, 
the duty of excise shall be levied and collected at the rate of five rupees 
per quintal of supr. 
a-(2) The duty of excise levied under 8ub-sedion (1) shall be in addition 
to the duty of excise leviable on sugar under the Central Exct.es 10 
and Salt Act, UU, or any other law for the time being in force. 
(3) The duty of excise levied -under sub-section (1) sball be payable 
by the occupier of the sugar factory in which sugar is produced. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excisetf and Salt Act, lMf" and the 
rules made thereunder, including thos~ relating to refunds and exemp- 15 
tions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy 
and collection of the said duty of excise as they apply in relation .to the 
levy and colleetion of the duty of excise on sugar UDder that Act. .. .. 
4. The proceeds o'f the duty of excise levied under section 3 shall be 
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
5. The Central Government may require an occupier of a sugar 
factory to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other 
information in such form and within such period as may be prescribed. 
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Omcial 
20 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. ~5 
--(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality' of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for the form in which and the 
period within which statistical and other information may be furnished 
under section 5. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 30 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
1 of 1944. 
1 of 1944. 
) 
.. , 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions J 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 35 
both Hauses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there- ~ 
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no e1fect, as the 
case may be; so, howe\'er, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 40 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
.- ~ • 1 
Plant and machinery in the various sugar factories, which were 
established more than twenty-five years ago, have almost outlived their 
normal span of life. A large number of these factories are also having 
a crushing capacity of less than 1,250 TCD (Tonnes Crushed per day) 
which is considered to be uneconomic. The factories which are old and 
. are of uneconomic capacity require rehabilitation on a priority basis. 
Many expert bodies have highlighted the need for rehabilitation and 
modernisation in the sugar industry. Besides, in many areas, develop-
ment of sugarcane has not been possible on modem and scientific lines 
for want of the necessary funds. 
2. Measures so far taken, e.g., taking over of management <1f sugar 
factories under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, 
and acquisition of sugar mills by some of the State Governments, could 
only be a partial and ad hoc solution to this problem. 
3. The problem, in fact, needs analysis, in depth, of unitwise maladies 
and co-ordination and supplementing of financial assistance under other 
schemes with suitable meas:ures which would give a unit a chance to 
rehabilitate itself so that, after a period, the assistance could stop and the 
unit would go on its ilndividual efforts. 
4. It is against th.is background that it is proposed to empower the 
Central Government to levy a cess, by way of a duty of excise, on all 
sugar produced by sugar factories at such rate not exceeding ten rupees 
per quintal of sugar as that Government may notJ."fy. For the present 
the cess is proposed to be levied at the rate of five rupees per quintal. 
The cess will only have a marginal effect on the consumer and it will 
help to generate funds (at the rate of five rupees per quintal) of the 
order of thirty to thirtY'"five crore rupees per year. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. Provision is being made 
in the Sugar Development Fund Bill, 1981 for the constitution of a fijnd 
to be known as the Sugar Development Fund and for crediting to the 
said fund the proceeds of the aforementioned cess as reduced by the cost 
df collection. The fund will be applied for the purposes of rehabilitation 
and modernisation of sugar factories and for development of sugarcane 
in the areas in which sugar factories are situated and also for research 
aimed at development of sugar industry. 
NEW DELHI; RAO BIRENDRA SINGH. 
The 8th December, 1981. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Claus& 3 of the Bill seeks to provide fur the levy, as a cess for the 
purposes of the Sugar Development Fund Act, 1981,.of a duty of excise on 
sugar at a rate not exceemng ten rupees per quintal of sugar. However, 
'for the present, the cess is proposed to be levied at the rate of flve 
rupees per quintal and thereby generate funds to the extent of thirty to 
thirty-five crore rupees annually.' The Bill, if enacted, would neceSsitate 
expenditure on collection of the said duty of excise. The cost of conec-
tion is not likely to exceed one per cent. of the proceeds'of the said auty 
of excise and may be of the order of thirty to thirty-five lakh rupees per 
year. 
2. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for carrying out the provisioJlS of the proposed legf6lation. The matters 
with respect to which rules may be made relate to the form in which and 
the period within which statistical and other information may be called 
for and other matters of detail 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
5 

, . LOK SABHA 
• .1 ...... , I· • 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the imposition of a cess on sugar for the developm~t of 
sugar industry and for matters connected therewith. 
(RGo Birendra Singh. Minister of 
Agriculture and Rural Reconstn&c-
tion and Irrigation and MiniBte1' of 
Civil Supplies.) 