5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 157 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  
BILL, 2025
By
Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- Sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.
2.  In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
       (i) In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, the existing entries 10 and 22 shall be 
re-numbered as entries 11 and 23, respectively, and before entry 11 as so re-numbered, 
the following entry shall be inserted, namely:–
 “10. Kudmali.”.
Short title.
Amendment 
of the Eighth 
Schedule.

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Kudmali is a language related to Bengali, Odia and Assamese. Its origin is linked to 
the civilization and culture of the Kudmi community. Kudmali language has its own special 
characteristics which belong to the Aryan language family which is reflected in its phonetic, 
linguistic and grammatical characteristics. It has its own linguistic idioms, proverbs, tune, 
rhythm, melody, various songs and a wide and powerful folk literature. There are basic 
reasons for its separateness. It has a large number of folk songs, folk tales, proverbs and 
riddles. After folk songs, folk tales, folk songs, riddles and proverbs have a place in Kudmali 
folk literature. The imprint of Kudmali is clearly reflected in these folk songs, folk tales and 
proverbs. It is known from the various compositions of these genres that Kudmali literature 
is as rich as it is excellent in terms of emotional beauty. Its literature is more than 2700 years 
old.
Kudmali language is mainly spoken in many states of India (mostly in Jharkhand). 
Mainly in Seraikela Kharsawan, East Singhbhum, Bokaro and Ranchi districts of Jharkhand, 
Mayurbhanj, Balasore, Kendujhar, Jajpur and Sundargarh districts of northern Odisha, and 
south western districts of West Bengal like West Medinipur, Jhargram, Bankura, Purulia and 
North Malda, North Dinajpur, South Dinajpur, Jalpaiguri, districts etc.
According to the 2011 census, there are more than 2 crore speakers of this language in 
India and some scholars believe that Kudmali is closest to the language of Charyapada. As 
a trade dialect, it is also called ‘Panchpargania’, which means it is a language spoken in five 
parganas.
There has been a continuous demand from the Kudmali speaking people to include 
Kudmali language in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution. This language is recognized 
as a regional language in the state of Jharkhand and this language is also taught in Jharkhand 
University. Still, Kudmali language has not been given national recognition.
Therefore, keeping the above in mind, it is necessary to protect, promote and preserve 
the sanctity of Kudmali language and protect the culture and traditions of the speakers of this 
language and also keeping in mind the importance of this language that Kudmali language 
should be included in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution and given due recognition. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                  B I D Y U T  B A R A N  M A H A T O  
November 6, 2024.

3
ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Constitution of India]
Eighth Schedule
(Articles 344(1) and 351)
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithilli.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato, M.P .) 