AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

4 4 Nov १९00

Bill No. 157 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Dr. RaGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Shortie.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
5 notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After article 30 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted namely:—

Insertion of
Rij new article
“Right to Dwelling Unit 31.
31. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to live in his own dwelling unit. Rightto

(2) No such dwelling unit shall be acquired or requisitioned by the State for any “**"# ™™*

purpose except according to procedure established by law or demolished without
providing a suitable alternative dwelling unit.

Explanation:—For the purpose of this article, “dwelling unit” includes a Jhuggi-Jhopri
or house built in any area.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The disparity among the rich and the poor is increasing day-by-day. It has come to
the notice that the number of people living below poverty line has substantially increased.
‘The poor are losing their property including their dwelling units at the hands of the rich
and they are compelled to lead a miserable and shelterless life which is a curse on the
humanity. In India, a dwelling unit is almost one time investment which costs more than
fifty percent of the life time saving of an ordinary person, The poor saves money by
virtually remaining half-fed and use it to build a dwelling unit. On the other hand, their
contribution to the society is very significant. In creation of any infrastructure, the toil of
the poor people is involved. Al factories are being run by them. It is a shame for the
humanity that the provider of roof to millions, does not find a roof for himself due to
faulty policy and inaction of the Government. Government agencies which are supposed
to engage in constructive activities are often found engaged in destructive activities i.e.
demolition of dwelling units of the poor people in the name of beautification and
development of cities without providing alternative shelter to displaced persons, Recent
drives of demolition of jhuggi-jhopri clusters or houses in unauthorised colonies in New
Delhi have deprived many poor people of their houses.

Therefore, to safeguard against deprivation of the dwelling units particularly of
people below poverty line who build their houses on the basis of their life time saving, it
is proposed to insert a new article 31 in the Constitution.

Hence, this Bill.

New Devi RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH
August 3, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that alternate accommodation shall be provided to
persons whose dwelling units are acquired or demolished. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of Union territo-
ries. As far as expenditure in respect of States, the expenditure will be’ bome by State
Governments. It is likely that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore
will be involved. Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore is also
likely to be involved.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4204LS—4.10.2000.