1
THE VEGETABLE PRODUCTS (REMUNERATIVE SUPPORT PRICE
AND INSURANCE) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI DEVJI M. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for fixation of minimum remunerative support prices and insurance of
vegetable products and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Vegetable Products (Remunerative Support Price and
Insurance) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 157 of 2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i)  "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) "insurance" means insurance against loss or damage or destruction of
vegetable products due to—
(a) any natural calamity like flood, drought, storm, frost, whirlwind,
earthquake, flash flood, hailstorm or such other calamity as may be specified by
the appropriate Government from time to time; and
(b) inferior quality of fertilizers, pesticides or seeds;
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be; and
(iv) "vegetable products" mean vegetables that are used for human consumption
and include beet, bitter gourd, brinjal, cabbage, carrot, cauliflower, okra, onion, peas,
potato, radish, tomato, turnip and banana leaf.
3.  The appropriate Government shall announce minimum remunerative support price
of vegetable products in such manner and at such intervals, as may be prescribed:
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different States and different seasons.
4. The appropriate Government shall, while announcing the minimum remunerative
support price of vegetable products, take into account all relevant factors, which shall
include,—
(i) expenditure on inputs such as seeds, fertilizers and pesticides;
(ii) average labour charges;
(iii) expenditure on rent paid for land and tractor;
(iv) interest payable to banks on loans taken for growing vegetables;
(v) electricity and water charges;
(vi) expenditure on storage of vegetable products; and
(vii) expenditure incurred on transportation of vegetable products to market.
5. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a comprehensive insurance scheme
for vegetable products.
(2) The expenditure incurred on payment of premium for insurance of vegetable
products under sub-section (1) shall be borne wholly by the Central Government.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall determine the quantum of loss suffered by
vegetable growers on account of natural calamity or inferior quality of fertilizers, pesticides
or seeds and send a report to this effect to the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) On receipt of a report from the appropriate Government under sub-section (1), the
Central Government shall direct the insurance company concerned to pay the insured
amount to vegetable growers within such time and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament,
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
Fixation of
minimum
remunerative
support price
of vegetable
products.
Factors for
determination
of minimum
remunerative
support price
of vegetable
products.
Definitions.
Formulation
of a
comprehensive
insurance
scheme for
vegetable
products.
Payment of
insurance
amount in
case of natural
calamities.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
2
5
20
25
30
35
40
10
15

3
8. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The minimum remunerative support price is announced for many agricultural products
from time to time. But there is no provision for fixation of minimum remunerative support
price for vegetable products. In the absence of minimum remunerative support prices,
vegetable growers are harassed and cheated by middlemen, brokers and multi-national retail
companies. They are forced to sell their products at a throwaway price resulting in heavy
loss to them. Further, the crop insurance scheme does not cover vegetable products. Moreover,
the crop insurance scheme provides for insurance only in case of serious natural calamities.
However, crops are damaged even due to inferior quality of fertilizers, pesticides and seeds
which are presently not covered under any crop insurance. For example, banana leaves,
plants, raw bananas are damaged and destroyed due to whirlwinds but since there is no
coverage for loss of crops due to this calamity, banana growers are suffering.
Around forty per cent of vegetable products perish during transportation from fields
to markets. In the absence of proper facilities of transportation and cold storage, farmers are
forced to throw away their products. There is no insurance coverage for such losses.
Therefore, the scope of insurance should be increased to cover inferior quality of
fertilizers, pesticides and seeds and the definition of natural calamities needs to be widened.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DEVJI M. PATEL
November 3, 2014.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for formulation of a comprehensive insurance scheme for
vegetable products. Clause 6 provides for payment of insurance amount in case of loss
suffered by vegetable growers on account of natural calamity or inferior quality of fertilizers,
pesticides or seeds. Clause 7 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for fixation of minimum remunerative support prices and insurance of vegetable
products and for matters connected therewith.
————
( Shri Devji M. Patel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2865LS(S3)—03-12-2014.