ty eee

As rnTRoDUCED IN Lox Saba oN

BiMaY 199)

Bill 158 of 1991.

THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution Seventy-second
Amendment) Act, 1991.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After Part VIII of the Constitution, the following Part shall be
inserted, namely: —

“PART IX
10 THE PANCHAYATS
243, In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “district” means a revenue district in a State;

५. (७) “intermediate level” means a level betwean the village
and district levels specified by the Governor of a State by public

15 notification to be the intermediate level for the purposes of this
Part;

(c) “Panchayat” means an institution (by whatever name

Short
title
and
com-
mence=
ment.

Insertion
of new
Part IX.

Defini-
tions.


Gram
Sabha.

Constitu-
tion of
Pan-
chayats.

Composi-
tion of
Pan-
chayats.

2

called) of self-government constituted under article 2488, for the
rural areas;

(d) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of a
Panchayat;

(e) “population” means the population as ascertained at the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published;

(f) “village” means a village specified by the Governor by
public notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part
and includes a group of villages so specified, 10

243A. (1) A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers at the village
level as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

(2) In this article, “Gram Sabha" means a body consisting of
persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised
within the area of Panchayat at the village level, 15

2438. (1) There shall be constituted in every State, Panchayats
at the village level in accordance with the provisions of this Part.

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
constitution of Panchayats at the intermediate level or the district
level or both in accordance with the provisions of this Part, 20

243C. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, tha Legislature
of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the composi-
tion of Panchayats:

Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial
area of a Panchayat at any level and the number of seats in such 25
Panchayat to be filled by election shall, so far as practicable, be the
same throughout the State.

(2) All the seats in a Panchayat at the village level and inter-
mediate level, if any, shall be filled by persons chosen by direct
election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area and, 30
for this purpose, each Panchayat area shal] be divided into territorial
constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population

of each contituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so
far as practicable, be the same throughout the Panchayat area

(3) The seats in a Panchayat at the district level, if any, shall be 35
filled by election in such manner as the Legislature of a State may,
by law, provide.

(4) The Legislature of a State may, by law, providg for the re-
presentation, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may
be specified in such law,— 40

(a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the village
level in the Panchayats at the intermediate level, or, in the case
of a State not having Panchayats at the intermediate level, in
the Panchayats at the district level;

(b) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate as
level, if any, in the Panchayats at the district level, if any;


10

20

25

30

35

45

50

3

(c) of the members of the House of the People and the
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State representing
constituencies which comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area
at a level other than the village level, in such Panchayat.

(5) The Chairperson of a Panchayat at the village level or inter-
mediate level, if any, and other members of such Panchayat chosen
by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat
area shall alone have the right to vote in the meetings of the
Panchayat,

(6) The Chairperson of a Panchayat at the district level, if any,
and other elected members of such Panchayat shall alone have the
right to vote in the meetings of the Panchayat.

(7) The Chairperson of—

(a) a Panchayat at the village level or intermediate level, if
any, shal] be chosen by direct election; and

(b) a Panchayat at the district level, if any, shall be chosen
by election in such manner as the Legislature of the State may,
by law, provided,

243D. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes in every Panchayat and the number of seats
so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to
the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Pan-
chayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat
area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to be
total population of that area and such seats shall be allotted by
rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.

\(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved
under clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging _ to the
Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.

__@) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats
reserved for women belonging’to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct
election in every Panchayat shall be reserved for womten and allot-
ted by rotation ‘to different constituencies in a Panchayat,

(4) The office’ of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village
or any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of
a State may, by law, provide:

Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at
each level in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of such offices in the Panchayats at
each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or
of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of
the State:

\/ Provided further that not less than one-third of the total
number of offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level
shall be reserved for women:

Provided also that the number of seats reserved under this clause
shall be allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.

Reserva~
tion of
seats.


4

(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the
reservation of office of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for
women) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expira-
tion of the period specified in article 334,

(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State 5
from making any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat
or office of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any level in favour
of backward class of citizens.

Duration 2488, (1) Every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolved under any
ae law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years from 10
aces the date appointed for its first meeting and.no longer and the
y expiration of the said peried of five years shall operate as a disso-
lution of thet Panchayat,

(2) Where a Panchayat is dissolved before the expiration of its
duration, an election to constitute the Panchayat shall be completed, 15
38 soon as may be, and in any case before the expiration of a period
of six months from the date of such dissolution:

Provided that where the remainder of the period for which
the dissolved Panchayat would have continued is less than six
months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this 20
clause for constituting the Panchayat,

(3) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Panchayat
before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the
remainder of the pericd for which the dissolved Panchayat would
have continued under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved, 25

Disquali- 2437, (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and
pea for being, a member of a Panchayat—

lor

member- (a) If he helds any office of profit under the Government
ship, of India or the Government of any State or a Panchayat, other

than an office declared by the Legislature of the State, by law, 30
not to disqualify its holder;

(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court;

(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;

() it he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily ac- 35

quired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any
acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;

(९) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time
being in force for the purposes of elections to the Legisla-
ture of the State concerned; 40

(f) if ne is so disqualified by or under any law made by
the Legislature of the State

(2) if any question arises as to whether a member of a Pan-
chayat has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned
in clause (1), the question shall be referred for the decision of the 4s
Governor and his decision shall be final.


uw

10

20

25

30

40

45

5

243G. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legis-
lature of a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such
Powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to func-
tion as institutions of self-government and such law may contain
provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as
may he specified therein, with respect to—

(a) the preparation of plans for economic deveiopment and
social justice;

(b) the implementation of schemes for economic develop-
ment and social justice as may be entrusted to them including
those in relation to the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.

243H. The Legislature of a State may, by law—

(a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate
such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such proce-
dure and subject to such limits;

(b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls and fees
levied and collected by the State Government for such purposes
and subject to such conditions and limits;

(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Panchayats
from the Consolidated Fund of the State: and

(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all
moneys received respectively, by or on behalf of the Panchayats
and also for the withdrawal of such money therefrom, as may
he specified in the law. :

243-I (1) The Governor of a State shall as seon as may be within
one year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-second
Amendment) Act, 1991, and: thereafter at the expiration of every
fifth year, constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial
position of the Panchayats and to make recommendations to the
Governor as to—

(a) the principles which should govern—

(i) the distribution between the State and the Pan-
chayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and
fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between
them under this part and the allocation between the Pan-
chayats at all levels of their respective shares of such
proceeds;

(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and
fees which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the
Panchayats.

(iti) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Con-
solidated Fund of the State;

(b) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission
by the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the
Panchayats.

responsi-

bilities of
Pan-
chayats.

Power to
impose
taxes by,
and
Funds of,
the Pan-
chayats.

Consti-
tution

of Fin-
ance Com-
mission
to re-
view
financial
position.


Audit
of ac-
counts of
Pancha-
vats.

Powers of
Legisla-
ture of
a State
to make
provi-
sions
with
respect
to elec-
tions to
Pancha-
yats.

Applica-
tion to
Union
territo-
ries.

Part not
to apply
to certain
areas.

6

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
composition of the Commission, the qualifications which shall be
requisite for appointment as members thereof and the manner in
which they shall be selected.

(3) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall
have such powers in the performance of their functions as the
Legislature of the State may, by law, confer on them.

(4) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by
the Commission under this article together with an explanatory
memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the
Legislature of the State.

243J. The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions
with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats and
the auditing of such accounts.

243K. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legisla-
ture of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all
matters relating (०, or in connection with, elections to the Panchayats
under the superintendence, direction and control of the chief elect-
oral officer of the State.

243L, (1) The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union
territories and shall, in their application to a Union territory, have
effect ay if the references to the Governor of a State were referen-
ces to the Administrator of the Union territory appoivted under
article 239 and references to the Legislature or the Legislative

Assembly of a State were references, in relation to a Union territory 2:

having a Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the President may,
by public notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall not
apply to any Union territory or any part thereof or shall apply to any
Union territory or part thereof subject to such exceptions and modi-
fications as he may specify in the notification,

243M. (1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled
Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in
clause (2), of article 244.

(2) Nothing in this Part shall apply to—

(०) the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram:

(०) the Hill Areas in the State of Manipur for which District
Councils exist, and the Hill Areas of the District of Darjeeling in
the State of West Bengal for which the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill
Council exists, under any law for the time being in force.

iy
a

35

40


10

25

30

35

40

45

7

(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, —

(०) the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a)
of clause (2) may, by law, extend this Part to that State,
except the areas, if any, referred to in clause (1), if the Legis-
lative Assembly of that State passes a resolution to that effect
by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that
House present and voting;

(>) Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this
Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in
clause (1) subject to such exceptions and modifications as may
be specified in such law, and no such Jaw shall be deemed to be

an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article
368.

243N. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of
any law relating to Panchayats in force in a State immediately be-
fore the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-second Amend-
ment) Act, 1991, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a
competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the
expiration of one year from such commencement or until the expir-
ation of the longest duration of the Panchayats, at any level, exist-

ing in that State immediately before such commencement, which-
ever is later:

Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before
such commencement shall continue till the expiration of their du-
ration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect
by the Legislative Assembly of that State or. in the case of a State

having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that
State.

243-0. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution—

(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies,
made or purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not be
called in question in any court;

(0) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question
except by an election petition presented to such authority and in
such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made
by the Legislature of a State.’

3. After the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, the following Sche-

dule shall be added, namely:—

“ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
(Article 243G)
1. Agriculture, including agricultural extension.
2. Land improvement and soil conservation.

3. Minor irrigation, water management and watershed develop-
ment. |

Continu-
ance

of exist-
ing laws
and Pan-
chayats.

Bar to.
interfe-

hy courts
‘in electo-
ral mat-

Addition of
Eleventh
Schedule.


4. Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry.

5. Fisheries.

6. Social forestry and farm forestry.

7. Minor forest produce.

8. Small scale industries, including food processing industries. 5
9. Khadi, village and cottage industries.

10. Rural housing.

11. Drinking water.

12. Fuel and fodder. -

13. Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means 10
of communication.

14. Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity.

*5. Non-conventional energy sources.

16. Poverty alleviation programmes.

17, Education, including primary and secondary schools. 15
18. Technical training and vocational education.

19. Adult and non-formal education.

20. Libraries.

21, Cultural activities, ©

22. Markets and fairs. 20

28, Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health
centres and dispensaries.

24, Family welfare. 7
25. Women and child development.

26. Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and 25
mentally retarded. ;

27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

28. Public distribution system,

29. Maintenance of community assets.”. : 30


q

“ Riu |३०. 158 4199,
The Conshtrron (Severs -Cecond Amdt). GMI

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Though the Panchayati Raj Institutions have been in existence for
a long time, it has been observed that these institutions have not been
able to acquire the status and dignity of viable and responsive people's.
bodies due to a number of reasons including absence of regular elections,
prolonged supersessions, insufficient representation of weaker sections
like Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women, inadequate devo-
lution of powers and lack of financial resources.

2, Article 40 of the Constitution which enshrines one of the Direc-
tive Principles of State Policy lays down that the State shall take
steps to organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers
and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units
of self-government. In the light of the experience in the last forty
years and in view of the short-comings which have been observed, it
is considered that there is an imperative need to enshrine in the Cons-
titution certain basic and essential features of Panchayati Raj Institu-
tions to impart certainty, continuity and strength to them.

3. Accordingly, it is proposed to add a new Part relating to Pan-
chayats in the Constitution to provide for among other things, Gram
Sabha in a village or group of villages; constitution of Panchayats at
village and other level or levels; direct elections to all seats in Panchayats
at the village and intermediate level, if any, and to the offices of Chair-
persons of Panchayats at such levels; reservation of seats for the Sched-
uled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population for
membership of Panchayats and office of Chairpersons in Panchayats at
each level; reservation of not less than one-third of thé seats for women;
fixing tenure of 5 years for Panchayats and holding élections within ‘a
period of 6 months in the event of supersession of any Panchayat; dis-
qualifications for membership of Panchayats; devolution by the State
Legislature of powers and responsibilities upon the Panchayats with
respect ‘o the preparation of plans for economie development and social
justice and for the implementation of development schemes; sound
finance of the Panchayats by securing authorisation from State Legisla-
tures for granfs-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund
of the State, as also assignment to, or appropriation by. the Panchayuts
of the revenues of designated taxes, duties, tolls and fees; setting up
of a Finance Commission within ene year of the proposed amendment
and thereafter every 5 years to review the financial position of Panch-
ayats; auditing of accounts of the Panchayats; powers of State Legisla-
ures to make provisions with respect to elections to Panchayats under
the superintendence, direction and control of the chief electoral officer of
the State; application of the provisions of the said Part to Union terri-
tories; excluding certain States and areas from the application of the
provisions of the said Part; continuance of existing laws and Panchayats
until one year from the commencement of the proposed amendment
and barring interference by courts in electoral matters relating to Pan-
chayats. |

4. The Bill secks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.

New Dru; 6. VENK,
The 10th September, 1991,

SWAMY.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Part IX in the Constitution
consisting of articles 243 to 243-0.

2, Articles 243G and 243H of the Bill envisage that the Legislature
of a State may confer such powers and authority (including the power
to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees on the
Panchayats as may be required to enable them to function ag institutions
of self-government. Article 243-I requires the constitution of the Finance
Commission by the States to review the financial position of Panchayats
and recommend principles governing distribution of taxes and grants-in-
aid. The strengthaning of Panchayats as envisaged may call for the
strengthening of their administrative capabilities and training require-
ments. As article 243L of the Bill makes its provisions applicable to the
Union territories, the expenditure which may have to be incurred in
relation to the Union territories, will have to be met by the Government
of India out of its Consolidated Fund. It is, however, difficult to estimate
the annual recurring expenditure as it will depend on the powers and
authority conferred on these institutions.

3. The Bill, when enacted, will not involve any other recurring or
non-recurring expenditure

10