THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called  Contempt of Courts (Amendment)  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No. 158 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in clause ( c), in sub-clause ( i), for the words “scandalises or tends to
scandalise”, the words “scandalises or tends to scandlise to the extent that it undermine or
tends to undermine the administration of justice or public confidence therein” shall be
substituted.
3. In section 13 of the principal Act, for clause ( a), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“ (a) no court shall impose a sentence under this Act for a contempt of court
unless it is satisfied that there is a mala fide intention and a real, clear and imminent
danger to discredit the  administration of justice or the contempt is of such a nature
that it substantially interferes, or tends substantially to interfere with the due course of
justice.”.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of  section 13.
7 of 1971
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Right to Freedom of speech and expression is one of the most important fundamental
rights of the citizens which is essential for any vibrant democracy. The founding fathers of
Indian Constitution undoubtedly considered free speech as one of the most basic rights,
essential for safeguarding and promoting other human rights. While providing for Right to
free speech under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution, certain reasonable restrictions have
been laid down under article 19(2). Article 19(2) of the Constitution includes “contempt of
courts” as one of the limitations on free speech. This provision has been provided to ensure
that citizens do not lose their faith in the judiciary if disrespectful or critical statements are
made about the courts.
The pending cases pertaining to contempt in the apex court accounts for 15.8 per cent.
with conviction rate over 58.8 per cent. of the cases in this category. Several democratic
countries including the United States of America, have narrowly circumscribed the doctrine
of contempt. However, in India a rather broad use of contempt has been permitted leading to
curbing of the right to free speech and expression provided in the Constitution.
In section 2(c) of the Contempt of Courts Act, the phrase “scandalizes or tends to
scandalize” is neither defined nor any guidelines have been laid down for its interpretation.
This phrase is so wide and vague that there is high probability of its misuse leading to
chilling effects on the citizens’ right of free speech and expression while criticising the
verdict of any Court. The Supreme Court has observed “a penal law is void for vagueness if
it fails to define the criminal offence with sufficient definiteness. Ordinary people should be
able to understand what conduct is prohibited and what is permitted”.
In case of Kartar Singh V . State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC 569, it was held “vague laws
offend several important values. It is insisted or emphasized that laws should give the
person of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to know what is prohibited, so that
he may act accordingly. Vague laws may trap the innocent by not providing fair warning.”.
Hence, it is pertinent to define the term clearly to make a distinction from the other phrases
used in the definition section of the Act.
Every citizen should have right to criticise in good faith, even the acts of the Court. As
long as citizens exercise right of free speech which criticise acts of Courts without any
mala fide intention to impair the administration of justice, they should not be held in contempt.
Moreover, public interest can be maintained by ensuring fair trial and reposing faith in the
judiciary while balancing the freedom of speech appropriately. Thus, it is necessary to
remove the scope of any vagueness from the expression “criminal contempt” as defined in
the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL
April 9, 2015.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS ACT, 1971
(70 OF 1971)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)* * * * *
(b)* * * * *
(c) “criminal contempt” means the publication (whether by words, spoken or
written, or by signs, or by visible representations, or otherwise) of any matter or the
doing of any other act whatsoever which—
(i) scandalises or tends to scandalise, or lowers or tends to lower the
authority of, any court; or
* * * *
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,—
(a) no Court shall impose a sentence under this Act for a contempt of court
unless it is satisfied that the contempt is of such a nature that it substantially interferes,
or tends substantially with the due course of justice.
* * * * *
4
Definitions.
Contempt not
punishable in
certain Acts.

LOK SABHA
———
A
BILL
further to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1270LS—14.07.2015.