As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 158 of 2022
THE NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR REDUCTION OF FOOD WASTE 
BILL, 2022
By
Shri Dhanush M. Kumar, M.P.
a
BILL
to develop a national strategy to reduce the food waste in the country  
and for matter connected therewith.
 Be it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Strategy for Reduction of Food Waste Act, 
2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
  (a) “food waste” means   food that is fit for consumption but consciously discarded 
Short title and  
commencement
5
Definitions.

starting from pre and post harvest losses, food processing and packing losses and discarded 
in residential buildings, restaurants, banquets, weddings, canteens, and retail outlets;
  ( b) “prescribed” means prescribed by strategy made under this Act;
  ( c) “stakeholders” means representative of both Central Government and State 
Governments those who are responsible for agriculture, food processing and logistics related 
to food other than government representative those who are involved in agri and agri-food 
industries; and
  ( d) “strategy” means a plan of action designed to eliminate food waste and achieve 
zero-food waste as end goal.
 3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the stakeholders, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, formulate a National Strategy to Reduce Food Waste in 
the country in such manner as may be prescribed. 
  ( 2) The National Strategy formulated under sub-section (1) shall consist of,—
(a) creating awareness amongst the public with a view to have behavioral 
change including—
(i) creating awareness and educating about food waste through print and 
electronic media;
(ii) creating awareness to purchase groceries in calculated terms;
(iii) reconsidering extravagant buffet spreads at weddings by persuasion 
technique;
(iv) conducting food exhibition and festivals by exhibiting in a way to 
adopt root-to-shoot philosophy in cuisine; and
(v) incorporating curriculum regarding food wastage in education.
(b) technological and innovative solutions including,—
(i) identification and strengthening the fragmented food systems and 
making efficient supply chain systems;
(ii) installing community fridges outside retail outlets for creating a access 
to the extra edible food generated from retail outlet for those in need;
(iii) making regulation for the food retailers across the country to adopt 
technology standards that allow incentives for the customer for the product 
which is nearing expiry date to reduce food wastage and maximise the grocery 
retailer revenue;
(iv) expediting the research in nano-technology to aid in inventing healthy 
food preservation technique that may make farm produce have a longer shelf 
life;
(v) exploring technological solution like multi-commodity cold storages 
and multipurpose cold storage facilities, ripening chamber and distributed 
refrigeration architecture;
Formulation of  
National 
Strategy  
to Reduce  
Food Waste.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2

(vi) institutionalising food bank concept; and
(vii) emulating other countries best practices including supermarkets to 
either give unsold food to charity or send it to farmers for use as animal feed 
and fertilizer.
 4. ( 1) Central Government shall prepare a report setting out the national strategy and 
cause the report to be laid before the both the Houses of Parliament in the year following the 
day on which this Act came into force.
  ( 2) The report shall be published on the website within fifteen days after the report 
has been tabled in Parliament for public view. 
  ( 3) Within three years of the tabling of the report referred to under sub-section 
(2) and every three years after that the Central Government shall prepare a report on 
the effectiveness of national strategy, setting out their conclusion and recommendations 
regarding the strategy and the report thereof shall be laid before both the House of the 
Parliament within fifteen days on which each House is sitting after the report is completed. 
 5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty:
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.
 6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
  (2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions, aforesaid, Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule 
or Parliament agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.
 
           
Report.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 According to the Food Waste Index Report, 2021 published by United Nations 
Environment Programme, 50 Kg of food is wasted per person every year or 68,760,163 
tonnes a year in Indian homes. A figure estimated by Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) says 40 per cent of food produced in India is wasted due to fragmented food storage 
and supply system. This is the loss that occurs even before the food reaches consumers. The 
need is to address food waste which is occurring before and after reaching the consumers.  
The need is also to putforth points which can be worked out to develop strategy to reduce 
the food waste and meeting our end goal that is zero food waste in India. 
 The United Nations reported that about 190 Million Indians are undernourished and 
apart from that India is home to 25 per cent of the world’s hungry population. The excess 
food which is wasted ends up in landfills and this is becoming  potential source of green 
house gas which also negatively affects environment. Adding to this, 25 per cent of fresh 
water used to produce food is ultimately wasted even as millions of people still don’t have 
access to clean drinking water. 
 A holistic approach is required to reduce the food waste where food wastage is not 
limited to one level alone but perforates through every stage; from harvesting, processing, 
packaging, and transporting to the end stage of consumption. 
 It is important that latest technology is adopted at every stage of the supply chain and 
has to be coupled with behavioural change to overcome this problem. As Inger Andersen 
(Executive Director of UNEP) says “If we want to get serious about tackling climate change, 
nature and biodiversity loss, and pollution and waste, businesses, governments and citizens 
around the world have to do their part to reduce food waste”. Reducing food waste helps to 
decrease pressure on the earth and also aids in decreasing the carbon foot print. It helps in 
conserving the natural resources because when food is wasted it is not just the food but also 
natural and physical resources associated with it also get wasted.
 Hence the consciousness around the extent and type of food waste has to be raised. The 
Sustainable Development goal target 12.3 aims at halving per-capita global food waste at 
the retail and consumer levels and reducing food losses along production and supply chains. 
If we need to achieve this target there should be a proper strategy and investment in tackling 
food waste has to be made.   The Bill, therefore, aims to develop national strategy to reduce 
the food waste which is rampant in India.
 Hence this Bill.
   New Delhi;            DHANUSH M. KUMAR
5 July, 2022.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to develop a national strategy to reduce the food waste in the country and for 
matter connected therewith.
(Shri Dhanush M. Kumar, M.P.) 