BUI No. 158 of 1985 -= 
THE JUDGES (PROTECTION) BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
lor securing additional protection jor Judges and others acting 
judicially and jor matteTS connected therewith. 
.-
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:--
1. (1) This Act may be called the Judges (Protection) Act. 1985. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
5 Kashmir. 
)0 
2. In this Act, "Judge" means not only every person who is officially 
designated as a Judge, but also every person-
(a) who is empowered by law to give in any legal proceeding 
a definitive judgment. or a judgmer,tt which, if not appealed against, 
would be definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by some other 
authority, would be definitive; Or 
(b) who is one of a body of persons which body t')f persons is 
empowered by Jaw to give such a judgment as is referred to in 
clause (a). . 
15 3. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force and subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), no 
court shall entertain or continue any civil or criminal proceeding against 
any person who is or wa'S a Judge for any act, thing or word committed, 
done or 'spoken by him when, or in the course of, acting or purporting to 
~ act in the discharge of his official or judicial duty or fUnction. 
Short. -
title lind 
extcl1ll. 
Deftni~ 
~ion. 
Addi-
tional 
protec-
tion to 
Judges. 

(2) Nothing in aub·.section (1) shall debar or affect in any manDer the 
power of the Central Government or the State Government or the 
Supreme Court of India or any High Court or any other authority under 
any law for the time being in force to take such action (whether by way 
of civil, criminal, or departmental proceedings Or otherwise) against any 5 
person who is or was a Judge. 
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in dero-
gation of, th-~ proviaiOftil"Of ally other law for the time being in force pr0-
viding for protection of J~dies. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
JUdiciary is one of the main pillars of parliamentary democracy as 
envisaged by the Constitution. It is essential to provide for all immuniti~ 
necessary to enable Judges to act fearlessly. and impartially in the dis-
t:harge of their judicial duties. It will be difficult for the Judges to 
function if their actions in court are made subject to legal proceedings, 
·either civil or criminal. 
Hence, this Bill. 
NEW DELHI; ., A. K. SEN. 
The 12th August, 1985. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
for securing additional protection for Jud·ges and others acting judicially and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Asoke KU'mar Sen, 
Minister of Law and Justice.) 