THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 142 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following proviso is shall be
inserted, namely—
"Provided that such decree or order, [etc. under this clause] shall be passed or
made by a Bench consisting of not less than five judges of the Supreme Court.
Provided further that the Supreme Court shall not, in exercise of its powers under
this clause, make an order or issue any direction which overrides an express provision
contained in any law made by a competent legislature.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 158 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5 Amendment
of article 142.
10

2
Provided also that where a decree or order has been passed or made by the
Supreme Court on a subject in respect of which no statutory provision has been made
by the competent legislature and decree or order shall remain in operation till the
competent legislature exercises its power to make statutory provision on that subject
and, if the statutory provision so made is inconsistent with the decree or order passed
or made by the Supreme Court or made “the statutory provision shall prevail
notwithstanding such inconsistency”.”
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 142 of the Constitution confers upon the Supreme Court the power to pass
decrees and make orders for doing complete justice. The amplitude of the power under the
article has been construed widely by various judicial pronouncements. The fact that only the
Supreme Court and not the High Courts have been given this power, places the
Supreme Court as the sole repository of such wide-ranging powers.
The Supreme Court has made ample use of this overarching power. However, the
directions issued in exercise of this power have often trespassed into the domain of the
legislature and thus transgressed the established principle of separation of powers, now
proclaimed as a basic feature of the Constitution. Not only has the court issued directions
that ideally belong to the functions of the legislature, but the court has also made orders
which contradict and run contrary to the existing statutory provisions.
In order to restore the balance between the judiciary and the legislature, it is necessary
that the scope of power of the Supreme Court under article 142, as interpreted by the court
itself, is restrained in order to prevent any encroachment on the legislative domain.
Towards this end, the Bill seeks to amend article 142 with a view to provide that—
(a) a decree or order, etc. passed and made under article 142 shall be issued only
by a Bench consisting of not less than five judges of the Supreme Court;
(b) the Supreme Court shall not issue an order overriding an express statutory
provision;
(c) the directions under article 142 shall be in operation only till the competent
legislature has not made any statutory provisions on the subject; and
(d) the competent legislature shall have express powers to override any directions
issued under article 142 of the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB
July 10, 2018.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
142. (1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such decree or
make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending
before it, and any decree so passed or order so made shall be enforceable throughout the
territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed by or under any law made by
Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the President may
by order 1 prescribe.
* * * * *
Enforcement
of decrees and
orders of
Supreme Court
and orders as
to discovery,
etc.

MGIPMRND—1839LS(S3)—12-10-2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)