THE COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING BILL, 2014
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to make military training compulsory for all able-bodied citizens and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in the case of a Union territory, the Central Government; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 158 of 2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "person" means a citizen of India  above the age of fourteen years but less
than fifty years.
3. (1) The Central Government shall provide military training to all able-bodied
persons for a period of not less than one year.
(2) The Central Government shall establish such number of institutions and take
such other necessary steps, as it may deem fit to give effect to the provisions of
sub-section (1).
(3) Every person who successfully completes training under sub-section (1) shall be
awarded a certificate to that effect by the Central Government.
4. The appropriate Government shall give preference to persons who have successfully
completed their military training in services under defence, para-military forces and such
other establishments and organisations, as it may deem fit, for proper utilization of talent:
Provided that all such persons, who, after successful completion of their military
training remain unemployed, shall be given unemployment allowances at such rate, as may
be determined from time to time, by the appropriate Government till they are gainfully
employed.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Compulsory
military
training.
Employment
to those who
have
undergone
military
training.
Powers to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Almost all developing countries, even those smaller in size, population and resources
than India, are providing compulsory military training to their citizens. Providing compulsory
military training to able-bodied citizens does not in any way run counter to the ideal of
international peace and harmony, which has been the hall-mark of India's foreign policy since
independence. Military training does not necessarily encourage the pugnacity of individual
or the belligerence of the nation-States. On the contrary it inculcates qualities of discipline
and sacrifice and fosters in each individual the spirit of brotherhood and amity. A well
integrated and a coordinated programme of military training would be immensely beneficial
to channelise the vast energies of our youth and would lead to their all-round development
and enhancement of the welfare of the nation. People can defend and safeguard their houses
from robbery and dacoity which are increasing day by day. Many innocent people are
murdered in broad day light. With extremist activities on the rise in the country and the
Government being not able to provide adequate protection to general public, self-defence
becomes a must for every individual.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for compulsory military training to all able-bodied
citizens.
N
EW DELHI; BHOLA SINGH
November 5,  2014

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide compulsory
military training to all able-bodied persons for a period of not less than one year and for the
purpose shall establish such number of institutions and shall take such other necessary
steps, as it may deem fit. Clause 4 provides that persons who have undergone military
training and remain unemployed shall be given unemployment allowance. The
Central Government will have to incur expenditure in respect of the Union territories for
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The Central Government may also have to assist the
State Governments for carrying out the provisions of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees seven thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to make military training compulsory for all able-bodied citizens and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2712LS(S-4)—03-12-2014.