1
Short title and
commencement.
THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED
OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1.( 1) This Act may be called the Public Premises (Eviction of  Unauthorised Occupants)
Amendment Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Public Premises (Eviction of  Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, clause (fa) and clause (fb) shall be renumbered
Amendment
of section 2.
40 of 1971.
Bill  No. 158 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
as clause (fb) and (fc) respectively, and before clause (fb) as so renumbered, the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(fa) “residential accommodation occupation”, in relation to any public premises
means occupation by any person on grant of licence to him to occupy such premises
on the basis of an order of allotment for a fixed tenure or for a period he holds office, in
accordance with the rules and instructions issued in this regard, made under the
authority of the Central Government, a State Government, a Union territory
Administration or a statutory authority, as the case may be;’.
3. In the principal Act, after section 3A, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“3B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4 or section 5, if the
estate officer has information that any person, who was granted residential
accommodation occupation, is in unauthorised occupation of the said residential
accommodation, he shall—
(a) forthwith issue notice in writing calling upon such person to show
cause within a period of three working days why an order of eviction should not
be made;
(b) cause the notice to be served by having it affixed on the outer door or
some other conspicuous part of the said residential accommodation, and in such
other manner as may be prescribed, whereupon the notice shall be deemed to
have been served upon such person.
(2) The estate officer shall, after considering the cause, if any, shown by the person on
whom the notice is served under sub-section (1) and after making such inquiry as it deems
expedient in the circumstances of the case, for reasons to be recorded in writing, make an
order of eviction of such person.
(3) If the person in unauthorised occupation refuses or fails to comply with the order
of eviction referred to in sub-section (2), the estate officer may evict such person from the
residential accommodation and take possession thereof and may, for that purpose, use such
force as may be necessary.”.
4. In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3A) If the person in unauthorised occupation of residential accommodation
challenges the eviction order passed by the estate officer under sub-section ( 2) of
section 3B in any court, he shall pay damages for every month for the residential
accommodation held by him.”.
Eviction from
residential
accommodation.
Insertion of
new section 3B.
Amendment
of section 7.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (the said Act), was
enacted to provide for eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises and for
certain incidental matters.
2. Government of India provides residential accommodation to its employees, Members
of Parliament and other dignitaries while they are in service or till the term of their office on
licence basis.  As per the existing allotment rules, after the expiry of the terms and conditions
of the licence, the occupants of such residential accommodations become unauthorised for
staying in such accommodation and should vacate the same.  The said Act, Confers powers
upon the estate officers to evict such unauthorised occupants from “public premises” in a
smooth, speedy and time-bound manner. Under the existing provisions, the eviction
proceedings of unauthorised occupants from “public premises” take around five to seven
weeks time.  It may take around four more weeks if the unauthorised occupants file appeal
under the said Act. However, eviction proceedings take much longer period than the timeline
prescribed in the said Act.  Sometimes, it takes years to evict the unauthorised occupants.
3. There are provisions for summary eviction proceedings under section 3A of the said
Act in case of persons occupying “public premises” temporarily, that is, less than thirty
days.  Under the summary proceedings, the estate officer does not have to follow elaborate
procedure prescribed, for serving notice, show cause, inquiry, and hearing, as per sections 4
and 5 of the Act, before passing eviction order.  However, these summary proceedings are
not applicable to the occupants of residential accommodations given on licence basis. It is,
therefore, proposed to apply summary eviction procedure to residential accommodation
given on licence basis with a short show cause notice of three days to the unauthorised
occupants by inserting new section 3B. It is also proposed to define the term “residential
accommodation occupation” by amending section 2.
4. It is often seen that the unauthorised occupants do not vacate the government
accommodation on expiry of the terms and conditions of the licence as per the rules and uses
dilatory tactics to withhold the accommodation, by challenging the eviction order before an
appellate officer or before the High Court and by obtaining stay of the eviction order.  In
order to check this delay, it is also proposed to insert a new sub-section (3A) in section 7 of
the Act to the effect that if the person challenges the eviction order passed by the estate
officer in any court, he has to pay the damages for every month for the residential
accommodation held by him.
5. These amendments would facilitate smooth and speedy eviction of unauthorised
occupants from residential accommodations, and ensure retrieval of the residential
accommodation from the unauthorised occupants without requiring elaborate procedures
under sections 4 and 5 of the said Act. This will further increase availability of residential
accommodations to new incumbents and improve the overall satisfaction level.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; NARENDRA SINGH TOMAR
The 21st  July, 2017.
3

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971.
————
(Shri Narendra Singh Tomar, Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs )
GMGIPMRND—1467LS(S3)—26-07-2017.