As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 158 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Shri Rao Rajendra Singh, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Preamble to the Constitution for the word “India” the word “Bharat” shall be 
substituted.
3. In article 1 of the Constitution in clause 1, for the words “India, that is Bharat” the 
word “Bharat” shall  be substituted.
4. Throughout the Constitution, for the word “India”, wherever it occurs, the word 
“Bharat” shall be substituted.
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment of 
the Preamble. 
5
Amendment of 
Article 1. 
Substitution 
of References 
“India” by 
“Bharat”. 
10

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 A Bill to amend Article 1 of the Constitution to  replace the term “India, that is Bharat”  
with “Bharat” as the  nation’s   sole   name.  The amendment aims to  affirm   the  country’s   
indigenous identity and cultural sovereignty  by adopting  “Bharat” as the single name by 
which the Republic shall be known, both domestically and  globally. Deeply embedded  
in ancient texts, heritage and the historical memory of our people, “Bharat” has stood for  
unity,  continuity,  and self-identity across generations , capturing the shared heritage and 
sovereign aspirations of this land. The dual nomenclature– “lndia” and “Bharat”– reflects a 
legacy from our colonial past that no longer aligns with contemporary national sentiment or 
with constitutional values of sovereignty, unity and integrity.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                            RAO RAJENDRA SINGH 
November 12, 2024.

3
ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Constitution of India]
 * * * * *
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA , having solemnly  resolved  to constitute india into a 
SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and  to secure to all  
its citizens:
 * * * * *
1. (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union or States.
(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in the First Schedule.
(3) The territory of India shall comprise—
(a) the Territories of the states;
(b) the Union Territories specified in the First Schedule; and
(c) such other territories as may be acquired.
 * * * * *
Name and 
territory of the 
Union.
Preamble.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri Rao Rajendra Singh, M.P .) 