Bill No. 158-F of  2023
THE PROVISIONAL COLLECTION OF TAXES
BILL, 2023
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2023
RAJYA SABHA ON 20TH DECEMBER, 2023)
ASSENTED  TO
 ON 28 DEC, 2023
ACT NO. 50 OF 2023

1
THE PROVISIONAL COLLECTION OF TAXES BILL, 2023
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to provide for the immediate effect for a limited period of provisions in Bills relating to
the imposition or increase of duties of customs or excise.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Provisional Collection of  Taxes Act, 2023.
2. In this Act, a “declared provision” means a provision in a Bill in respect of which
a declaration has been made under section 3.
Short title.
Definition.
Bill No. 158-F of 2023

2
3. Where a Bill to be introduced in Parliament on behalf of the Government provides
for the imposition or increase of a duty of customs or excise with or without change in tariff
classification, the Central Government may cause to be inserted in the Bill a declaration that
it is expedient in the public interest that any provision of the Bill relating to such imposition
or increase shall have immediate effect under this Act.
4. (1) A declared provision shall have the force of law immediately on the expiry of
the day on which the Bill containing it is introduced.
(2) A declared provision shall cease to have the force of  law under the provisions of
this Act—
(a) when it comes into operation as an enactment, with or without amendment;
(b) when the Central Government, in pursuance of a motion passed by Parliament,
directs, by notification in the Official Gazette, that it shall cease to have the force of
law; or
(c) if it has not already ceased to have the force of law under clause ( a) or
clause (b), then on the expiry of the seventy-fifth day after the day on which the Bill
containing it was introduced.
5. (1) Where a declared provision comes into operation as an enactment in an amended
form before the expiry of the seventy-fifth day after the day on which the Bill containing it
was introduced, refunds shall be made of all duties collected which would not have been
collected if the provision adopted in the enactment had been the declared provision:
Provided that the rate at which refunds of any duty may be made under this sub-section
shall not exceed the difference between the rate of such duty proposed in the declared
provision and the rate of such duty in force when the Bill was introduced.
(2) Where a declared provision ceases to have the force of law under clause ( b) or
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4, refunds shall be made of all duties collected which
would not have been collected if the declaration in respect of it had not been made.
6. The Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 is hereby repealed.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
declaration.
Effect of
declarations
under this
Act, and
duration
thereof.
Refunds to be
made in
certain cases.
Repeal. 16 of 1931.

A
BILL
to provide for the immediate effect for a limited period of provisions in Bills relating to the
imposition or increase of duties of customs or excise.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament )
MGIPMRND—554LS(S3)—03-01-2024.