wa

As rnTROpUcED IN Lox SABHA ON

é ocT 19390

Bill No. 158 of 1990

Seen
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-SIXTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first, Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-sixth Amend-
ment) Act, 1990.

2. In article 356 of the Constitution, in clause (4), in the third pro-
viso, for the words “three years and six months”, the words “four years”
shall be substituted.

Short
title.

Amend-
ment of
article
356.


STATEMENT OF CBJECTS AND REASONS

Under clause (4) of article 356 of the Constitution, no Proclama-
tion issued under that article and approved by both the Houses of Parlia-
ment shall remain in force for more than three years. However, under
clause (5) of the said article, a resolution approving the continuance in
force of a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of that article beyond.
a period of one year cannot be passed by either House of Parliament
unless the two conditions relating to a Proclamation of Emergency
being in operation in the whole cr any part of the State and the certi-
ficate by the Election Commission that the continuation of the Procla-
mation issued under clause (1) is necessary Gn account of difficulties in
holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State as
specified in that clause are met. The three year period in the case of
Proclamation issued on 11th May, 1987 with respect to the State of
Punjab was extended to three years and six months by the Constitution
(Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990 and clause (5) of article 356 was
also suitably amended by that Act in the expectation that it would be
possible to hold elections to the Legislative Assembly of that State. The
prevailing circumstances in the State, however, still do not hold out
prospects for free and peaceful elections to the State Legislative
Assembly. Clause (4) of article 356 of the Constitution is, therefore,
Proposed to be amended so as to facilitate the extension of the said
Proclamation up to a total period of four years in relation to the State
of Funjab.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dena; MUFTI MOHAMMED SAYEED.
The 1st October, 1990.


ANNEXURE

Extract FRomM 78E CoNsriruTion 0७ INDIA

me न * * *
356. (1) * * * रू हि

(4) A Proclamation so appreved shall, unless revoked, cease to
operate on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of issue
of the Proclamation:

Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continu-
ance in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parlia-
ment, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a
further period of six months froma the date on which under this clause
it would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such Proclamation
shall in any case remain in force for more than three years:

Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People
takes place during any such pericd of six months and a resolution approv-
ing the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the
Council of States, but no resolution with respect to the continuance in
force of such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People
during the said period, the Proclemation shall cease to operate at the
expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of 86
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of
the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the continuance in
force of the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the
People:

Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation issued under
clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of
Punjab, the reference in the first proviso to this clause to “three years”
shall be construed as a reference to “three years and six months”.

* * * * *

Provisions
in case of
failure of
constitu-
tional
machi-
nery in
States.


LOK SABHA : ook Lee

A हर
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India,

cl ec iain af

(Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed, Minister of Home Affairs.)