1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR SONKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List I-Union List, Entry 56 shall be omitted;
(ii) in List II-State List, entry 17 shall be omitted; and
(iii) in List III-Concurrent List, after entry 32, the following entry shall be inserted
namely:—
"32A. Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys.
32B. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage
and embankments, water storage and water power.".
Bill No. 159  of  2019
Short title.
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Life is impossible without water. All living beings including human, animals and plants
need water for their survival. Therefore, it is desirable that requisite amount of water is
available without any hindrance for drinking and irrigation.
Around ninety-seven per cent. of  water on the Earth is salty water and only three per
cent. is fresh water; slightly over two thirds of this fresh water is frozen in the form of glaciers
and polar ice caps. The remaining unfrozen fresh water is found mainly as ground water.
Ground water is a renewable resource, yet the world's supply of ground water is
steadily decreasing with the depletion of water table, most prominently in Asia and North
America. It is still not clear that how much natural renewal balance of fresh water is available
or whether ecosystem will be threatened for want of fresh water in near future. The
framework for allocating water resources to water users where such a framework exists is
known as water rights.
At present, water is a State subject and is considered as primary responsibility of the
State Governments.
The Bill seeks to amend the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a view to
transfer entry 56 of List-I Union List and entry 17 of List-II State List pertaining to 'Regulation
and Development of Inter-State Rivers and River Valleys' and 'Water', respectively, to List-III
Concurrent List so that the Central Government and the State Governments concerned can
also play their due role for regulation and development of inter-State rivers and conservation
and sustainable use of water to meet the growing needs of the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR SONKAR
June 26, 2019.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
List I-Union List
* * * * * * *
56. Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to
which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
List II-State List
* * * * * * *
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments,
water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List-I.
* * * * * * *
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1183LS(S-3)—09.07.2019.