Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 159 of 2022
THE CONDUCTING OF UNION GOVERNMENT EXAMINATIONS IN 
ALL EIGHTH SCHEDULE LANGUAGES BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Dඁൺඇඎඌඁ M. Kඎආൺඋ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for conduction of all Union Government examination in all the languages 
included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution and 
for matters connected therewith.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:– 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Conducting of Union Government Examinations in all 
Eighth Schedule Languages Act, 2022. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Union Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Deﬁnitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “exams” means all recruitment exams conducted by Union Government through 
its recruitment commissions and other such agencies;
(b) “recruitment commission” includes Union Public Service Commission, 
Railway Recruitment Board, Public Sector Undertakings, Public Sector Banks, Institute 
of Banking Personnel Selection, Reserve Bank of India, Staff Selection Commission 
and any other national agency responsible for conducting of examination for the posts 
and services under the Union Government; and
(c) “prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(d) “Union Government” means Government of India and its Departments, 
undertakings, recruitment commission and agencies.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the Central Government to ensure that all 
examinations being conducted by the recruitment commissions and such other agencies 
for the services and posts under the Union Government in all the languages included in 
the eighth schedule to the Constitution in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament.
5. (1) The Central Government, may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Conduct of 
Examination 
by recruitment 
commissions 
and agencies 
in all the 
Eighth Schedule 
Languages.
Power to 
remove 
diﬃculties.
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is home to different languages where we enrich rich linguistic plurality. According 
to 2011 Census, there are total of 121 languages and 270 Mother tongues while Ethnologue 
counts it to be 454. The survey recently conducted by People’s Linguistic Survey of India 
(PLSI) found that 780 languages in India. So this gives a clear picture of how India is 
linguistically diverse as a country.  Majority of Indian young population aspires be to be 
Government servants ranging from All India Services, Group A, Group B and some even 
Group C and Group D posts etc. The option of facing the Union Government exams only 
in English and Hindi language is acting as a barrier to once dream and aspiration especially 
one who is more comfortable in his/her native language. This has serious disadvantage to 
students who did not study in English medium or not from Hindi speaking States. This Bill 
tries to create more opportunity to non-hindi speaking States and persons who studied in 
medium of instruction other than Hindi and English such as Tamil, Malayalam, Kannada, 
Telugu, Marathi, Odia etc. Adoption of technology and effort of Government of India in 
translation right from Technology Development for Indian Languages in 1991 to as per 
the recommendation of National Knowledge Commission (NKC), Government of India 
launched National Translation Mission (NTM) in 2008. Since then NTM is collaborating 
with various institutes, universities private publishers etc. by providing academic and 
financial assistance for bringing out translations of  pedagogic in Indian languages in order 
to reach out to the section of students with limited English knowledge. 
With application of technology it shall be easier to conduct Union Government exams 
in all eighth schedule languages because 22 major Indian languages are listed in the eighth 
schedule of the Constitution of India and they are spoken by more than 96% of the total 
population. This is not new as recruitment to junior level posts in the Indian Railways is 
done through a Computer Based Test by 21 Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs) located 
all over the Country. Where, the question paper for the RRB competitive examinations is 
objective type with multiple choices, in that addition to English question papers are set in 
15 languages listed in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India. Likewise Common 
Recruitment Process of Regional Rural Banks where online Main Examinations of Officers 
Scale I and Office Assistants (Multipurpose), the candidates are provided with an option to 
choose the medium of examination from the list of 13 regional languages, relevant to the 
State/UT, in addition to Hindi and English. 
In Civil Services (Mains) Examination conducted by UPSC, the candidate has the 
option to write his/her answers in any regional language, except in case of language and 
literature paper, but the question paper is framed in only Hindi and English. The thing is that 
candidates are ready to take up the exams in their native language but still option of only 
providing Hindi and English make some to struggle but many give up the dream to join the 
Government services. 
The competitive exams for recruitment to posts in Union Government, Central Public 
Sector Undertakings, Indian Railways, Defence services and nationalised banks etc. are 
still conducted in only Hindi and English shall be hereafter conducted in all eighth schedule 
language. This indicates setting/framing questions and medium for descriptive papers for 

all entry level and different stages of the Union Government exams shall be in all eighth 
schedule languages which replace the option of having only Hindi and English. This 
promotes inclusivity and provides equal and fair opportunity to aspirants to the person who 
did not study in English medium and from all States especially non-Hindi speaking States.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                DHANUSH M. KUMAR
4 July, 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the Union Government to conduct examinations being 
conducted by Union Public Service Commission and other agencies in all the languages 
included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India.  It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore 
per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for conduction of all Union Government examination in all the languages 
included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution and 
for matters connected therewith.
_______ 
(Shri Dhanush M. Kumar, M.P .)