Bil] No. 159-C of 1991
ERA CCITT

THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991
A
BILL
further to ainend the, Constitution of India,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republie
of India as follows: —

4, (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amend-
ment) Act, 1992.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint,

2. After Part IX of the Constitution, ‘the following Part shall be in-
serted, namely: —

‘PART IXA
10 THE MUNICIPALITIES
243P. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Committee” means a Committee constituted under
article 2438;

(9) “district” means a district in a State;

Short
title
and
com-
mence-
ment.

Insertion
of new
Part

XA,

Defini~
tiong,



Constitu.
tion of
Munici~
Palities,

Composi-
tion of
Munict-
Balities,

2

(०) “Mei Means a
of ten lakh,

TOpolitan area” 11 greg having a population
comprised in on,
consisting of two or mo

Panchayats or other
fied by the Governor by public notifica-
tion to be a Metropolitan area for the Purposes of this Part, 5
(व) “Municipal area”

Means the जात
clpality as is ni

ilorial area of a Muni-
Otified by the Governor,

(e) “Municipality” means an institution of self-government
constituted uadep article 2490;

() “Panchayat” Means a Panchayat 1 Constituted under 19
article 2438; :

(9) “population” means the Population a5 ascertained at the
last Preceding census of which the re}
bublished,

‘vant figures have been

15

atea, th

ame called) for a
at is to Say, an area in tran,
area to an urban area;

4 rural

(9) a Municipa} Council for, a smaller urban area; and

20
in accordance with the Provisions of this Part;

‘ Provided that a Municipality u
tituted in such ur’

ban area or Part th

(2) In this article, «,

or “a largey urban
may,

@ transitional area” “gq smaller urban area”
area” means

as the Governor

248k, (1) Save as provi,
cipality shall be filled:
territorial const,
each Muni

ided in clause (2), all ॥]
by persons chose
ituenciés in the
cipal area shall be

he seats in a Muni-
7 by direct election

area and for is

35

ivided into territorial ¢
‘OWN as wards,

(2) persons having special knowledge or experience in
Municipaj administration;

a



10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

3 =

(ii) the members of the House of the People and tha
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State represent-
ing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the
Municipal area;

(iii) the members of the Council of States and the mem-
bers of the Legislative Council of the State registered as
electors within the Municipal area;

(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted
under clause (5) of article 2438:

Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph () shall
not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality;

(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Munici-
pality.
9488, (1) There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consis-

ting of one or more wards, within the territorial area of a Munici-
pality having a population of three lakhs or more.

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with
respect to— t

{a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards
Committee; पु

(b) the manner in which the seats ina Wards Committee
shall be filled. t
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the
territorial area of the Wards Committee shall be a member of that
Committee. !

(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of—

(a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the
Municipality; or

(b) two or more wards, one of the members _ representing
such wards in the Municipality elected by the members of the
Wards Committee, हे

shall be the Chairperson of that Committee.

(8) Nothing in this‘ article shall be deemed fo prevent the
Legislature of a State from making any provision for the constitu-
tion of Committees in addition to the Wards Committees.

243T. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the number of
seats. so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same propor-
tion to the total number of seats to be filled hy direct election in that
Municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the Muni-
cipal area or of the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal area bears
to the total population of that area and such seats may be allotted by
rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved
under clause (1) shal] be reserved for women belonging to the Sche-
guled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.

Constitu-
tion and
compo-

sition of
Wards

Commit-
tees, ete.

Reserva-
tion of
seats.



Duration
of
Munici-
palities,
ete,

Disgquati-
fications
for
member.
ship.

4 -

(3) Not Jess than one-third (including the number of seats re-
served for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Schedu-
led Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election
in every Municipality shall be reserved for women and such seats
may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Munici- 5
pality, 1

(4) The office of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be
reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women
in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide,

(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the re- 10
servation of office of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for
women) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration
of the period specified in article 334, i

(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a
State from making any provision for reservation of seats in any 15
Municipality or office of Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour
of backward class of citizens. ‘

243U. (1) Every Municipality, unless sooner dissolved under
any law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer: 20

Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable oppor.
tunity of being heard before its dissolution.

(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall
have the effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at any level,
which is functioning immediately before such amendment, till ihe 25
expiration of its duration specified in clause (1).

(3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed,—
(०) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);

(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from
the date of its dissolution: 30

Provided that where the reminder of the period for which
the, dissolved Municipality would have continued is less than
six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under
this clause for constituting the Municipality for such period.

(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Muni- 35
cipality before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for
the remainder of the period for which the dissolyed Municipality
would have continued under clause (1) had it not been se dissolved.

243V. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and

for being, a member of a Municipality— 40

(4) if he is so disqualitied by or under any law for the time
being in force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of
the State concerned: ! ह

शिया ee



5 ॥

Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground
that he is less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the
age of twenty-one years; :

(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the
5 Legislature of the State. |

(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Munici-
pality has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned
in clause (1), the question shall be referred for the decision of such
authority and in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by

10 law, provide, |i

243W. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legis- powers, if

lature of a State may, by law, endow— authority |
and res- i
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as हक शी"
ies

है may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of yyunici-
15 self-government and such law may contain provisions for the  palities,
devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities, ete.
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with res-

pect to— हा |
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development
20 and social justice; :
| (ii) the performance of functions and the implementa-

tion of schemes as may be entrusted to them including those
in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;

(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may
25 be necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities
conferred’ upon them including those in relation to the matters

listed in the Twelfth Schedule,

243K. The Legislature of a State may, by law,— Power to
impose
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appro- taxes by, |
30 priate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such and ds |
procedure and subject to such limits; of, the
Munici- |

(b) assign to 4 Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees _ palities.
levied and collected by the State Government for such purposes
and subject to such conditions and limits;

35 (ec) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Municipa-
lities from the Consolidated Fund of the State; and

(०) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all
moneys received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Munieipali-
ties and also for the withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,

(
'

40 as may be specified in the Jaw,



Finance
Com-
mission.

Audit of

_ accounts
of Muni-
cipalities.
Elections
to the
Municipali-
ties,

Applica-
tion to
Union
‘Territo-
ries.

6

248५, (1) The Finance Cormmission constituted under article
243-1 shall also review the financial position of the Municipalities and
make yecommendations to the Governor as to—

(a) the principles which should govern—

G) the distribution between the State and the Munici- 5
palities of ‘the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and
fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between
them under this Part and the allocation petween the Muni-
cipalities at all levels of their respective shares of such pro-

ceeds; 10

(it) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and

fees which may be assigned to, of appropriated py, the

Municipalities; पर

इक) the grants-in-aid to the ‘Municipalities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State; ion

(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position

of the Municipalities;

(टी. any other matter referred to the Finance Commission.

by the Governor jn the interests of sound finance of the Muni-
cipalities. 20

(2) The, Governor shall cause every recommendation made by
the Commission under this article together with an explanatory
memorandum ss to the action taken thereon to be laid pefore the
Legislature of the State. :

9437, The Legislature of a State may, by law, male provisions 25
with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities
and the audit of such accounts.

94374. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the
preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections
to the Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election Cormmis- 30
ston referred to in article 243K.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legisla-
ture, of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all mat-
ters relating to or in connection with, elections to the Muni cipalities,

24378. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union 35
territories and shall, in their application to & Union territory, have
effect as if the references $0 the Governor of a State were references

to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article
939 and references to the Legislature of the Legislative Assembly of

a State were yeferences in relation to 8 Union territory having a 40
Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:

Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct
that the provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or
part thereof subject to such exceptions and ynodifications 38 he. may
specify in the notification. पु 45



15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in
clause (2), of article 244.

(2) Nothing in this Pari shall be construed to affect the functions
and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Fit Counell constituted under
any law for the time being in force for the hill areas of the district
of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal,

exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law, and no
such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution
for the Purposes of article 368,

248ZD, Q) There shall be constituted in every State at the
district level g District Planning Committee tg consolidate the plans
Prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and
to prepare a dratt development plan for the district as a whole.

(2) The Legislature of ६ State may, by law, make Provision
with Tespect to—

(४) the composition of the District Planning Committees;

(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall
be filled:

Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number
of members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from
amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district
level and of the Municipalities in the district in Proportion to
the ratio between the population of the tural areas and of the
urban areas in the district;

(०) the functions relating to district Planning which may
be assigned to such Committees;

(2) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Com-
mittees shall pe chosen,

(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in Preparing the
draft development plan,— Bon

(4) have Tegard to—

(6) matters of common interest between the Panchayats
and the Municipalities including Spatial planning, sharing of
water and other physical and natural Tesources, the inte-
Srated development of infrastructure and environmental
Conservation; पर

(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether
“financial or otherwise;

(6) consult such institutions and organisations ag the
Governor may, by order, Specify,

(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall
forward the development plan, ag tecommended by such Committee,
to the Government of the State,

Part not
to apply
to certain
areas,

Commit-
tee for
district
Planning.



.Commit-

tee for
Metro-
politan
planning.

8

24998, (1) There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan,
area a Metropolitan Planning Committee to prepare @ draft deve-
opment plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision
with respect to-~

(a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning Com-
mittees;

(b) the manner in which the seats jn such Committees
shall be filled:

Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of 10
such Conimittee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the
elected members of the Municipalities and Chairpersons of the |
Panchayats in the Metropolitan area in proportion to the
ratio between the population of the Municipalities and of the

Panchayats in that area; 15

(०) the representation in stich Committees of the Government
of India and the Government of the State and of such organisa-
tions and institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying
out the functions assigned to such Committees;

(d) the functions relating to planning and coordination 20
for the Metropolitan area which may be assigned to such Com-
mittees;

(e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Com-
mittees shall be chosen. है

(3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing 25
the draft development plan.—

(@) have regard to-—

G) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the
Panchayats in the Metropolitan area, हि
|

(ii) matters of common interest between the Munici- 30
palities and the Panchayats, including co-ordinated spatial
planning of the area, sharing of water and other physical
and natural resources, the integrated development of infra-
structure and environmental conservation;

(iii) the ‘overall objectives and priorities set by the 35
Covernment of India and the Government of the State;

हे (iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be
made in’ the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Govern-
ment of India and of the Government of the State and
other available resources whether financial or otherwise; 40

(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the
+

हे

Governor may, by order, specify. !



16

35

28

i.)
a

30

40

9

(4). The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee
ali torward the development plan, as recommended by such Com-
ittee, to'the Government of the State.

243ZF. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of
any law relating to Municipalities in force in a State immediately
before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1982, which is inconsistent with the provisions
of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until
the expiration of one year from such’ commencement, whichever is
eaxiier:

Provided that ali the Municipalities existing immediately before
such commencement shall continue till the expiration of their
duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that
effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a
State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature
of that State,

243ZG, Notwithstandinv anything in this Constitution,—

(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of

constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, *

made or purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not be
called in question in any court;

(0) no election te any Municipality shall be called in ques-
tion except by an election petition presented to such authority and
in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by
the Legislature of a. Siate.’.

3. In clause (3) of article 280 of the Constitution, sub-clause (c) shall
be lettered as sub-clause (d) and before sub-clause (व) as so relettered,
the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(c) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of
a State to supplement the resources of the Municipalities in the

State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance
Commission of the State;”.

4. After the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, the following

5 Schedule shall be added, namely: —

“TWELFTH SCHEDULE
(Article 243W)

i, Urban planning including town planning.

2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.
3. Planning for economic and social development,

4. Roads and bridges.

5

. Water supply Tor domestic, industrial and commercial purposes,

Conti.
nuance of
existing
laws and
Maunici-

Bar to
inter-
ference
by courts
in elee-
toral
matters,

Amend_
ment of
article
280.

Addition
of
Twelfth
Sehe-
dule.



"10
6. Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste man-
agement.
7, Fire services.

8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion
of ecological aspects.

un

9. Saieguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, in-
cluding the handicapped and mentally retarded,

10. Slum improvement and upgradation.

11, Urban poverty alleviation,

12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks. 14
gardens, playgrounds

13, Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects:

14. Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds
and electric crematoriums.

15. Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals 15

46. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.

17, Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus
stops and public conveniences.

18. Regtilation of slaughter houses and tanneries.”



LOK SABHA

BILL

od
2
&
बज
o
a
a
3
8
PA
g
a
5

further to amend the

(As pissed by Lok Sebha)