1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 159 of  2016
5
THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows :—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint .
2. In section 11 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), —
(a) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) While preparing the National Plan, the National Executive Committee
shall take into consideration —
Amendment of
section 11.
10
53 of 2005.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(i) the native and traditional knowledge, if available, regarding
preparedness of the disaster plan; and
(ii) the successful disaster plans of other countries."; and
(b) in sub-section ( 3), after clause ( a), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(aa) measures to identify the vulnerability of different areas of the country
to different forms of disaster;".
3. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (h), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ha) framing of guidelines for disaster resilient construction of buildings;
(hb) ensuring that all constructions in the seismic zones are earthquake resilient;
(he) taking such remedial measures in consultation with the concerned State
Government as are necessary, in regard to vulnerable buildings in the seismic zones,
which shall include hospitals, hotels, schools and educational institutions, multistorey
buildings and high rise residential complexes;
(hd) ensuring that all buildings compulsorily comply with directions for
earthquake resilience; and
(he) compulsory licensing of buildings and obtaining clearance certificates before
construction of new multistorey buildings.".
Amendment of
section 35.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 was enacted to provide for the effective
management of disasters in the country. Preparedness by Government and society for all
eventualities that may arise due to natural disasters like earthquakes, floods etc. and to work
towards minimizing the death, injury and loss is still to be crystallised.
The need is to identify the areas which are vulnerable to disasters in the country. It is
also of utmost importance that the native and traditional knowledge about the preparedness
of natural disasters be taken into consideration.
To ensure structural strength of constructions that are already existing or that are in
the process of construction or that are proposed to be constructed, especially hospitals,
hotels, schools and multistoried residential complexes, the intervention of Government
pertaining to disaster resilient construction of building is urgently required.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY  RAMACHANDRAN
April 18, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005
(53 OF 2005)
* * * *
11.  (1) There shall be drawn up a plan for disaster management for the whole of the
country to be called the National Plan.
* * * *
(3) The National Plan shall include—
(a) measures to be taken for the prevention of disasters, or the mitigation of their
effects;
(b) measures to be taken for the integration of mitigation measures in the
development plans;
(c) measures to be taken for preparedness and capacity building to effectively
respond to any threatening disaster situations or disaster;
(d) roles and responsibilities of different Ministries or Departments of the
Government of India in respect of measures specified in clauses (a), (b), and (c).
35. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall take all such
measures as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of disaster management. (2) In
particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
measures which the Central Government may take under that sub-section include measures
with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) Coordination of actions of the Ministries or Departments of the Government
of India, State Governments, National Authority, State Authorities, governmental and
nongovernmental organizations in relation to disaster management;
* * * *
(h) Establish institutions for research, training, and developmental programmes
in the field of disaster management;
* * * *
Central
Government to
take measures.
National Plan.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005
————
(Shri Mullapally Ramachandran, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—1385LS(S3)—18-07-2016.