• 
17 of 1927. 
As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABHA 0l!I' 
8m No. 159 of 1985. 
THE LIGHTHOUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Lighthou.re Act, 1927. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the RepubUc 
of India as foll.ows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Lighthouse (Amendment) Act, 1985. 
(2) It shall come into force on such c:Ia.te as the Central Government 
5 may, by notification in the Oftieial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 2 of the Lighthouse Act, 1927 (hereinafter refer.red to as 
the principal Act), after clause (hh), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
• (hha) "ship" includes a sailing vessel;'. 
10 J. In lleCtion 3 of the principal Act, for clauses (b), (c) and (d), the 
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
" (b) appoint a perIOD: to be ~ Director of Lighthouses and 
Ligbtships in each. distriet; 
(c) appoint persons to be Deputy Directors-General of Light-
15 hou"sea and 'Lightships; and 
(d) appoint a person to be the Director-GeneraI of Lighthouses 
and Lightships.". 
Short 
title and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 

Amend-
ment of 
&ection 4. 
2 
•. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 
sub·section shall be inserted, namely:-
II (4) No act or proceeding of the AdviSory Committee shall be 
jnvalidated merely by reason of-
(4) any vacancy in, or any defect in constitution of, the 5 
Advisory Committee; 
(b) any defect in appointment of a person acting as a 
member of the Advisory Committee; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Advisory Com-
mittee not affecting the merits of the case.". 10 
Amend- 5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the expres-
ment of sions "Chief tnspector of Lighthouses" and "Superintendent or Inspector 
section 6. of Lighthouses", the expressions "Director-General of Lighthouses and 
Inser-
tiOn of 
new aec-
tion SA. 
Power of 
CeDtral 
Govem-
IDeM to 
prohibit 
lfIbta 
aDd 
recuJate 
hellbts 
of build-., 
~ 
and trees. 
Lightships" and "Director or Deputy Director-General of Lighthouses and 
Lightships" shall respectively be substituted. 15· 
6. After section 8 of the principal Act and before the heading 
"LIGHT-DUES", the following section shan be inserted, namely:-
USA. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is 
necessary or expedient so to do for unobstructed functioning of any 
lighthouse, it may, by notification in the OtIlcial Gazette, direct 20 
that,- . 
(i) no light shall be established without the prio.r permission 
of the Central Government in case· of genei'al lighthouse and 
without the prior permission of the local lighthouse authority in 
case of local lighthouse on any land within such radius, not 25 
exceeding one kilometre from the lighthouse, as may be speci-
fied in the notification; and 
(ii) no building or structure higher than such height as 
maybe specified in the notification shall be cons~cted o.r erect-
ed, or no tree, which is . likely to grow or ordinarily grows higher 30 
than such height as may be specified in the notification, shall 
be planted., on any land within such radius, not exceeding one 
kilometre from the lighthouse. as may be specified in the 
notification. 
-(2) Where any light has been· established without or contrary 35 
to the permission referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (1), the 
Central Government or the local lighthouse authority, as the case 
may be. may, in addition to any other action that may be taken 
under this Act, make an or~ directing that such light shall be 
removed. by the oWDei' or the person having control of the light, 40 
within such period as may be specified in such order. 
(3) Where any building or structure hal been constructed or 
erected or any tree has been planted in contravention of the direc-
tions contained. in clauae (ii) of sub-sedlon (1), the Central Govern-
ment or the local Ughthouae authority, as the case may be, may, til 45 
addition to ally otller action that may be taken under this ~ make 
• 

3 
an order directing that the height of such building, structure or 
tree shall be reduced to the extent specified in such notification, by 
the owner or the person having control, of the building or structure 
r)r the tree, as the case may be, within· such period as may be 
5 specified in such order. 
10 
20 
45 
50 
(4) No o.rder under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) shall be 
made unless the owner or the person has been given, by means of 
a n~tice, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why such order 
shall not be made. 
(5) If any person fails to remove the light in pursuance of 
direction contained in the order issued undel' 'Ilub-section (2) or reduce 
the height of the building, structure or tree in pursuance of any 
direction contained in the order issued under sub-section (3), within 
the period specified in such order, then, subject to such rules as the 
Central Government may make in this behalf, it shall be competent 
for any oftioer authorised by the Central Government or the la:al 
lighthouse authority, as the case may be,. in this behalf to Xdluwe 
such light or to reduce the height of such building, structure or 
tree and the expenses of such removal or reduction shall be recover-
able from such person as a land revenue. 
(6) The orders referred to in sub-sections (2) and (3) and the 
notice referred to in sub-section (4) shan be served on the owner 
or the person haVing the control of the light, building, ·structure or 
tree, as the case may be,-
(i) by delivering or tendering it to such owner or person; or 
(ii) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by delivering 
or tendering it to any oftlcer of such owner or person or any 
adult male member of the family of such owner or person or by 
affixing a copy thereof on some conspicuous part of the premises 
in which such owner or person is known to have last resided 
or carried on business or personally worked for gain. or failing 
service by these means; 
. (iiti) by post. 
(7) If any person wilfully fails to comply with any directioA 
contained in any notification issued under sub-section (1), he shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months Or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees 
or with both. 
(8) Every notification issued by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) shall .be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
published in the Official Gazette, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately follOwing the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both· Houses agree in making 
any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the 
notification should be made, the notification shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such· modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
the notification.", 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
10. 
Amend-
mentol 
Retlon12. . 
Amend-
ment of 
section 21. 
7. In seetion 10 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-eection shall b. 
substituted. namely:-
"(1) The Central Government may, by notlflcation in the 
Official Gazette, prescribe BUch rates. as it may deem necessary 5 
to provide for the purpose mentioned in section 9, at which light-
dues shall be payable, and may prescribe different rates for 
different classes of ships or sailing vessels. or for ships or sail-
ing vessels of the same class when. in use for difl'erent purposes 
or in different circumstances."; 10 
(b) after sub-section (3). the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (4) Every notification isSued by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) shall be laid, u soon as may be after it is 
published in the Oftlcial Gazette, before each House of Parlia- 15 
ment, while it is in. session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session imme-
diately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
sai~ both Houses agree in making any modification in the noti- 20 
fieation or both Houses agree that the notification should not 
be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no e1fect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 25 
under ~he notification.". 
8. In section 12 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following 
~ub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
W (1) For the purposes of levy of light-dues, the tonnage of a 
ship or sailing vessel shall be reckoned as. 1.Dlder the Merchant 30 
Shipping Act, 1958 for dues payable on a ship's tonnage incluc:ting 44 of 1958. 
the tonnage of any space added under the said Act to the tonnage of 
ships by reason of such space being utilised for carrying cargo.". 
9. In section 21 of the principal Act. in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for clause (a), the follOwing clause shall be substituted,35 
namely:-
" (4) the powers and dutiea of the Director-General of 
Lighthouses and: Lightships and Dlrec'torI and Deputy Directors-
General of Ughtbousea and Ligbtships;"; 
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 40 
namely:-
.. (bb) the manner in which the light may be removed and 
the height of the building, structure or tree may be reduced 
under 8~~ (5) of section SA;". 

STATEMENT OF OBJBCTS AND REASONS. 
The Lighthouse Act does not provide an independent definition of 
"saUing vessel". Therefore, it has become necessary to include in section 
2 a definition of the expression ''ship''· to the effect that "ship" includes 
a sailing vessel. 
2. Consequent upon the change in the designation of oftlcers mention-
ed in sections 3, 6 and 21 of the Act, it has become necessary to substi-
tute the same by appropriate designations presently in vogue. 
3. At present there is no provision in the Act to preserve the validity 
of the acts or proceedings ,of the Central Advisory Committee appointed 
under section 4 (1), from challenge on the ground of existence of any 
vacancy in or defect in constituting the Committee or any irregularity 
of procedure not affecting the merits of the case. A new section 4 (4) 
for this purpose has been proposed for insertion in the Act. 
4. The Lighthouses and other aids to nevigation are vital for the 
shipping traffic and it is imperative that their flIDctions should in no 
way be allowed to be obstructed. Since the Act does not contain any 
provision for the removal of obstructions. it has become necessary to 
confer powers in this behalf on the Central Government by incorporating 
suitable enabling provisions in the Act. The new seetion SA is proposed 
to be inserted for meeting such contingencies. 
5. According to section 10(1) of the Act, as amended in 1976" the 
maximum rate at which light-dues· may be levied is Rs. 1.50 per tonne. 
The rate i,s not at all adequate to meet the cost of services which have 
to be rendered. The enhancement of the l'ates of light-dues by resorting 
to amendments of section 10(1) has proved to be a long and time con-
suming process resulting in a considerable loss of revenue to the Depart-
ment. In view of this position, it is proposed to amend section 10 (1) of 
the Act so as to enable the Central Government to prescribe by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette' such rates as are necessary to provide for 
the purpose mentioned in section 9 of the Act at which light-dUes shall 
be payable and lay such notification. before each House of Parliament. 
6. At present, no light-dues can be levied on the additional cargo 
carried on the deck and thereby a considerable amount of revenue is 
being lost. Accordingly, it has become necessary to amend section 12(1) 
of the Act. 
7. The Bill seeks to achieye the above objects. 
Nrm Da.m; Z. R. ANSARI. 
The 14th August. 1985. 
5 

· MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert new clause (bb) in sub-section (2) 
of section 21 so as to empower the Central Government to make rules 
regarding the manner in which the light may be removed and the height 
of the building, structure o.r tree may be reduced. 
2. This is a matter of procedure and administrative detail. 
3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

Appoint-
ment of 
ofticen. 
Advisory 
Committees. 
Power .to 
inspect 
local liaht-
hoUlelo 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS PROM THE LIGHTHOUSE ACT. 1927 
(17 OF 1927) 
• • • • • 
3. The Central Govemment may, by notifieation in the 
Gazette,-
Official 
l' 
• • • • • 
(b) appoint a person to be the Superintendent of Lighthouses in 
each district; 
(c) appoint a person to be the Chief Inspector of Lighth9uses in 
India; and 
(d) appoint persons to be Inspectors of Lighthouses. 
4. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Central Advisory 
Committee and shall consult it in regard to-
(a) the erection ·or position of lighthouses or of any works 
appertaining thereto; 
(b) additions to, or the alteration or removal of, lighthouses; 
(c) the variation of the character of any lighthouse or Of the 
mode of use thereof; 
(d) the cost of any proposals relating to lighthouses; or 
(e) the making or alteration of any rules or .rates of dues under 
this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may, jf it thinks fit, appoint an 
Advisory Committee for any district for the purpose of advising in 
regard to any of the matters specified in sub-section (1) in so far as·the 
interests of the district are affected thereby. 
(3) Advisory Committees shall consist of persons representing inter-
ests affected by this Act or having special knowledge of the subject-
matter thereof. 
• • • • • 
6. (1) The Chief Inspector of Lighthouses may, at any time, and any 
Superintendent Or Inspector of Lighthouses may, if authorised in this 
behalf by a general or special o.rder in writing of the Central Govern-
ment, enter upon and inspect any local lighthouse and make such in-
quiries in respect thereof or ot the management thereof as he thinks 
fit. 
• • • • • 
T 

oM of 1958. 
8 
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Of!lcial Rates of 
Gazette, prescribe rates, not exceeding one rupee and fifty paise per ton li,bt-duOl 
at which light-dues shall be payable, and may prescribe . different rates leviable. 
for different classes of ships, or for ships of the same class when in use 
for different purposes or in different circumstances. 
• • • • • 
lZ. (1) For the purpose of the levy of light-dues, a ship's tonnage Ascertain-
shall be reckoned as under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, for dues ment of 
payable on a ship's tonnage. tonnage. 
• • • • • 
21. (1) • • • '. • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a.) the powers and duties of the Chief Inspector of Lighthouses 
and of Superintendents and Inspectors of Lighthouses; 
• • • • • 
Power to 
makeru1eL 

LOK SABRA 
'. 
A 
BILL 
furt.er to amend the LightJaouse Act, 1127. 
(ShTi Z. R. Ansari, 
MiniBter of State of the 
MiniBtry of ShiPlri~ anti 
T .. ...,.m.) 