AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 159 of 2024
THE  STRAY ANIMALS CONTROL BILL, 2024
By
SHRI ANAND BHADAURIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the control of stray animals in the
country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Stray Animals Control Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.

(b) “board” means Stray Animals Control Board constituted under section 3;
(c) “stray animals” means animals left unattended by the animal rearer or farmers
in public places for fodder and water and includes its progeny, bulls and
bullocks;
(d) “animal rearer” means persons rearing animals; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under provisions of this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Board to be known as the Stray Animals Control Board for the control of
stray animals in the country.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and ten other members, including
one member each from the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh having
special experience for conducting various schemes of cattle rearing, and five animal
rearers engaged in farming and rearing animals for the last five years.
(3)  The headquarters of the Board shall be in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(4) The Board shall hold quarterly review meeting in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall,—
(a) conduct a survey once in every year for five years to assess the number
of stray animals in the country;
(b) establish an animal shelter in every village for protection of stray animals
with the facility of proper cleaning, fodder, water, breed improvement;
(c) make arrangements for the collection of cow urine, panchgavya products
and installation of gobar gas plants;
(d) establish breed improvement centre for Tharparkar, Gir, Sahiwal and
Gangatiri breed of cows; and
(e) establish animal sanctuaries through water conservation, plantation
and pasture on the basis of public partnership by the Forest Department of the
State Government concerned on the open and vacant land.
5. The Central Government shall provide the following financial assistance to
every animal rearer;—
(a) rupees one thousand per month per stray animal for rearing for a period
of one year;
(b) for the establishment of flour mill, oil ghani, fodder cutting machine
and pump technique for extracting water utilising the stray bullock and ox; and
(c) rupees twelve hundred per month as incentives to the farmers who utilises
stray animal  such as oxes and bullock cart for agricultural purpose.
6. The Central Government shall award rupees five lakh as an incentive to the
Gram Panchayat which has made full control on stray animals under its jurisdiction.
7. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) on the recommendation of the Gram Panchayats under its jurisdiction
provide compensation to the farmers for the loss of his crops caused due to stray
animals;
(b) grant compensation of rupees ten lakh to the dependants of the victim
who has  loss his life due to attack by stray animals; and
Constitution
of the  Stray
Animal
Control
Board.
Functions of
the Stray
Animal Control
Board.
Responsibilityof appropriateGovernment.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
2
Financial
Assistance to
animal rearer.
Incentive toGram Panchayathaving controloverstrayanimals.

Central
Government to
provide requisite
Funds.5
10
Power to make
rules.
15
3
CentralGovernment togive directionsto StateGovernments.
(c)  provide grant upto fifty percent to the farmers for the expenses required
for fencing of the farms.
8. The Central Government shall, after appropriate appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this regard, make available requisite sums of money to the
State Governments for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
9. The Central Government may give such directions to the State Governments,
as may be necessary, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Act.
 (2)  Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature.
.
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
           Agriculture is the basis of the country’s economy and when it goes in a loss,
the only alternate source of income for farmers is animal husbandry. But in the
economically backward areas of the country, especially in drought prone Bundelkhand
for the last several decades, it has become very difficult to arrange water and fodder
for animals. Consequently, farmers leave their herd of cows far away from their homes
for their livelihood. In Bundelkhand region, it is also known as Anna Pratha. It is a
pan-Indian problem. Stray cattle cause a lot of damage to standing crops, causing
loss to farmers and also adversely affect social harmony. The traditions like Anna
Pratha also provide impetus to the smuggling of stray cattle.  Some of these stray
animals die prematurely due to lack of fodder and water. Besides this, stray cows
come on roads and highways, causing heavy traffic jams or accidents. Controlling
stray cows will not only increase the income of farmers, but also stop their migration.
This will also control the cattle smuggling, reduce the harm incurred to animals and
accidents on the roads, and will also bring social harmony in the society.
            The Bill aims to prevent the menace of cow smuggling and the problem of stray
animals especially in drought affected areas; to eliminate the problem of customs like
Anna Pratha, to take care of domestic animals like cow and its progeny and to reduce
the burden on farmers.
         Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;
August 16, 2024 ANAND BHADAURIA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formation of Stray Animals Control Board for
the protection and control of stray animals in the country. It also provides for
appointment of Chairperson and ten other members to the Board. Clause 4 provides
for establishment of animal promotion centre, etc. Clause 5 provides for financial
assistance to the animal rearer. Clause 6 provides for incentive of rupees five lakh to
a Gram Panchayat having control over stray animals in its jurisdiction. Clause 7
provides for the appropriate Government to provide compensation to the farmers for
loss of crops due to stray animals. It also provides for payment of compensation of
rupees ten lakh in case of death of a person due to attack by stray animals. Clause 8
provides that the Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments
for the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure
to the tune of about rupees twenty thousand crore will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the  delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the control of stray animals in the
country and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Anand Bhadauria, M.P .)