Bengal Act 
VI of 1M!. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
BIU No. 15 of' 1~3 
THE BENGAL FINANCE (SALES TAX) (DELHI 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941 as in 
force in the Union territory of Delhi. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Short title 
(Delhi Amendment) Act, 1963. and com-
mence-
S (n It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Commission- ment. 
er, Delhi, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 5 of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941, as in Amend-
forc~ in the Union territory of Delhi, in sub-section (1),- ment of 
section 5. 
(i) in clause (a), for the words "seven naya paise", the 
10 words Clten naye paise" shall be substituted; and 
(ii) in clause (c), for the words "four naya paise", the 
words Clfive naye paise" shall be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In view of the need fou raiSing add tional re60urces, it was agreed 
at the last meeting of the Chief MinistzI'3 of States that the raJte of 
Sales Tax on certain luxury goods, which are now taxable in almost 
all the States at a uniform rate of 7%. IIk:J be raised to 10%. To give 
effect to this decision in the Union ttL rritory of Delhi, it was 
necesstary to amend the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941, as 
extended to Delhi. It was also found that the general rate of Sales 
Ta~ applicable in Delhi was lower as compared with the rates 
obtaining in adjoining States. The gbove opportunity of amending 
the Aet is, therefore, proposed ,to be availed of, to reduce the prevail-
ing disparities by increasing the general rate of Sales Tax in Delhi 
from 4% to 5%. 
Hence this Bill. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th Ma.rch, 1963. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT nOM THE BENGAL FINANCE (SALES TAX) ACT, 1941 AS IN 
FORCE IN THE UNION TERRITORY OF DELHI (VI OF 1941) 
• • • • 
5. (1) The tax payable by a dealer under this Act shall be Rate Of 
levied,- Tax. 
(a) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of the goods 
specified in the First SchedlHe, at the rate of seven naya paise 
in the rupee; 
(b) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of the goods 
specified in the Third Schedule, at the rate of two naya paise in 
the rupee; 
(c) in the cese of taxable turnover in respect of any other 
goods, at the rate of four naya paise in the rupee: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to, or omit from, or otherwise amend the First and the 
Third Schedules: 
Provided ~urther that if in respect of any goods or class of goods 
the Chief Commissioner is of opinion that it is expedient in the 
mterest of the general public so ,to do, the Chief Commissioner, with 
the previous approval of the Central Government, may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, direct that the ·tax in respect of the 
taxable turnover of such goods or class of goods shall, subject to 
mch conditions as may be specified, be levied at such modified rate 
not exceeding the rate applicable under this sub-section as may be 
apecified in the notification. 
• • • • 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941 as 
in force in the Union territory of Delhi. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 