10K 3ABhA 
CORRlGENDA 
to 
THE \\Ql.~.KING JOURNALISTC iJfj.i Q'LLU t-Il1~iS.?.L-u:I!J:l. EHPWYEES 
(CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AND MISCELLANEOUS PRO'lISIOHS 
( AMENDivJENT) BI LL, 1979 . 
( To be/As introduced in Lok Sabba) 
1 • Page 1 , in the Long Title,-
.fQ1: liN e 1..rSp ap er s 11 read "Ne wsp 'lper 11 
2. Page 3, line 14, -
for "fixing ("If" read "fixing or" 
3. Page 5, line 14, -
for "employee s' II read "employers' " 
4. Page 8, line 2,-
for "NEWS!? .AP ERS II read "NEWSP APEh ,t 
NEW DELHI; 
Februar.~.~ 19~ Magtia 2~~ , 900 aka) 

Uotllll. 
.B 
As INTRODt1CID IN LOR: SABHA ON 
, Q fEB \919 
Bill No. 15 of Ist79 
!l'liE WORIQNG JOUBNALISTS AND OTHE.R NEWSPAPER EM-
PLOYUS (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AND MISCELI.ANEOUS 
PROVISIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL. 1979 
~ ',<I ' ,., . 1 A 
BILL 
further to .amend thB Working Jo'U.rruuists and Oth.e1- Newspapers 
Em.p1Dyess (Clonditions of ServiCe) and Mi.'Jcellaneous Provisions 
Act~ 195~. 
WHEREAS the Wage Board constituted under' section 9 of the Working 
JCltl.tQau"ts and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of ~rvice) and 
:MiscellaneoUs Provisions Act, 1955 by the notification of the Government 
of India in the Ministry of Labour, No. s.0. 809, dated the 6th February, 
S 1976 for fixing and revising rates of wages in respect of wo,rking journa-
lists and the Wage Board constituted under section 13C of the said Act 
.hy the n9Mfteatiol'l ef the Gowmment of India in the 141J7.istry o~ Labour, 
No. S.O. I., 41ated the 11th June, 1975 for fixing and revjsUlg rates of 
wages in respect of non-journalist newspaper employees have not been 
10 able to function effectively; 
AND WHEREAS the consequent delay on the part of the said Boards in 
making thefr recommendations to the Central Government has impeded 
the making of proper provision for securing to working journalists and 
non",;oUl'JUllist newspaper employees just conditions of work; 
15 AND WHEREAS for dealing with the situations referred to in the fore-
g~pa1"OgMph8 ~ matters .risillg therefrom it is necessary in the 
.... Wie mterest to m.ake alternative 8lT8Qgements for the purpose of fixing 
and revising rates of wages in respect of worldng journalists and in 
r~spect of non-jaumalist newspaper employees under the said Act and 
20 ijiereby securing to them speedtly just conditions of work; 
BE it ... ted ~ Par-liament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
I. ~!l} This Act may be caned the WorkUJ,g JoumaUsts an.d Other 
Ii ..... per ~ees(COnditions of8erYice) And ~us Pro-
25 '\riB... (Amead.metlt) Ad, mg. 
(I) It shall be deemed to ha~ @6me into fqrce on the 31st day of 
January, 1(179. IL . _ 
Shc;ri 
title and 
com-
mence-
ment. 

Amend-
ment 01. 
section 2. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
13AA. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Tribunal 
forftxing 
orrevis-
ingrates 
otwages 
in respect 
of work-
ingjour-
nalists. 
2. In section 2 of the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Em-
ployees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Ad, 1955 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (e), the 
foHowing . clause shall be inserted, namely:-
'(ee) "Tribunal" means,-
(i) in relation to working journalists, the Tribunal consti-
tuted under section 13AAj and 
(ii) in relation to non-journalist newspaper employees, the 
Tribunal constituted under section 13'DDj'. 
s 
3. In Chapter II of the principal Act, after section 13A, the following 10 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"13AA. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ad, 
where the Central Government is of opinion that the Board consti. 
tuted under section 9 for the purpose of fudng or revising rates of 
wages in respect of working journalists under this Act has not been IS 
able to function (for any reason whatsoever) effectively, and in the 
circumstances, it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a Tribunal, which shall consist of a penon 
who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme Court, 
for the purpose of fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of 
working journalists under this Act. ' 20 
(2) The provisions of sections 10 to 13A shall apply to, and in 
relation to, the Tribunal constituted under gub-section (1) of this 
section, the Central Government and working journalists, subject to 
the modifications that-- 2S 
(a) the references to the Board therein, wherever they 
occur, shall be construed as references to the Tribunalj 
(b) in sub-section (3) of section 11,-
(i) the reference to the office of Chairman or any other 
member of, the Board shall be construed as a reference to the 30 
office of the person constituting the Tribunal; and 
(ii) the reference to section 9 shall be construed as a 
reference to sub-section (1) of this section; and 
(c) the references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 
shall be construed as references to section 12 read with this sec-3S 
tion. 
(3) The Tribunal, in discharging its functions under this Act, 
may act on the evidence recorded by the Wage Board or partly 
recorded by the Wage Board and partly recorded by itself: 
~or 1955. 
. Provided that ifi the Tribunal is of opinion that further examina- 40 
tlon of any of the witnesses whose evidence has already been recorded 
is necessary in the interests of justice, it may re-summon any such 
witness, and after such further examination, cross-examination and 
re-examination, if any, as it may permit, t.h~ wjtJl~~ ,hall be dis-
charged. . 
4S 

3 
(4) On the constitution of a Tribunal under sub-section (1), the 
Board constituted under section 9 and functioning immediately 
before such constitution shall cease to exist and the members consti-
tuting that Board shall be deemed to have vacated their ofDces: 
S Provided that any interim rates of wages fixed by. the Central 
Government under section 13A in respect of working journalists and 
in force immediately before the constitution of the Tribunal shall 
remain in force until tlieorder of the Central Government under 
section 12 read with this section comes into operation.". 
10 4:. In Chapter IIA of the principal Act, after section 130, the 'following 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
4S 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
1113DD. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
where the Central Government is of opinion that the Board consti-
tuted under section l3C for the purpose of fixing of revising raies of 
w..- ia respect of non-journalist newspaper employees under this 
Act has not been able to function (for any reason whatsoever) effec-
tively, and in the circumstances, it is necessary so to do, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Tribunal, which shall 
consist of a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or 
the Supreme Court, for the purpose of fixing or revising rates of 
wages in respect of non-journalist newspaper employees under this 
Act. 
(2) The provisions of sections 10 to 13A shall apply to, and in 
relation to, the Tribunal constituted under sub-section (1) of this 
section, the Central Government and non-journalist newspaper em-
ployees, subject to the modifications that-
(a) the references to the Board and working journalists 
therein, wherever they occur, shall be construed respectively as 
references to the Tribunal and to non~ournalist newspaper em-
ployees; 
(b) in sub-section (3)0,£ section 11,-
(i) the reference to the office of Chairman or any other 
member of the Board shall be construed as a reference to 
the office of the person constituting the Tribunal; and 
(ii) the reference to section 9 shall be construed as a 
reference to SUb-section (1) oil this section; and 
(c) the references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 
shall be construed as references to section 12 read with this sec-
tion. 
(3) The Tribunal, in discharging its functions under t~s Act, 
may act on the evidence recorded by the Wage Board or partly re-
corded by the Wage Board and partly recorded by itself: 
Provided that if the Tribunal is of opinion that further exami-
nation o~ any of the witnesses whose evidence has already been re-
corded is necessary in the interests of justice, it may re-summon any 
INCh witness, and after such further examination, cross-examination 
and re-examination, if any, as it may permit, the witness shall be dis-
charged, 
Insertion 
Ott new 
section 
13DD. 
Constitu-
tion Oi 
Tribunal 
forflxing 
or revis-
ingrates 
of wages 
in respect 
otnon-
jOurnalist 
paper em-
ployees. 

AmeRd-
m,etlt of 
IIeCtiOa 19. 
AmeDd-
meD,tof 
lleC:tion 20. 
4 
(4) On the constitution of a Tribunal under sub-section (1), the 
Board constituted under section 13C and functioning itnmedlafely 
before such constitution shall cease to exist and the members cons-
tituting that Board shall be deemed to have vacated their omeei: 
Provided that any interim rates of wages fixed by the Central 5 
Government under section 13A read with section 13D in respect 'Of. 
non-journalist newspaper employees and in force immediately before 
the constitution of the Tribunal shall remain in force until the order 
of the Central Government under section 12 read with this section 
comes into operation.". 
5. In section 19 of the principal Act, after the words "member of the 
Board", the words "or the person constituting the Tribunal" shall bf! 
inserted. 
10 
t. In section 20 o~ the principal Act, in clause (d) of sub..-tloa(2), 
after the word "Board", the wer&; "or, as the cue may be, the ~al," 1'5 
shall be inserted. ',~ 
7. (1) The Working Journalists and OtMr Newspaper bployees 
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Antenc!ment) 
Ordinance, 1979 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action faken 20 
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordil'llriae shall be 
deetned to have been done or taken under the principal Ad as aDl8'l1ded 
by this Act. 
3 of 1979. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Government constituted, under the Working Journalists 
and Other Newspaper Empl10yees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellane-
ous Provisions Act, 1955, two Wage Boards, one for non-journalist new~ 
paper employees and the other for working journalists, on the 11th June, 
1975 and 6th February, 1976 respectively. On the 1st April, 1977,. the 
Central Government, on the recommendations of the Wage Boards, noti-
fied interhn wage rates for these employees under section 13A, read with 
section 13D, of the Act. Soon after this, some newspaper managements 
filed writ petitions in various High Courts challenging the 'fixation C1l 
interim wage rates on various grounds. The constitution of the Wage 
Boards was also challenged ori the ground that the two independent mem-
ber9 on the Wage Boards were not really independent. Later, in Decem-
ber 1977, the employees' representatives wrote to the Central Government 
that they were withdrawing from the Wage Boards because their respec-
tive or.ganisations desired them to do so. Under the circumstances, fur-
ther sittings of the Wage Boards had to be po9tponed. 
2. The Government made several efforts to resolve the deadloot. 'l'tIe 
employees' representatives put forward some concrete propoI8clsfor 
ending the lI'talemate, but these proposals were not acceptable to the 
employers' oarganisations. No other alternative proposals acceptable to 
both sides and within the framework of .existing Boards and the.Act 
under which the Boards have been set up, emerged. The Wage Boards 
were therefore advised to proceed with their work. On 28th August, 1978 
writ petitim1s were flIed by the Indian and Eastern Newspaper Society 
and Others in the High Court at Bombay, challenging the emstitutioll 
of the Wage Boards and praying that the members of the Wage Boards 
(other than the employers' representatives) be restrained from. hoIdiD&' 
or proceeding with any meetings of the Wage Boards. An interim injunc-
tion order was passed by the Bombay High Cow-t on 9th September, 1978 
allowing the prayer of the petitioners. This was confirmed on 10th Octo-
ber, 1m. Around thi9 time, the employers' representatives on the two 
Wage Boards sent in their resignations to the Government. As a result, 
the Wage Boards could not proceed with their work. 
3. AI; no other solution except making alternative arrangements for 
dispGsal of the work entrusted to the Boards could be found and as it be-
came urgently necessary to make such alternative arrangements so as to 
secure speedily just conditions of work to non-journalist newspaper em-
pl<1yee8 and working journalists, the President promulgated on the 31st 
January, 1979 the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees 
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment)' 
Ordinance, 1979. This Ordinance provided for the constitution of a Tribu-
nal consisting of a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court or 
the Supreme Court in place of each such Board and the abolition of such 
Boards upon the constitution of such Tribunals and for the continuance 
of the interim wages notified by the Government after taking into ac-
count the recommendations of 9Uch Boards. The Ordinance also em-
powered each Tribunal to regulate its own procedure and to act in Its 
discretion on the evidence recorded by the Board in place of which such 
Tribunal had been created. 
4. The present Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NIlW DD.m; 
The 14th Febrl./4'11l, 1979. RAVlNDRA VARMA. 
, 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 13AA, w bile clause 
4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 130D in Chapter IIA 
of the principal Act. Sub-section (1) of the said new section 13AA pro-
vides for the constitution of a tribunal for fixing or revising rates of 
wages in respect of working journalists, while sub-section (1) of the other 
new section 13DO provides for the constitution of a tribunal for fixing 
or revising rates of wages in respect of non-journalist newspaper em-
ployees. 
The expenditure that will be involved as a result of the constitution 
of the tribunal aforesaid would depend upon the periods for which such 
tribunals may have to function, the number of witnesses that such tribu-
nals may call and the travelling allowances that will have to be paid to 
IRlch witnesses, the staff that, may be employed for assisting such tribu-
nals, etc. As a matter of economy, the same person has been appointed 
to both the tribunals constituted under the relevant provisions of the 
Ordinance which the Bill seeks to replace. 
It is estimated that the non-recurring expenditure, which may be in-
volved with respect to both the tribunals, would be of the order of about 
Rs. 1 lakh and that the expenditure on salaries, allowances and other 
items of recurring expenditure would be about Rs. 2 lakhs for one year. 
If the tribunals complete their work in less than a year, there will be a 
corresponding reducUon in the expenditure on recurring items and if the 
tribunals continue for a period longer than one year, there will be a cor-
responding increase in such expenditure. It is estimated that expendi"-
ture as aforesaid will also be incurred as and when similar tribunals 
are set up in future. 
It may also be mentioned that in view of the fact that a tribunal can 
be constituted only in place of a wage board, whenever a tribunal is con9ti-
tuted, the Wage Board concerned will stand abolished and there would, 
therefore, be a corresponding reduction in expenditure. 
The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or non-
tecurring nature. . 
(, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 20 of 
the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions 
of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955, to empower the 
Central Government to make rules to regulate the procedure to be fol-
lowed by the Tribunal constituted under new section 13AA or section 
13DD. The Central Government has already been empowere-d to. make 
rules to regulate the procedure to be followed by the Wage Board consti-
tuted under section 9 or section 13C. The power of making rules will be 
confined to matters of procedure. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a nonna! cha-
racter. 
.. J. .. : 1 

Indem-
nity. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
.' 
i 
ANNEXURE 
EX'l'RIlCTS PROM .'ftH: WORKING JOURNALISTS AND 0rIaR N&wsPAICRS 
EMPIlOYImlS (CONDITIONS OF SmVICE) AND MlllCELLANBOUS 
PliOVISIONS Aer, 1955 
(45 OF 1955) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
CHAPI'ER II 
WORKING JOURNALISTS 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER II-A 
NON-JOURNALIST NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
M!SCELLANIDOUS 
• • • • • 
19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Chairman or any other member of the Board or an Inspector appOinted 
under this Act for any thing which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done. ~ 
• • • • • 
20. (1) • * • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any o~ the following 
matters, namely:-
•. • • • • 
(d) tne procedure to be followed by the Board in the discharge 
of its functions under this Act; 
• • * • • 
8 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper 
Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1955. 
(Shri Ravindra Varm4, 
Minister of ParliamentMy 
A.ffairs and Labour.) 