AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

JUE 1999

Bill No. 15_of 1998

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
‘Suri Amar Pat Sincu, M.P.

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India

‘it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

4. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998.
2. In article 302 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end,

__ “Provided that no such law shall impose any restrictions on the freedom of
de or commerce between one State and another or within any part of the territory
India in respect of any agricultural produce or its product or by-product or any
trial product or by-product based on an agricultural product.”.

article 304 of the Constitution, before the existing proviso, the following proviso
ed, namely —

“Provided that the provisions of this article shall not apply in respect of any

icultural produce or its product or by-product or any industrial product based on
agricultural product.”.

Short title.

Amendment of
article 302.

Amendment of
article 304,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, many States have imposed restrictions on the movement of agricultural
produce and its products or by-products and as a result farmers are unable to sell their
products in other States. Sometimes, it so happen that a particular agricultural product is
produced in large quantities in one State and there is acute shortage of the product in other
States. Due to ban in the movement of the product the farmers are not able to sell their
product to those States. They suffer heavy losses due to accumulation of the product and
for which there is no market in their home States.

Moreover, it has been seen that prices are different for the same agricultural product
in various States. In some States the prices are very low and in some other States it is very
high and as a result, though, there is a ban in the movement, illegal trading takes place.
With a view to streamlining the prices of al! agricultural produce and to ensure adequate
protection to the farmers in the matter of sale of their agricultural produce, it is proposed
toamend the constitution that there should be no ban in the movement or trade of agricultural
produce between one State and another or within any part of our country. For national
unity and integrity, these amendments are must and essential.

Hence this Bill,

New Detut; AMAR PAL SINGH
March 23, 1998


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

| * * * * * *
302. Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade, Powerof
or intercourse between one State and another or within any part of the territory Parliament to

ia as may be required in the public interest. impo sca

trade, commerce
and intercourse.

* * * * * * *

304. Notwithstanding anything in article 301 or article 303, the Legislature of a Restrictionson

may by law:— De, om
and intercourse

among States.

(a) impose on goods imported from other States or the Union territories any
tax to which similar goods manufactured or produced in that State are subject, so,
however, as not to discriminate between goods so imported and goods so manufactured
or produced; and

(b) impose such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce on
intercourse with or within that State as may be required in the public interest:

Provided that no Bill or amendment for the purposes of clause (b) shall
be introduced or moved in the Legislature of a State without the previous
sanction of the President.

* * * * * * *



ee ed

a ene

29 २2005 Netaai wena eal 18. ese आकर ROR

99451 615, «५ ५ ge © RNAS ZO Sthtei titi: Pray wo SATE WILE HE Tis जया
7 WP al Gang eh elgg. "४

a

i -
paleet 4 Te ROT कक BLE, pe tee ७ हल: डुछू५ cereale ge
ltt हे
ee "55
् फ्छमकक।:2/ Ne (9०6 xeon PAE ica ani oA)
= deat ee oR A er ॥2८३॥७- © Samu we hp AW Amey
क* अं 'स॥ल्‍क <-#-२+--<६.. कमा BE Pe emia ds. (न
7 . a 5
2 SLO Ws » Desi Saas J ८०
es

a ८-८ के
Bak, ee te emt को HP ly
b Wet! te Bye cos Biy

ach a! «4 gum te F

TAP बकरी! Tee 0 (६७२ ame

Wine tet

aa

Sr BUT

ie

५ धन