IIU No. I! 011'$1 
THE EXPENDITURE-TAX BILL, 1957 
( As IN'l'lODUCBD IN LoK SABm ) 

I'HE EXPENDITURE-TAX BILL, I051 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
~. CHAPTER r 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencemea.t. 
2. Deftnitiolll. .; 
CHAPTER IT 
CIUR(2 0 .. gPENDITURE-TAX AND EXPIlNDITl1R1 !UBJ!'.C'J TO SUCH c:RAIt_ 
3. Charge of expenditure-tax. 
,. Amounts to be included in taxable expenditure. 
5. Exemptions from expenditure-tax in certain cues. 
e. Exclusion from taxable expenditure. 
CHAPTER ITr 
EXPENDITURE-TAX AUTHOIUTIZS 
,. Expenditure-tax Officers. 
8. Appellate Assistant Commissioners of Expenditure-tax. 
9. Commissioners of Expenditure-tax. 
10. Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Expeniiiture-tax. 
U. Expenditure-tax Officers to be subordinate to the Co~ 
sioner of Expenditure-tax and the Inspecting AasiatuI J 
Commissioner of Expenditure-tax. 
U. Expenditure-tax authorities fo follow onsel'l, etc. 01 m. Bome. 
CHAPTER IV 
Ass~!MD'r 
13. Return of expenditure. 
1 •. Return after the due date and amendment 01 refurn. 
1'. Aalessment. 
18. Expenditure escaping assessment. 
!T. Penalty for concealment. 
(i) 

LIABn.ITY TO ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL CASES 
18. Tax of deceased persons payable by legal representative. 
19. Assessment after partition of a Hindu undivided family. 
CHAPTER VI 
APPEALS, REVISIONS AND REFERENCES 
20. Appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner from orders 
of Expenditure-tax Officers. 
21. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal from orders of the Appel-
late Assistant Commissioners. 
22. Power of Commissioner to revise orders of Expenditure-tax 
-Officers in the interests of revenue. 
23. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal from orders of enhancement 
of Commissioner. 
24. Reference to High Court. 
25. Hearing by High Court. 
26. Appeal to the Supreme Court. 
CHAPTER VII 
PAYMENT AND RECOVERY OF iEXPENDITURE--TAX 
27. Notice of demand. 
28. Recovery of tax and penalties. 
29. Mode of recovery. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
30. Rectification of mistakes. 
31. Prosecutions. 
32. Power to take evidence on oath, etc. 
33. Information returns and statements. 
34. Effect of transfer of authorities on pending proceedings. 
35. Computation of periods of limitation. 
36. Service of notice. 
37. Prohibition of disclosure of information. 
38. Bar of jurisdiction. 
39. Appearance before Expenditure-tu authorities by authoris-
ed representatives. 
40. Power to make rules. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

.. of 192.40 
s 
BDI No. 15 of 1'~. 
THE EXPENDITURE-TAX BILL, 1957, 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy oj a tax on expenditure. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
P!w.D.uNARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957. Short 
eztcDt 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu COIJIimellteeI 
and Kashmir. maIL 
(3) It shall come into force on the 1st day of. April, 1958. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
10 (a) "Appellate Assistant Commissioner" means· a ~erson 
empowered to exercise the functions of an Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner of Expenditure-tax under section 8; 
(b) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal 
appointed under section 5A of the Income-tax Act; 
]s (c) "assessee" means an individual or a Hindu undivjded 
family by whom expenditure-tax or any other sum of money is 
payable under this Act, and includes every individual or Hindu 
undivided family against whom any proceeding under this Act 
has been taken for the assessment of his expenditure; 
< d) "asseSsment year" means the year for which tax is 
chargeable under section 3; 
(e) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constitut-
ed under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; 
. <I) "Commissioner" means a person empowered to exercise 
2S Ulefunctions of a Commissioner o~ Expenditure-tax under section 
9; 

t7) "4ependanr l ~ 
(i) wheN the usessee il an individual, a son or daugh. 
wholly or mainly dependant on the alsessee tor support and 
ll&intenanee; 
MI> wiler. the assessee » a Hindu undivided tamily- , 
{a) every coparcener other than the karta; and 
(b) any other member of the family who under aDJ 
MW' or order or diCree of a court is entitled to maint.-
nance rrom the Joint family property; 
f') "expenditure" means the aggregate of all sums in Ie 
~.y or money'. worth apent or disbursed by an assessee, and 
Irldudee any amount which under the provisiona ot thit Act II 
~ired eo be included in the taxable expenditure; 
til ''Expenditure-tax Officer" meana the Income-tax Officer 
auUloriled to perform the functions of an Expenditure-tax Om- J, 
.. under lection 7; 
t1) "Income-tax Act" meana tha Indian Income-tax Aet. 
522; 
(1t') "Income--t8x Officer" means a person appointed to be an 
meome-tax Ofticer under the Income-tax Act; aD 
(I) "Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Expenditure-tu" 
aeans a person empowered to exercise the functions of an 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Expenditure-tax under 
llCUon 10; 
(m) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 3f 
Aft; 
<n) "previoull year" in relation to any assessment year, meana 
... previous year as defined in clause (11) of section 2 of the 
lneom~tu Act if an assessment were to be made under the said 
Act for that year: iO 
Provided that where in the case of an assessee there are 
d11!erent previbus years under the Income-tax Act for different 
It)urces of income, the previous year shall be that previous year 
which expired last before the commencement of that asaessment 
year. i5 
CHAPI'ER II 
ea·_ c. UPmfDJ.Tt1D-TAX AND EXPENDI1't1U st1BJ'EC'1' TO sua c:HAac. 
•. Subject to the otlier provisions contained in this Act, there 
.ball be charged tor every financial year commencing on and from 
.. In. day of April, 1958, • tax (hereinafter referred to as expen- 40 
......... lb. rate 01' ra'es specified in the Schedule in respect cI 

• 
.. upend.un irlcu.ed by all1 IIddlual or H __ aiivid.d ~, 
~ til. previous year: 
Provjded that no expenditu~tax Itlall be payab. by an aaaesaee 
in rasped of any aseessmenS year if hia total income under the 
• Income-tax Act durina the previous year dOell .!;l0' exceed IOOy thou-
IUld l"IJpeel. 
,. In computine tae expenditure liable to tax under thil Act, the Amoun •• 
tollowing amounts shall be included, namely, any expenditure incur-:: =~~ed 
red, whether directly or indirectly, by a penon other than the assessee expenditIUI. 
10 in respect of any obligation Qr personal requiremen. of the all6euee 
or any of hia dependant. which, but for the expenditure having been 
Incurred by that other person, wouki have been incurred by the 
assessee. 
I. (1) No expenditure-tax shall be payable under thil Act in res- &~. 
II pect 01 any such expenditure as is referred to in the following clauses =:;. •. 
_ieh has been. incurred by ~he assessee, namely: - m certain 
{a) any expenditure, whether in the nature of current expen-
diture or capital expenditure, incurred by the assessee wholly 
and exclusively for the purposes of the business, profession, voc .. 
30 tion or occupation carried on by him, but not j.ncludina any per-
lonal expenditure; 
(b) any expenditure incurred in the acquisition or construc-
tion of any immovable property; 
(c) any expenditure incurred by way 01 investment i.Jl cur-
rent and fixed deposits, loans, shares and securities; 
(d) an1 expenditure incurred by way of contribution u 
capital to a firm or other association of persons in consideFation 
01. share in the profits of the firm or association; 
(e) any expenditure incurred by way of repqment o. afty 
,0 ]pan or other borrowing; 
(n any expenditure incurred in respect of any gift, donation 
or settlement on trust or oth.-wise for the benefit 01 "y othel' 
person; 
(g) any expenditure incurred for paying premiums in respect 
Sf of any policiel of insurance on the life of the assessee or ot any 
of his dependants or in respect of any health, accident or disabi-
lity policies of insurance; 
(h) any expenditure incurred by way ~ contributions to a 
provident, thrift or superannuation fund; 
40 (i) any expenditure incurred by an assessee, who is not a 
citizen of India, outside India from any income or capital, accru-
ed or RlU_ o,"*ide lndiL 
CIM. 

• 
(~) Where any expenditure is not wholly and exclusively incurred 
for any of the purposes specified in sub-section (1), the provisions 
of that sub-section shall apply in respect of so much of that expen-
diture as is reasonably attributable to any such purpose. 
Blrdualon 6. In compu~ing the taxable expenditure, the following deductions S 
~~e and allowances shall be made, namely:-
(a) any taxes including the expenditure-tax payable under 
tPis Act, duties, cesses or fees paid to the Government or a local 
authority, but not including-
(i) taxes or fees in respect of any conveyance or other 10 
movable asset intended for the personal use of the assessee or 
any of his dependants; 
(ii) customs duties on articles imported for the personal 
use of the assessee or ,any of his dependants; 
(iii) any fine or penalty in respect of an offence under any IS 
law relating to the levy of taxes, duties, cesses or fees; 
(b) any expenditure incurred by the assessee in respect ot 
the marriage of any of his dependants, to the extent of Rs. 5,000 
in respect of each such dependant; 
(c) four-fifths of any expenditure incurred by way of capital 20 
expenditure on the purchase of jewellery, ornaments, works of 
art, furniture and other household goods, motor cars and other 
conveyances or any other article for the personal use of the 
assessee or any of his dependants: 
Provided that where a deduction as aforesaid is made, one- 2S 
fifth of the said capital expenditure shall be deemed to bE! 
incurred by the assessee in each of the four years succeeding the 
previous year in which the expenditure was actually incurred and 
no deduction shall be made under this clause in the assessment 
for any succeeding year in respect of expen~iture so deemed to 30 
have been incurred in any earlier year; 
. 
(d) a basic allowance of Rs. 24,000 and a further allowance, 
if claimed, of Rs. 5,000 in respect of each dependant: 
Provided that the allowance under this clause in respect of 
any dependant shall be reduced by the amount, if any, of the 3S 
separate income of such dependant, but so as not to exceed 
Rs. 5,000 in any case: 
Provided further th,at where any expenditure claimed by 
any individual as having been incurred in respect of any of his 
dependants has been allowed as a deduction from his taxable 40 

'. 
; I , " '''''1'1'',.-", 
~ \ . I '1 
expenditure, the allowance pennissib£e under this clause in the 
case of a Hindu undivided family of which the dependant is a 
coparcener shall be Rs. 2,000. 
/ 
CHAPTER III 
5 (' EXPENDITUftE-TAX AUTHORITIl'S 
'1. Every Income-tax Officer having jurisdiction or exercising &peDditure 
pQwers as such under the Income-tax Act in respect of any individual tu omcan. 
o Hindu undivided family shall perform the functions of an Expen-
di re-tax Officer under this Act in respect of such individual or 
10 Hi u undivided family. 
8. The Board may empower as many persons as it thinks fit to Ap~e 
exerci under this Act the functions of an Appellate Assistant Com- ~: 
missioner of Expenditure-tax, and on being Jo empowered the Appel- =m:re 
late Assistant Commissioners of Expenditure-tax shall perform their to. 
15 functions in respect of such areas or such classes of persons as the 
Board may direct, and where such directions have assigned to two or 
more Appellate Assistant Commissioners the same area or the same 
classes of persons, they shall perform their functions in accordance 
with such orders as the Board may make for the distribution and 
20 allocation of the work to be performed. 
9. The Board may. empower as many persons as it thinks fit to~­
exercise under this Act the functions of a Commissioner of Expen- ~di:re­
diture-tax, and on being so empowered the Commissioners of Expen- to. 
diture-tax shan perform their functions in respect of such areas or 
25 such classes of persons as the Board may direct, and where such 
directions have assigned to two or more Commissioners of Expendi-
ture-tax the same area or the same classes of persons, they shall 
have concurrent jurisdiction subject' to such orders, if any, as the 
Board may make for the distribution and allocation of the work to 
30 be performed. 
10. The Commissioner of Expenditure-tax may empower as many I~ 
persons as he thinks fit to' exercise under this Act the functions of ~; 
an Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Expenditure-tax and on ~ of 
being so empowered the Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Ex- tu. lUre-
35 penditure-tax shall perform their functions in respect of such areas 
or such classes of persons' as the Commissioner of Expenditure-tax 
may direct, and where such directions have assigned to two or more 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Expenditure-tax the same 
area or the same classes of persons ihey shall perform their functions 
40 in accordance with such orders as the Commissioner of Expenditure-
tax may make for the distribution and allocation of the work to be 
performed. 
, 
I 

• 
JIxpeodimre. 11. The Expenditure-tax Omcera shall be subordinate to the Com-
:x be ':= missioner of Expenditure-tax and the Inspecting Assistant Commis-
~::u~ the sioner of Expenditure-tax within whose jurisdiction they perfOl'lll 
=:nue-their tunctiona. 
tax and 
~~ '\. 
tina AuiI-
tant Com-
million. 01. 
Bxpendi-
RUe-taX. 
&pend!-
ture-tu: 
authoritica 
so follow 
orden, etc. 
... the 
ao.rcs. 
lZ. All officers and other persons employed in the execution! ef 5 
this AC. t shall observe ahd follow the orders, instructions anldOo 
tions of the Board: 
Provided that no orders, instructions, ~ directions mall b given 
by the Board so as to interfere with the discretion of the *ppell ... , 
Assistant Commisioner 01 Expenditure-tax in the exercise 01 All 10 
appella1e functions. 
CHAPI'ER IV 
AssB88MBNT 
~etura ~ 13. (1) l!Yvy person whOle expenditure for the previous yea 
~&tare. was of such an amount al to render him liable to expenditure-tax I, 
under this Act shall bewre the thirtieth lIlay ot June of the corree-
ponding assessment year furnish to the Expenditure-tax Officer a 
return in the prescllibed form and verified in the prescribed manner 
setting forth his expenditure for the previous year. 
btum 
after ~ 
due date 
and UleDd-
JDeDt of Ie-
... 
(2) If the Expendtture-tax Officer is satisfied that the expenditure -
Of any person for any year is of. such an amount as to render him 
liabla to expenditure-tax, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in .sub-section (1), he may aerve a notice upon such a person requir-
ing him to furnish within such period, not being lest than thirty day., 
as may be specifit!ld in the notice, a return in the prescribed form a, 
and verified in the prescribed manner and setting forth IUch other 
particulars as may be required in the notice relating to the expendi-
ture of such person for the previous year mentbned in the notice. 
(3) The Expenditure-tax Offtcer may, if he is satisfied that jt • 
necessary to do so, extend the date :l>r the delivery of the return J • 
. under this se~~on. 
14. If any person has not furnished a return within tbe time 
allowed under section 13, or having furnished a return under that 
section discovers any omission or a wronit statement therein, he 
may furnish a return or a' revised return, as the cue may be, at.M 
any ¥me before ~e a __ meld 11 made. 

, 
is. (1) tf the Expenditure-tax Officer is satisfied without requiring ...... t. 
the presence of the assessee or production by him of any evidence 
that a return made under section 13 or section 14 is correct and 
complete, he shall assess the taxable expenditure of the assessee and 
5 determine the amount payable by him as expenditure-tax. 
(2) If the Expenditure-tax Officer is not so satisfied, he shall 
serve a notice on the assessee, requiring him either to attend in 
person at his office on a date to be specified in the notice, or to 
produce or cause to be produced on that date any evidence on which 
10 the assessee may rely in support of his return. 
(3) The Expenditure-tax Officer, after hearing such evidence as 
the person may produce and such other evidence as he may require 
on any specified points, shall, by order in writing, assess the taxable 
expenditure of the assessee and determine the amount payable by 
15 him as expenditure-tax. 
(4) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, the 
Expenditure-tax Officer may ~erve on any person, whether he has 
made a return or not, a notice requiring him to produce or cause to 
be produced on a date specified in the notice such accounts, records 
20 or other documents as the Expenditure-tax Officer may require 
(5) If any person fails to make a return in response to any notice 
under sub-section (2) of section 13 or fails to comply with the terms 
of any notice issued under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4), the 
Expenditure-tax Officer shall make the assessment to the best of 
25 his judgment and determine the amount payable by the person ~s 
expenditure-tax on the basis of such assessment. 
16. If the Expenditure-tax Officer- Bxpeaditure eec:apiDa __ 
30 
35 
(a) has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or 1CI8IIDeDt. 
failure on the part <?f the assessee to make a return of his 
expenditure under section 13 for any assessment year, or to 
disclose fully and trulY' all material facts necessary for his 
assessment for that year, the expenditure chargeable to tax has 
escaped assessment for that year, whether by reason of under-
assessment or assessment at too Iowa rate or otherwise; or 
(b) has in consequence of any information in his possession 
reason to believe, notwithstanding that there has been no such 
omission or failure as is referred to in clause (a), that the 
expenditure chargeable to tax has escaped assessment for any 
assessment year, whether by reason of under-assessment or' 
assessment at too Iowa rate or otherwise; 
he ~ay, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time, and in cases 
falling under clause (b) at any time within six years of the end of 
327 L B-2 
" 
.I 

·...alty for 
cac:ealment. 
• 
that Quessment year, serve on the assessee a notice containing a11 or 
any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under 
sub-section (2) of section 13, and may proceed to assess or reassess 
such expenditure, and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may 
be, apply as if the notice had issued under that sub-section. 5 
17. (1) If the Expenditure-tax Officer is satisfied that any person-
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the 
return of his expenditure which he is required to furnish under 
sul>-section (1) or sul>-section (2) of section 13 or section 16, 
Or has without reasonable cause failed to furnish it within the 10 
time allowed and in the manner required; or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with a 
notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 15; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of any expenditure or 
deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars thereof, he may, IS 
by order in writing, direct that such person shall pay by way of 
penalty-
(t) in the case referred to in clause (a), in addition to 
the amount of expenditure-tax payable by him a sum not 
exceeding one-and-a-half times the amount of such tax, and 20 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b) or clause (c), 
in addition to the amount of expenditure-tax payable by him 
a sum not exceeding one-and-a-half times the amount of the 
tax, if any, which would have been avoided if the expendi-
ture returned by such person had been accepted as correct. 25 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless the. 
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. 
(3) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be insti-
tuted in respect of the same facts in relation to which a penalty 30 
has been imposed under this section. 
(4) The Expenditure-tax Officer shall not impose any penalty 
under this section without the previous approval of, the Inspecting 
Assistant Commissioner of Expenditure-tax. 
CHAPTER V 
LIABn.ITY TO ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL CASES 
3S 
Tu of de- 18. (1) Where a person dies, his executor, administrator or, other 
:-s; legal representative shall be liable to payout of the estate of the 
Ible by deceased person to the extent to which the estate is capable of 
~..:_. meeting the charge, the expenditure-tax assessed as payable by such 40 

perso~, or any tax which would have been Payable by him under 
this Act if he had not died. 
(2) Where a person dies without having furnished a return under 
the provisions of section 13 or after having furnished a return which 
5 the Expenditure-tax Officer has reason to believe to be incorrect 
or incomplete, the Expenditure-tax Officer may tpake an assessment 
of the expenditure of such person and determine the expenditure-
tax payable by the person on the basis of such assessment, and for 
this purpose may, by the issue of the appropriate notice which would 
10 have had to be served upon the deceased person if he had survived, 
require from the executor, administrator or other legal representa-
tive of the deceased person any accounts, documents or other evi-
dence which might under the provisions of section 15 have been 
required from the deceased person. 
IS (3) The provisions of section 14 shall apply to an executor, 
administrator or other legal representative as they apply to any 
person referred to in that section. 
19. (1) Where, at the time of making an assessment, it is brought As8e8IDleJ?-t 
to the notice of the Expenditure-tax Officer that a partition has =r ra-
20 taken place among the members of a Hindu undivided family, and~:S un-
the Expenditure-tax Officer, after inquiry, is satisfied that such family. 
partition has taken place, he shall make assesJiments on the expendi-
ture of the undivided family as such for the assessment year or 
years including the year relevant to the previous year in which the 
25 partition has taken place, and each member or group of members 
shall be liable jointly and severally for the tax assessed on the 
expenditure of the joint family as such. 
(2) Where the Expenditure-tax Officer is not so satisfied, he may, 
by order, declare that such family shall be deemed for the purposes 
30 of this Act to continue to be a Hindu undivided family liable to be 
assessed as such. 
CHAPTER VI 
APPEALS, REVISIONS AND RUERENCES 
Appeal to 
Z'. (1) Any person,- the Appellate Assistant 
3S (a) objecting to the amount of his taxable expenditure ~:,:j;;om 
determined under this Act; or orders ~f Expenditure-
(b) objecting to the amount of expenditure-tax determined tax Oftic:en. 
as payable by him under this Act; or . 
(c) denying his liability to be assessed under this Act; or 

Appeal to 
me Appel-
late TDou.-
DIl from 
orden ~ 
the Appel-
late Alai ... 
Wit Com-
miaiaDen. 
10 
~) objecting to any penalty imposed by the Expenditure-
tax Officer under section 17; or 
(e) objecting to any order of the Expenditure-tax Officer 
under sub-section (2) of section 19; 
may appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner against the 5 
assessment or order, as the case may be, in the prescribed form and 
verifted in the prescribed manner. 
(2) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the receipt 
of the notice of demand relating to the assessment or penalty 
objected to, or the date on which any order objected to is communi- 10 
cated to him, but the Appellate Assistant Commissioner may admit 
an appeal after the expiration of the period aforesaid if he is satis-
fied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not presenting the 
appeal within that period. 
(3) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall fix a day and IS 
place for the hearing of the appeal and may from time to time 
adjourn the hearing. 
(4) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner may, before disposing 
of any appeal, make such further inquiry as he thinks fit or cause 
further inquiry to be made by the Expenditure-tax Officer. 20 
(5) Any order passed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 
on appeal may include an order enhancing the assessment or penalty: 
Provided that no order enhancing an assessment or penalty shall 
be made unless the person affected thereby has been given a reason-
able opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement. z5 
(~) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner under this section shall be forwarded to the appellant 
and the Commissioner. 
21. (1) Any assessee objecting t'o an order passed by an Appellate 
Assi~tant Commissioner under section 20 may appeal to the Appellate 30 
Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which he is served with 
notice of such order. 
(2) The Commissioner may, if he is not satisfied as to the correct-
ness of any order passed by an Appellate Assistant Commissioner 
under section 20, direct the Expenditure-tax Officer to appeal to the 35 
Appellate Tribunal against such order, and such appeal may be 
made at any time before the expiry of sixty days or the date on 
which the order is communicated to the Commissioner. 
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed 
form, and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and shall. 40 
except in the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2), be 
accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees. 

11 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving both parties to the 
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as 
it thinks fit, and any such orders may include an order enhancing 
the assessment or penalty: 
5 Provided that no order enhancing an assessment or penalty shall 
be made unless the person affected thereby has been given a reason-
able opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement. 
(5) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under 
this section shall be forwarded to the assessee and the Commissioner. 
10 (6) Save as provided in section 24 any order passed by the 
Appellate Tribunal on appeal shall be final. 
(7) The provisions of sub-sections (5), (7), and (8), of section 
5A of the Income-tax Act shall apply to the Appellate Tribunal in 
the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in 
15 the discharge of its functions under the Income-tax Act. 
22. (1) The Commissioner may call for and examine the record ~!j~ 
of any proceeding under this Act and, if he considers that any order aioner to 
passed therein by an Expenditure-tax Officer is erroneous in so far ~v~p~~T 
as it is prejudicial to the interests of revenue, he may, after giving ture-UX, 
U) the assessee an opportunity of being heard and after making or ~~~~t8 
causing to be made such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass such of revenue. 
orders thereon as the circuplstances of the case justify, including 
an order enhancing or modifying the assessment or cancelling it and 
directing a fresh assessment. 
25 (2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) after the 
expiry of two years from the date of the order sought to be revised. 
23. (1) Any assessee objecting to an order of enhancement made ~~:if.~~ the 
by the Commissioner under section 22 may appeal to the Appellate P'dbunal 
Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which the order is com- ~rn ~_ 
30 municated to him. ment , by . ComDU8-
(2) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) 8ioner. 
shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed 
manner and shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees one hundred. 
(3) The Tribunal may, after giving the appellant an opportunity 
35 of being heard, pass such order thereon as it thinks fit, and shall 
communicate any such order to the assessee and to the Commissioner. 
M. (1) Within ninety days of the date upon which he is served Ref~c:e 
with an order under section 21 or section 23, the assessee or the Com- ~ 
missioner may present an application in the prescribed form accom-
40 panied, where application is made by the assessee, by a fee of one 

hundred rupees to the Appellate Tribunal requirIng the Appellate 
Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of law arising out 
of such order, ",'and the Appellate Tribunal shall, if in its OpInIOn 
a question of law arises out of such order, state the case for the 
opinion of the High Court. 5 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) may be admitted art~r 
the expiry of the period of ninety days aforesaid if the Tribunal is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within 
the said period. 
(3) If on an application made under sub-section (1) the Appellate 10 
Tribunal-
(a) refuses to state a case on the ground that no question 
of law arises: or 
(b) rejects it on the ground that it is time barred; 
the applicant may, within three months from the date on which he 15 
is served with a notice of refusal or rejection, as the case may be, 
apply to the High Court, and the High Court may, if it is not satis-
fied with the correctness of the decision of the Appellate Tribunal, 
require the Appellate Tribunal to state the case to the High Court, 
and on receipt of such requisition the Appellate Tribunal shall state 20 
the case: 
Provided that if in any case where the Appellate Tribunal has 
been required by an assessee to state a case the Appellate Tribunal 
refuses to do so on the ground that no question of law arises,' the 
assessee may, within thirty days from the date on which he 25 
receives notice of. refusal to state the case, withdraw his application, 
and ,if he does so, the fee paid by him under sub-section (1) shall 
bE' refunded to him. 
(4) The statement to the High Court shall set forth the facts, the 
determi.nation of the Appellate Tribunal and the question of law 30 
which arises out of the case. 
(5) If the High Court is not satisfied that the case as stated is 
sufficient to enable it to determine the question of law raised thereby, 
it may require the Appellate Tribunal to make such modifications 
therein as it may direct. 35 
(6) The High Court, upon hearing any such case, shall decide 
the question of law raised therein, and in doing so may, if it thinks 
fit alter the form of the question of law and shall deliver" judgment 
thereon containing the ground on which such decision is founded 
and shall send a copy of the judgment under the seal of, the Court 40 
and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal and 
the Appellate Tribunal shall pass such orders as' are necessary to 
dispose of the case conformably to such judgment. 

(7) The costs of any reference to the High Court shall be in the 
discretion of the Court. 
(8) Section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, shall apply to an 
application to the High Court under this section. . 
5 25. Where a case has been stated to the High Court under section 24, tl~y 
it shall be heard by a Bench of not less than two Judges of the lih rt. 
High Court and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of 
such Judges or of the majority of such Judges: 
Provided that where there is no such majority, the Judges shall 
10 state the point of law upon which they differ and the case shall 
then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the Judges of 
the High Court, and such point shall be decided according to the 
opinion of the majority of, the Judges who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it. 
15 26. (1) An appeal shall lie to the SupremeCou~ from any judg- Appeal to 
ment of the High Court delivered on a case stated under section ~ ~~~pftDlC 
in any case which the High Court certifies as a fit case for appeal 
to the Supreme Court. 
(2) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed 
20 on appeal under this section, effect shall be given to the order of 
the Supreme Court in the manner provided in sub-section (6) of 
section 24. 
(3) The High Court may, on application made to it for the exe-
cution of any order of the Supreme Court in respect of any costs 
25 awarded by it, transmit the order for execution to any court subordi-
na te to the High Court. 
CHAPI'ER VII 
PAYMENT AND RECOVERY OF EXPENDITURE-TAX 
27. When any tax or penalty is 'due in consequence of any ord~r Nodcedof 
30 passed under this Act, the Expenditure-tax Officer shall serve' upon deJDID • 
the assessee or other person liable to pay such tax or penalty a 
notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum so pay-
able and the, time within which it shall be paid. 
'28. (1) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of demand Recovery of 
35 issued under section 27 shall be paid within the time, at the place, ~~. 
and to the person mentioned in the notice, or if no time is so men-
tioned, then on or before the first day of the second month following, 
the day of service of the notice and any assessee failing so to pay 
shall be deemed to be in default. 

Mode of 
recovery. 
." .. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section where an 
assessee has presented an appeal under section 20 the Expenditure-tax 
Officer may in his discretion treat the assessee as not being in default 
as long as such appeal is undisposed of. 
29. The provisions of sub-sections (1), (IA), (2), (3), (4), (S), (SA), S 
(6) and (1) of section 46 of the Income-tax Act shall apply as if the 
said provisions were provisions of this Act and referred to expendi-
ture-tax instead of to income-tax and to Expenditure-tax Officer and 
Commissioner of Expenditure-tax instead of to Income-tax Officer 
and Commissioner .of Income-tax. 10 
CHAPI'ER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Rec:dficauon 30. At any time within four years from the date of any order 
of mistakes.j passed by him, or it, the Commissioner, the Expenditure-tax Officer, 
the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Appellate lribunal IS 
may, on his, or its, own motion rectify any mistake apparent from 
the record and shall, within a like period, rectify any such mistal~e 
which has been brought to the notice of the Commissioner, the Ex-
penditure-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the 
ProIecutiODl. 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, by an assessee: 20 
Provided that no such rectification shall be made which has the 
effect of enhancing an assessment unless the assessee has been given 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
31. (1) If a person fa Us without reasonable cause--
(a) to furnish in due time any return mentioned in section 2S 
13, 
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced on or before the date 
mentioned in any notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) 
of section 15 such accounts, records and documents as are refer-
red to in the notice; 30 
he shall, on conviction before a' magistrate be punishable with fille 
which may extend to ten rupees for every day during which the 
default continues. 
(2) If it person makes a statement in a verification ment;oned in 
section 13, section 20, section 21, or section 23, which is false, and 3S 
which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe 
to be true, he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which 
may extend' to one year or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees or with both. 
(3) A person shall not be proceeded against for an ollence under,.o 
this seetion except at the instance of the Coptmissioner. 

15 
(4) The Commissioner may either before or after the instituti» 
of proceedings compound any such offence. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section 'magistrate' meaa.~ 
a presidency magistrate, a magistrate of the first class, or a magts-
, trate of the second class specially empowered by the Central Gov-
ernment to try offences under this Act. ' 
32. The Commissioner, the Expenditure-tax Officer, the Appellate Powet to 
Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal shall, for the::e ~ 
purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a court etc. 
J 01 ltol. 10 under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in res-
pect o~ ,the follOwing matters, namely:-
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
IS (c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; 
and any proceeding before the Commissioner, the Expenditure-tax 
Offieer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Appellate Tribu-
nal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning 
., of 1160. 20 of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 
33. Where for the purposes of determining the Expenditure-tax Informadea 
payable by any person, it appears necessary for the Expenditure-Lax :=a~ 
Officer to obtain any statement or information from any individual, 
Hindu undivided family, company or any other person, the Expendi-
2S ture-tax Officer may serve a notice requiring such individual, 
Hindu undivided family, company or other person on or before a 
date to be therein specified, to furnish such statement or information 
on the points specified in the notice, and the individual, the 
manager of the Hindu undivided family, the prinCipal officer of the 
30 company or other person, as the case may be, shall, notwithstanding 
anythmg in any law to the contrary, be bound to furnish such 
statement or information to the Expenditure-tax Officer. 
34. Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this Act any Bffcct of 
Expenditure-tax authority ceases to exercise jurisdiction and is sue- =0: 
3S ceeded by another who has and exercises such jurisdiction, the 00 peo~ 
authority so succeeding may continue the proceedina from the stage proceed",... 
at which the proceeding was left by his predecessor. 
35. In computing the period of limitation prescribed for an appeal ~tati08 
under this Act or for an application under section 24, the day OD = c:::a.. 
40 which the order complained of was made and the time reqUisite lor 
obtaining a copy of such order shall be excluded. 
127 L B-3 

Service of 
notice. 
Problbition 
of dildo-
lUre olin-
formatioD. 
16 
36. (1) A notice 01' a requisition under this Act may be served on 
the person therein named either by post or as if it were a summons 
issued by a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. S of 1901. 
(2) Any such notice or requisition may, in the case of a Hindu 
undivided family be addressed to the manager or any adult male 5 
member of the family. 
37. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the 
provisions of section 54 of the Income-tax Act shall apply to all 
accounts or in relation to statements, documents, evidence or affidavits 
given, produced or obtained in connection with or in the course of 10 
any proceeding under this Act, as they apply to or in relation to 
similar particulars under that Act, subject to the modification that 
the reference to 'any Income-tax authority' in clause (d) of sub-
section (2) and to the Commissioner in sub-section (5) of section 54 
of that Act shall be construed as a reference to any Expenditure-tax IS 
authority and to the Commissioner of Expenditure-tax respectively. 
(2) Nothing contained in section 54 of the Income-tax Act sh~l 
apply to the disclosure ot any such particulars as are referred to in 
sUb-section (1) to any person acting in the execution of this Act or 
the Income-tax Act or the Estate Duty Act, 1953, or the Wealth Tax 20 34 of 1953. 
Act, 1957, where it is necessary or desirable to disclose the same to 
him for the purpose of this Act or any of the other Acts aforesaid. 
38. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no suit shall lie in 
any civil court to set aside or modify any assessment made under 
this Act, and no prosecution, suit or other legal proceeding shall lie 25 
againliit any officer of the Government for anything in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act. 
S9. Any assessee who is entitled to or required to attend before 
any Expenditure-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connec-
tion with any proceeding or inquiry under this Act, except where 30 
he is required under this Act to attend in person, may attend by a 
person authorised by him in writing in this behalf, being a relative 
of, or a person regularly employed by, the assessee, or a legal prac-
titioner or a chartered accountant. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) the expression 'a person regularly employed by the 
assessee' includes any officer of a Scheduled Bank with which 
the assessee maintains a current account or has other regular 
dealings; 
35 
(b) 'Chartered Accountant' means a Chartered Accountant as ~ 
defined in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. 37 of I,.... 

1'1 
to. (1) The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, Power to make rules. make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, rules made under this section may provide for--
S (a) the form in which returns under this Act shall be made, 
and the manner in which they shall be verified; 
(b) the form in which appeals and applications under this 
Act may be made, and the manner in which they shall be 
verified; 
10 (c) the form of any notice of demand under this Act; 
(d) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed 
for the purposes of this Act. 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before each House 
of Parliament, as soon as may be, after they are made, and shall be 
IS subject to such modifications as Parliament may make durir-g the 
session in which they are so laid or the session immediately 
following. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
RATES or EXPlENDlTURE-TAX 
In the case of every individual and Hindu undivided family, 
on that portion of the taxable expenditure-
(i) which does not exceed Rs. 10,000; 10% 
(ii) which exceeds Rs. 10,000, but does not exceed 
Rs. 20,000; 20% 
(iii) which exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not 
Rs.30,000; 
(iv) which exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not 
Rs. 40,000; 
(v) which exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does not 
Rs. 50,000; 
(vi) which exceeds Rs. 50,000 
exceed 
exceed 
exceed 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100%. 

STATEMENTS OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to imp5e IU1 annual tu on pel'llOnal 
ItIqIIP.miituret above a presaribed level, of individuals ~d H1adu un-
divided tamilieljl. Such a tax in addition to being a deterreDt to 
pPQlilive pereoll,..! Qxpenditure and an incentive for savings also fonaa 
a JligP.Uicant ~ ot an integrated tax structure. 
NEW DELHI; 
T. T. KJUSaNAMACllARI. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
This Bill proposes a levy of tax with effect from 1st April, 1958, 
on expenditure of individuals and Hindu undivided famiUes. 
Though this is a new tax, the procedure for assessment and 
collection of this tax is very much allied 'to that of taxes on income. 
It is accordingly proposed that for the time being the tax be 
administered by the Income-tax Department and that no separate 
administrative machinery need be set up. 
The existing pressure of work on the Income-tax Department, is 
however, already quite heavy. This pressure is likely to increase 
further on aCilCount of the proposed lowering of the minimum tax-· 
able limits. It will, therefore, be necessary to expand adequately 
the staff at various levels of the departmental cadres. 
The increase of personnel, along with incidental expenses of 
admjnistration is estimated to cost Rs. 8 lakhs per annum ultimately. 
Actual recruitment of staff will, however, be made as and when it is 
found really necessary. 

• 
I. VOLUME OF WORK 
E.timatednumber of assessment. : 
(.) Individual8 
(b) Hindu undivided families 
II. REQUIREMENTS OF PERSONNEL AND FINANCE 
Ojftcers 
I. No. of Inspecting Asst. Co'm-
missioners & Appellate ASllt . 
Commissioners (1+2) 3 3XI200XI2 = Rs. 43,200 
2. No. of Income-tax Officers 
Taking the average disposal 
per I. T. O. per annum at 300 20 20X 500 X 12 = Rs. 1,20,000 
Sf4fj 
3. No. of Inspectors 10 lOX 2S0X 12 ::::a Rs. 30,000 
4. No. of SUpe1visors 4 4X 3S0X 12 = Rs. 16,800 
5. No. of Head Clerks 10 lOX 2S0XI2 .... Rs. 30,000 
6. No. of Upper Division Clerks 50 Sox ISOXI2 = Rs. 90,000 
7. No. of Lower Division Clerks 30 30X I20X 12 == Rs. 43,200 
8. No. of Stenographers 3 3X ISOX 12 == Rs. 5t400 
9. No. of Stenotypists 20 20X 140X 12 == Rs. 33,600 
say 
Incidental expenses including Class IV 
staft' and contingencies etc. . 
Rs. 5 lakhs 
Rs. 3 lakhs 
TOTAL Ra. 8 lakhs 

MEMORANDUM REGAltDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 40 of the Bill authoria tlie Central Board of ReVeilue to 
make rules with respect to matters like the fcmn in which the 
returns may be made under the Ad, the form in W1rl& the appeals 
should be ftled or notices of demand issued. The rule making power 
is thus of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of a tax on expenditure. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article II7 of the Constitution of India, recommended to' 
the Lok Sabha, the introduction and consideration of the 
Bill. 
GIPND-LS 1-327 LS-16-5-S7-I.". 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
($Iwi T. T. KrisnntJmachari, 
Jli"i"., of Finance.) 