BILL No. IS OF 1988
THE FINANCE BILL, 1988
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA)


THE FINANCE B JIU
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Cl a u se s
1.  Short title and commencement.
2. Income-tax.
CHAPTER n  
RATES OF INCOME-TAX
CHAPTER m  
DIRECT TAXES 
Income-tax
3. Amendment of section 2.
4. Amendment of section 10.
5. Amendment of section lOA.
6. Insertion of new section lOB.
7. Amendment of sectirai 13A.
8. Amendment of section 14.
9. Amendment of section 16.
10. Omission of sections 18 to 21.
11. Amendment of section 40.
12. Amendment of section 43B.
13. Insertion of new section 43C.
14. Amendment of section 44AB.
15. Insertion of new section 44AC.
16. Amendment of section 44BB.
17. Amendment of section 47.
18. Amendment of section 56.
19. Amendment of section 57.
20. Amendment of section 58.
21. Amendment of section 79.
22. Amendment of section 80CC.
23. Substitution of new section for section 80CCA.
24. Amendment of section 80HHC.
25. Amendment of section SO L.
26. Amendment of section 80-0.
27. Amendment of section SO P.
28. Omission of section 86A.


(ii)
Cl a u s e s
29. Amendment of section 89.
30. Omission of section 112A.
31. Amendment of section 115B.
32. Amendment of section 115R
33. Amendment of section 131.
34. Amendment of section 132.
35. Amendment of section 139.
36. Omission of section 181.
37. Amendment of section 193.
38. Amendment of section 194C.
39. Amendment of section 195.
40. Insertion of new section 206C.
41. Amendment of section 230A.
41 Insertion of new section 245DD.
43. Amendment of section 246.
44. Amendment of section 263.
45. Amendment of section 271B.
46. Insertion of new section 276BB.
47. Amendment of section 279.
48. Omission of Chapter XXIIA.
49. Amendment of section 281B.
50. Omission of section 285A.
51. Amendment of section 293.
52. Amendment of First Schedule.
53. Amendment of Eleventh Schedule.
54. Consequential amendments.
55. Amendment of section 5.
56. Insertion of new section 22DD.
57. Amendment of section 25.
58. Amendment of section 34AB.
59. Amendment of section 34ACC.
eo. Amendment of section 34AD.
61. Insertion of new section 34AE.
62. Amendment of section 34C.
63. Substitution of new section for sec
64. Amendment of section 37.
65. Amendment of section 43.
66. Amendment of Schedule 1 .
67. Amendment of section 5.
68. Amendment of section 24.
69. Amendment of section 35.
70. Amendment of section 36.
Wealth-tax
Gift-tax
71. Amendment of section 42.


Expenditure-tax
(iii)
Cl a u se s
72.
73. 
lA.
75.
Substitution of new authorities. 
Amendment of section 6. 
Amendment of section 13. 
Amendment of section 24.
CHAPTER IV 
INDIRECT TAXES 
Customs
76. Amendment of Act 51 of 1975. 
Tl. Auxiliary duties of customs.
78. Amendment of section 27.
79. Amendment of section 115.
80. Amendment of section 156.
Excise
81. Amendment of Act 5 of 1986.
82. Special duties of excise.
83; Amendment of Act 58 of 1957.
84. Provision as to additional duties of excise on cotain varieties
of sugar in relation to a cotain poiod and validation.
85. Amendment of Act 74 of 1956.
86. Amendment of Act 57 of 1972.
87. Amendment of Act 11 of 1983.
88. Amendment of Act \ of 1988.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
CHAPTER V 
M iscellan eo u s


AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 29TH FEBRUARY, 198S.
Bill No. IS of 1 9 8 8
THE FINANCE BILL, 1988
A
BILL
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Governmentfor the 
financial year 1988-89.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as foUows;-
CHAPTERI
PR E L IM IN A R Y
1.(1)  This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1988. S h o it title a n d
conm ace-
5 (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 V o  15 and sections 86 to 88 shall be
deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1988.
CHAPTER n
R a te s  of in c o m e -ta x
2.(1)  Subject to the provisions of sub-sections C 2 ) and (3), for the assessment year income-tax. 
10 commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in
Part I of the First Schedule and shall be increased,—
(a) in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B, C and D of that Part apply, by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union; and
(b) in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, by a surcharge,
15 calculated in each case in the manner provided therein.
(2) In the cases to which Sub-Paragraph I or Sub-Paragraph II of Paragraph A of Part I of the 
First Schedule applies, where the assessee has, in the previous year, any net agricultural income 
exceeding six hundred rupees, in addition to total income, and the total income exceeds,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, eighteen thousand rupees, and
20 (u) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph n  applies, twelve thousand rupees,
then,-
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided in 
clause (b) [that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total income 
after,-
25 (i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, the first eighteen thousand
rupees, and
(ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, the first twelve thousand rupees.


10
of the total income but without being liable to tax], only for the purpose of charging income- 
tax in respect of the total income; and
(b) the income-tax chargeable shall be calculated as follows:-
(i) the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated and the amount of 
income-tax shall be determined in respect of the aggregate income at the rates qjeciHed in 
Sub-Paragraph I or, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A, as if such 
aggregate income were the total income;
(u) the net agricultural income shall be increased,-
(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, by a sum of eighteen thousand 
rupees; and
(B ) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, by a sum of twelve thousand 
rupees,
and the amount of income-tax shall be detomined in respect of the net agricultural income as 
so increased at the rates q>ecified in Sub-Paragraph I or, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph n  
of the said Paragraph A, as if the net agricultural income as so increased were the total 15
income;
(iii) the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with sub-clause (0  shall be 
reduced by the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with sulxlause (ii) and the 
sum so arrived at shall be the income-tax in respect of the total income:
Provided that the amount of income-tax so arrived at shall, in the case of every person 20
having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of five per cent of such income-tax and the sum 
so arrived at shall be the income-tax in respect of the total income.
(3) In cases to which the provisions of Chapter XII or Chapter XII-A or sub-section CM)
of section 161 or section 164 w section 164A or section 167A of the Income-tax Act, 1%1 25 4 3  of I I
(hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax Act) apply, the tax chargeable shall be determined as 
provided in that Chapter or that section, and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (1)
( H *  the rates as specified in that Chapter or section, as the case may be:
Provided that in respect of any income chargeable to tax under section 115B or section 1ISBB 
of the Income-tax Act, the income-tax computed under section 115B or section 115BB shall'be 30
increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of five per cent of such 
income-tax.
(4) In cases in which tax has lo be deducted under sections 193, 194, 194A, 194B, 194BB,
194D and 195 of the Income-tax Act at the rates in force, the deduction shall be made at the rates 
specified in Part II of the First Schedule and shall be increased,— 35
(a) in the cases to which the provisions of sub-item (a) of item 1  of that Part apply, by a
surcharge fw purposes of the Union; and
(b) in the cases to which the provisions of sub-item (a) of item 2 of that Part apply, by a
surcharge,
calculated in each case in the manner provided therein. 40
0} In cases in which tax has to be deducted undo^ section 194C of the Income-tax Act, the 
deduction shall be made at the rates specified in that section and shall be increased by a surcharge 
f<x purposes of the Unim calculated at dte rate of five per cent of such deduction.
(6) In cases in which tax has to be collected under section 206C of the Income-tax Act. the 
collection diall be made at the rate specified in diat section and shall be increased by a surcharge 45 
for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of five per cent of such collection.
2


(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (8), in cases in which income-tax has to be 
calculated under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or charged 
under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub­
section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from
5 income chargeable undo- the head "Salaries" or deducted undC T  sub-section (1) of section 194E of
the said Act from any paymentrefmed to in the said sub-section (1) or in which the "advance tax" 
payable under Ch^ter of the said Act has to be computed, at the rate or rates in force, such
inc6me-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be so calculated, charged, deducted or 
computed at the rate or rates specified in Part m  of the First Schedule and shall be increased,—
10 (a) in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B and C of that Part apply, by a surcharge for
purposes of the Union; and
(b) in the cases to which Paragraph D of that Part applies, by a surcharge,
calculated in each case in die manner provided therein:
Provided that in cases to which the provisions of Chapta XU or Chapter XII-A or sub-section
15 fJA) of section 161 or section 164 or section 164A or section 167A or section 167B of the
Income-tax Act apply, "advance tax" shall be computed with reference to Ihe rates imposed by this 
sub-section or the rates as specified in that Ch^ter or section, as the case may be:
Provided further that in respect of any income chargeable to tax undo* section USB of the 
Income-tax Act, the "advance tax" computed under the first proviso sJjall be increased by a
20 surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of five per cent of such "advance tax".
(8) In the cases to which Sub-Paragraph I or Sub-Paragraph II of Paragraph A of Part m  of the 
First Schedule applies, where the assessee has, in the previous year or, if by virtue of any 
provision of the Income-tax Act, income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a period 
other than the previous year, in such other period, any net agricultural income exceeding six
25 hundred nq)ees, in addition to total income and the total income exceeds,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragr^h I applies, eighteen thousand rupees, and
(u) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragra;^ II implies, twelve thousand nq>ees,
then, in calculating income-tax under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the 
Income-tax Act or in charging income-tax under sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or
30 sub-section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or in computing the "advance tax" payable under
Chapter XVn-C of the said Act, at the rate or rates in fc»ce,-
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided in 
clause (b) [that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total income 
after,-
35 (i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragr^h I ai^lies, the first eighteen diousand rupees,
and
(u) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, the first twelve diousand rupees.
of the total income but without being liable to tax], only for the purpose of calculating, charging 
or computing such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" in respect of the total income;
40 and
O f) such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be so calculated, charged or 
computed as follows:-
(i) the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated and the anount of 
income-tax or "advance tax" shall be determined in respect of the aggregate income at the rates
45 specified in Sub-Paragn^ I or, as die cue may be, Sub-Paragraph n  of the said Paragraph A, 
as if such aggregate income were the total income;
3


(U ) the net agricultural income shall be increased,—
(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, by a sum of eighteen 
thousand rupees; and
(B) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragr^q^h II applies, by a sum of twelve thousand 
rupees,
and the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" shall be determined in respect of the net 
agricultural income as so increased at the rates specified in the said Sub-Paragraph I or, as the 
case may be, the said Sub-Paragr^^ II as if the net agricultural income as so increased were 
the total income;
(iii) the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" determined in accordance with sub- 10 
clause (i) shall be reduced by the amount of income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance 
tax" determined in accordance with sub-clause (U ) and the sum so arrived at shall be the 
income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" in respect of the total income:
Provided that the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" so arrived at shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a 15
surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of five per cent of such income-tax 
or, as the case may be, "advance tax" and the sum so arrived at shall be the income-tax or, as 
the case may be, "advance tax" in respect of the total income.
(9) For the purposes of this section and the First Schedule.—
( c O "company in which the public are substantially interested" means a company within the 20 
meaning of clause {18) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, and includes a subsidiary of such 
company if the whole of the share capital of such subsidiary company has been held by the 
parent company or by its nominees throughout the previous year;
(b) "domestic company" means an Indian company, or any other company which, in respect
of its income liable to income-tax under the Income-tax Act for the assessment year 25
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, has made the prescribed arrangements for the 
declaration and payment within India of the dividends (including dividends on preference shares) 
payable out of such income in accordance with the provisions of section 194 of the Act;
(c) "insurance commission" means any remuneration or reward, whether by way of 
commission or otherwise, for soliciting or procuring insurance business (including business 30 
relating to the continuance, renewal or revival of policies of insurance);
( c O "investment company" means a company whose gross total income (as defmed in section 
80B of the Income-tax Act) consists mainly of income which is chargeable under the heads 
"Interest on securities", "Income from house property", "Capital gains" and "Income from other 
sources"; 35
(e) "net agricultural income", in relation to a person, means the total amount of agricultural 
income, from whatever source derived, of that person computed in accordance with the rules 
contained in Part IV of the First Schedule;
(f) "tax-free security" means any security of the Central Government issued or declared to be 
income-tax free, or any security of a State Government issued income-tax free, the income-tax 40 
whereon is payable by the State Government;
(g) "trading company" means a company whose business consists mainly in dealing in 
goods or merchandise manufactured, produced or processed by a person other than that company 
and whose income attributable to such business included in its gross total income (as defined in 
section 80B of the Income-tax Act) is not less than fifty-one per cent, of the amount of such 45 
gross total income;
(h) all other words and expressions used in this section or in the First Schedule but not 
defined in this sub-section and defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in that Act.
4


CHAPTER III 
D IR B C T T A X E S  
Income-tax
3. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (28A), the following clause shall be inserted Amendment 
5 with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely:- of section
2.
\28B) "interest on securities" means —
(i) interest on any security of the Central Government or a State Government;
(ii) interest on debentures or other securities for money issued by or on behalf of a local 
authority or a company or a corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act;'.
10
15
20
25
30
35
1  of 1956.
40
4. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, —
(a) in clause (6), —
(i) for sub-clauses (ii) to (v), the following sub-clause shall be substituted with effect 
from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely:-
"(ii) the remuneration received by him as an official, by whatever name called, of an 
embassy, high commission, legation, commission, consulate or the trade representation of 
a foreign State, or as a member of the staff of any of these officials, for service in such 
capacity:
Provided that the remuneration received by him as a trade commissioner or other official 
representative in India of the Government of a foreign State (not holding office as such in 
an honorary capacity), or as a member of the staff of any of those officials, shall be 
exempt only if the remuneration of the corresponding officials or, as the case may be, 
members of the staff, if any, of the Government resident for similar purposes in the 
country concerned enjoys a similar exemption in that country:
Provided further that such members of the staff are subjects of the country represented 
and are not engaged in any business or profession c m*  employment in India otherwise than 
as members of such staff;”;
(ii) in sub-clause (viia),—
(1) in the opening paragraph, the brackets, words, figures and letters "(commencing 
from a date after the 31st day of March, 1971)" shall be omitted;
(2) in item (A), for the brackets, letter and words "(A) such remuneration due to or 
received by him", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"(I) where such services commence from a date after the 31st day of March, 1971, 
but before the 1st day of April, 1988, —
(A) such remuneration due to or received by him ";
(3) in the proviso, for the words "Provided that", the following shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(II) where such services commence from a date after the 31st day of March, 1988, 
the tax on his income chargeable under the head "Salaries" paid to the Central 
Government by the employer (which tax, in the case of an employer, being a company, 
may be paid notwithstanding anything contained in section 200 of the Companies Act, 
1956), the tax so paid by the employer for a period not exceeding forty-eight months 
commencing from the date of his arrival in India:
Provided that where he continues, with the approval of the Central Goverapent, such 
approval being obtained before the 1st day of October of the relevant assessment y w , to
Amendment 
of section 
10.


remain in employment in India after the expiiy of the period of twenty-four months 
commencing fiom die date of his anival in India:
Provided further that';
(b) in clause (dA), in ^Explanation,  for the words T or the purposes (rf this ctamae”.
the w(»ds, iHackBts, figure and letter "For the purposes of this clause and clause (6B)" diaU be 5 
substituted;
(c) after clause C 6A), the following clause shall be inserted, namdy:-
"(6B) where in the case of a non-resident (not being a company) or of a f(vagn company 
dmving income (not being salary, royalty or fees for technical services) fian Government or 
an Indian concon in pursuance of an agreement entered into by the Central Govonmentwidi lO 
the Government of a foreign State (v an intonational organisation, the tax on such income is 
payable by Government or the Indian concern to the Central Government undC T  the toms of 
that agrement or any other related agrement approved by the Central Govoronent, the tax 
so paid;";
(d ^ in clause (75), after sub-clause (iib), the following sub-clause shall be inserted with is 
effect firom the 1st day of April, 1989, namely
"(H e) in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided family, intoest on such Relief.
Bonds as the Coitral Govemmoit may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf;":
(e) in clause (20), the words' "Interest on securities",' shall be omitted with effect from 20 
the 1st day of April, 1989;
(f) in clause (25A), the words' "Interest on securities''or* shiall be omitted with effect from 
the 1st day of April, 1989;
(g) in clause (23D) [as inserted by clause (m) of section 6 of the Direct Tax Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1987],— 25 4 of 1988.
(i) for  the words "any income fiom", the words "any income oP shall be substituted;
(tt) for the words "the income from the Mutual Fund shall be distributed to the unit 
holders", the words "such income shall be distributed to the holdo’ s of its units" shall be 
substituted;
(h) in clause (24), the words ' "Interest on securities",' shall be omitted with effect fiom 30 
the 1st day of April, 1989:
(i) after clause (30), the following clause shall be inserted with effect fiom the 1st day of 
April, 1989, namely
'(31) in the case of an assessee who carries on the business of growing and 
manufacturing rubber, coffee, cardamom or such other commodity in India, as the Central 35 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, the amount 
of any subsidy received from or through the concerned Board under any such scheme for 
replantation or replacement of rubber plants, coffee plants, cardamom plants or plants for the 
growing of such other commodity or for rejuvenation or consolidation of areas used for 
cultivation of rubber, coffee, cardamom or such other commodity as the Central Govonment 40 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify:
Provided that the assessee furnishes to the Assessing Officer, along with his return of 
income for the assessment year concerned or within such further time as the Assessing 
Officer may allow, a certificate from the concerned Board, as to the amount of such subsidy 
paid to the assessee during the previous year.
6


Explanation,— In this clause, "concemed Board" means —
24 of 1947.
7 of 1942.
10 1986.
10
15
in reUukm to rubber, the Rubba Board constituted under section 4 of the Rubber 
Act, 1947,
(ii) in relation to coCfee, the Coffee Board constituted under section 4 of the Coffee 
Act, 1942,
(Hi) in relation to cardamom, the Spices Board constituted under section 3 of the 
Spices Board Act, 1986,
(iv) in relation to any other commodity qiecified undo'this clause, any Board or otho- 
authority established under any law for &e time being in force which the Central 
Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette. q)ecify in this behalf.'.
5. In section lOA of the Income-tax Act, with effect fitom the 1st day of April, 1989, —
fo ) in sub-section (7), fot  the words, brackets and figures 1>efore the expiry of the time 
allowed under sub-section (I) or sub-section (2) of section 139, whetha fixed originally or on 
extension, for furnishing the return of income", the words, brackets and figures "before the due 
date for furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139" shall be 
substituted;
Amendment 
of section 
lOA.
(b) in sub-section (8) [as inserted by section 126 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
4 of 1988. Act, 1987],—
20
(i) for the words "in this section", the words, brackets and figure "in sub-section (5)" 
shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words "purposes of this section", the words "purposes of that sub-section" 
shall be substituted.
6. After section lOA of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with effect 
ftom the 1st day of April, 1989, namely
25 'lOB. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any profits and gains derived by an 
assessee from a hundred po- cent export-oriented und»taking (hereaftCT in this section referred to 
as the undertaking) to which this section implies shall not be included in the total income of the 
assessee.
(2) This section applies to any undertaking which fulfils all the following conditions,
30 namely:-
(i) it manufactures or produces any article or thing;
(ti) it is not formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in 
existence:
Provided that this condition shall not J()ply in respect of any undertaking which is formed
35 as a result of the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the business of
any such industrial undertaking as is referred to in section 33B, in the circumstances and 
within the period specified in that section;
(H i) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of machinery or plant previously 
used for any purpose.
40 Explanation.— The provisions of Explanation 1 and Explanation 2 to sub-section (2) of 
section 80-1 shall apply for the purposes of clause (iii) of this sub-section as they apply for the 
purposes of clause (ii) of that sub-section.
(3) The profits and gains referred to in sub-section fi) shall not be included in the total 
income of the assessee in respect of any five consecutive assessment years, falling within a
45 period of eight years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which
the undertaking begins to manufacture o t produce articles or things, specified by the assessee 
his option:
Insertion of 
new section 
lOB.
Special 
provision 
in respect 
of newly 
established 
hundred per 
cent, 
export- 
oriented 
under­
takings.


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed to extend the aforesaid five 
assessment years to cover any period after the expiry of the said period of eight years.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act. in computing 
the total income of the assessee of the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
immediately succeeding the last of the relevant assessment years, or of any previous year 5 
relevant to any subsequent assessment year, —
(i) section 32, section 32A, section 33 and clause (ix) of sub-section (I) of section 36 
shall apply as if every allowance or deduction referred to therein and relating to or allowable 
for any of the relevant assessment years, in relation to any building, machinery, plant or 
furniture used for the purposes of the business of the undertaking in the previous year 10 
relevant to such assessment year or any expenditure incurred for the purposes of such 
business in such previous year had been given full effect to for that assessment year itself and 
accOTdingly sub-section (2) of section 32, clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 32A. 
clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of section 33 or the second proviso to clause (ix) of sub­
section of section 36, as the case may be, shall not apply in relation to any such 15 
allowance or deduction;
(U ) no loss referred to in sub-section (7 ) of section 72 or sub-section (1) or sub-section
(3) of section 74, in so far as such loss relates to the business of the undertaking, shall be 
carried forward or set off where such loss relates to any of the relevant assessment years;
(H i) no deduction shall be allowed under section 80HH or section 80HHA or section 20 
80-1 in relation to the profits and gains of the undertaking; and
(iv) in computing the depreciation allowance under section 32, the written down value of 
any asset used for the purposes of the business of the Undertaking shall be computed as if the 
assessee had claimed and been actually allowed the deduction in respect of depreciation for 
each of the relevant assessment years. 25
(5) Where the undertaking has begun to manufacture or produce articles or things in any 
previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing before the 1st day of April. 1989. 
the assessee may. at his option, l)efore the due date f c M *  furnishing the return of his income uAder 
sub-section (1) of section 139 for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1989. furnish to the Assessing Officer a declaration in writing that the provisions of sub- 30 
section (I) may be made applicable to him for each of the relevant assessment years as reduced
by the number of assessment years which expired before the 1st day of April, 1989, and if he 
does so, then, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to him for each of such relevant 
assessment years and the provisions of sub-section (4) shall also apply in computing the total 
income of the assessee for the assessment year immediately succeeding the last of the relevant 
assessment years and any subsequent assessment year. 35
(6) The provisions of sub-section (S) and sub-section (9) of section 80-1 shall, so far as 
may be, apply in relation to the undertaking referred to in this section as they apply for the 
purposes of the industrial undotaking referred to in section 80-1.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, where
the assessee, before the due date for furnishing the return of his income under sub-section (1) of 40 
section 139, furnishes to the Assessing Officer a declaration in writing that the provisions of 
this section may not be made 2q)plicable to him, the provisions of this section shall not apply 
to him for any of the relevant assessment years.
Explanation,- For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "hundred per cent export-oriented undertaking" means an undertaking which has been 45 
approved as a hundred per cent, export-cmented undertaking by the Board sqppointed in this 
behalf by the Central Government in exCTcise of the powers conferred by section 14 of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and the rules made under that Act; 1 ^ ^ ^
8


(ii) "relevant assessment years" means the five consecutive assessment years specified 
by the assessee at his option under sub-section (S);
(iii) "manufacture" includes any—
(a) process, or
S 0 > ) assembling, or
(c) recording of programmes on any disc, perforated media or o th a  information 
Stonge device.'.
7. In section 13A of the Income-tax Act, the w<hx1s ' "Interest on securities",’  shall be omitted Amendmeai 
with effect firom the 1st day < rf Apiil, 1989. L D J K m
10 8. In section 14 of the Income-tax Act, the letter and words "B.-Interest on securities." shall Amendment
be (Mnitted with effect fiom the 1st day of April, 1989. section 14.
9. In section 16 of the Income-tax Act, in clause for the portion beginning with the words Amendment
"a sum equal to" and ending with the words "whichever is less”, the following shall be substituted of section
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely:— 16-
IS "a sum equal to thirty-three and one-third per cent, of the salary or twelve thousand rupees,
whichever is l«s".
10. Secticms 18 to 21 of the Income-tax Act and the sub-heading ' "B.— Interest on  0 «>ission
secwities" • above section 18 shall be omitted widi effect fixjm the 1st day of April, 1989, °g
11. In section 40 of the Income-tax Act, with effect firom the 1st day of April, 1989,— Amendment
of section 
40.20 (i) in clause (a), for sub-clause (i), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
'(i) any interest (not being interest on a loan issued for public subscription before the 1st 
day of April, 1938), royalty, fees for technical S C T vices or other sum chargeable under this 
Act, which is payable outside India, on which tax has not been paid or deducted undo* Chapter 
25 X V n -B :
Provided that where in respect of any such sum, tax has been paid or deducted under 
Chapter XVII-B in any subsequent year, such sum shall be allowed as a deduction in 
computing th^ income of the previous year in which such tax has been paid or deducted.
ExpUmadon.— For the purposes of this sub-clause,—
30 (A) "royalty" shall have the same meaning as in £xp/anan'on 2 to clause fvi) of sub­
section (1) of section 9;
(B) "fees for technical services" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to 
clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 9;';
(u) clause (d) shall be omitted.
35 12. In section 43B of the Income-tax Act [as amended by section 15 of the Direct Tax Laws Amend-
4 of 1988. (Amendment) Act, 1987], with effect fiom the 1st day of April, 1989, — mnent of
section
(i) for clause ('a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
" (a ^ any sum payable by the assessee by way of tax, duty, cess or fee, by whatever name 
called, under any law for the time being in force, or";
40 (ii) in clause fc), the word "or" shall be inserted at the end;


10
(H i) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
any sum payable by the assessee as interest on any loan or borrowing from any 
public finaroial institution, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement 
governing such loan or borrowing,";
(fv) in the first proviso, after the word, brackets and letter "clause (cy\  
brackets and lettm-"or clause ((fr shall be insmed;
the words.
Insertion of 
new scction 
43C.
Special 
provision 
for compu­
tation of 
cost of 
acquisition 
of certain 
assets.
Amendment 
of section 
44 AB.
(v) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation  shall be inserted, namely:—
'Explanation 3.— For the purposes of this section, the expression "public financial 
institution" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4A of the Companies Act, 
1956;. 10
13. After section 43B of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:—
"43C. (1) Whoe an asset which becomes the property of an amalgamated company undo’  a 
scheme of amalgamation, is sold after the 29th day of February, 1988, by the amalgamated 
company as stock-in-trade of the business carried on by it, the cost of acquisition of the said 15
asset to the amalgamated company shall be the cost of acquisition of the said asset to the 
amalgamating company, as increased by the cost, if any, of any imjMOvement made thCTelo, and 
the expenditure, if any, incurred, wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer by the 
amalgamating company.
(2) Where an asset which becomes the property of the assessee on the total or partial 20
partition of a Hindu undivided family or under a gift or will or an irrevocable trust, is sold after 
the 29th day of February, 1988, by the assessee as stock-in-trade of the business carried on by 
him, the cost of acquisition of the said asset to the assessee shall be the cost of acquisition of 
the said asset to the transferor or the donor, as the case may be, as increased by the cost, if any, 
of any improvement made thereto, and the expenditure, if any, incurred, wholly and exclusively 25
in connection with such transfer (by way of effecting the partition, acceptance of the gift, 
obtaining probate in respect of the will or the creation of the trust), including the payment of 
gift-tax, if any, incurred by the transferor or the donor, as the case may be.".
14. In section 44AB of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989,—
(a ) in clauses (a) and (b), the wcHds, figures and letters "or years relevant to the assess- 30 
ment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1985, or any subsequent assessment year" 
shall be omitted;
(b) for the words "such previous year or years", the words "such previous year" shall be 
substituted;
(c) in the Explanation,  for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, 35 
namely:—
'(ii) "specified date", in relation to the accounts of the previous year relevant to an 
assessment year means,—
Special 
provision 
for compu­
ting profits 
and gains 
from the 
business of 
trading in 
certain 
goods.
1  of 1956.
((^ w hC T e the assessee is a company, the 31st day of December of the assessment year; 
(b) in any other case, the 31st day of October of the assessment year.’ .
Insertion of 15. After section 44AB of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with
44AC^^^°^ effect from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely:—
40
'44AC. (I)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sections 28 to 43B, in 
the case of an assessee, being a person (hereafter in this section referred to as the buyer) 
obtaining in any sale by way of auction, tender or any other mode, conducted by any other 45 
person or his agent (hereafter in this section referred to as the seller),—
fe) the right to receive any goods in the nature of alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption (other than Indian-made foreign liquor); or


(b) any forest produce, scrap or waste, yhether industrial or non-industrial, or such other 
goods as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf,
a sum equal to sixty pei cent of the amount paid or payable by the buyer in respect of such sale 
5 shall be deemed to the profits and gains of the buyer from the business of trading in such
goods chargeable to tax under the head "Profits and gains.of business or {vofession":
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any class of sales which the Central 
Govonment may, having regard to the smallness of the amount involved in such sales, the 
nature of the goods or other factors, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
10 (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of sub-section (1)
shall not i^>ply to a buyer in the further sale of any goods obtained undfer or in pursuance of the 
sale under sub-section (1).
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "seller”  means the Central Government, a 
State Government or any local authority or corporation or authority established by or under a 
Central, State or Provincial Act, or any company.'.
16. In section 44BB of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), in the opening paragraph, for Amendment 
the words "in the case of an assessee", the words "in the case of an assessee, being a non-resident," of section 
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of 44BB. 
April, 1983.
20 17. In section 47 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (v), the following proviso shall be Amendment
inserted, namely:— ■  of section
"Provided that nothing contained in clause C jv ) or clause shall apply to the transfer of a 
capital asset made after the 29th day of February, 1988, as stock-in-trade.".
11
18. In section 56 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2>, after clause (ic) (as inserted by Amendment
I  of 1 9 8 7 . 25 section 26 of the Finance Act, 1987), the following clause shall be inserted with effect from the of section
1st day of April, 1989, namely:—
'(id) income by way of interest on securities, if the income is not chaigeable to income-tax 
under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession";'.
19. In section 57 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989,— Amendment
of section
30 (a) in clause fO, —
(1) after the word "dividends", the words "or interest on securities" shall be inserted;
(2) after the words "such dividend", the wcffds "or interest" shall be inserted;
(b) the Explanation shall be omitted.
20. In section 58 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (]), with effect from-the 1st day of Amendment
35 April, 1989,—
((^ in clause fa), in sub-clause (h), the words and figures "and in respect of which there is 
no person in India who may be treated as an agent under section 163" shall be omiued;
(b) clause (b) shall be omitted.
21. In section 79 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989,— Amendment
of section
40 (al in clause (a), the word "or" occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(b) clause (b) shall be omitted.
79.


Amendment 
of section 
80CC.
Substitu­
tion of new 
section for 
section 
80CCA.
Deduction 
in respect 
of deposits 
under 
National 
Savings 
Scheme or 
payment to 
a deferred
annuity
plan.
22. In section 80CC of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section {!), after the words "eligible issue 
of capital,", the words, brackets, figures and letter "or units of any Mutual Fund specified under 
clause (23 D) of section 10 if such Fund subscribes only to eligible issue of capital," shall be 
inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989.
23. For section 80CCA of the Income-tax Act (as inserted by section 34 of the Finance Act, 5
1987), the following section shall be substituted, namely:— of 1 9 8 7 .
12
*80CCA. (]) Where an assessee, being—
(a ) an individual, or
(b) a Hindu undivided family, or
(c) an association of persons or a body of individuals consisting, in either case, only of 10 
husband and wife governed by the system of community of property in force in the State of 
Goa and the Union territories of Dadra ancjh&gar Haveli and Daman and Diu,
has in the previous year—
(i) deposited any amount in accordance with such scheme as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf (hereafter in this section 15
referred to as the National Savings Scheme); or
(ii) paid any amoimt to effect or to keep in force a contract for such deferred annuity plan 
of the Life Insurance Corporation as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify,
out of his income chargeable to tax, he shall, in accordance with, and subject to, the provisions 20
of this section, be allowed a deduction in the computation of his total income of the whole of 
the amount deposited or paid (excluding interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee’ s 
account, if any) as does not exceed the amount of twenty thousand rupees in the previous year.
Provided that in relation to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989 
and subsequent assessment years, this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "twenty 25
thousand rupees", the words "thirty thousand rupees" had been substituted.
(2) Where any amount—
(a ) standing to the credit of the assessee under the National Savings Scheme in respect of 
which a deduction has been allowed uner sub-section (1) together with the interest accrued 
on such amount is withdrawn in whole or part in any previous year, or 30
(b) is received on account of the surrender of the policy or as annuity or bonus in 
accordance with the deferred annuity plan of the Life Insurance Corporation in any previous 
year,
an amount equal to the whole of the amount referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) shall be 
deemed to be the income of the assessee of that previous year in which such withdrawal is made 
or. as the case may be, amount is received, and shall, accordingly, be chargeable to tax as the 
income of that previous year.
35
Explanation I. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that interest on the deposits 
made under the National Savings Scheme shall not be chargeable to tax except in the manner 
and to the extent specified in sub-section (2). 40
Explanation II. — For the purposes of this section, "Life Insurance Corporation" shall have 
the same meaning as in clause {a) of sub-section (8) of section 80C.’ .


24. In section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the ist day of April, 1989,— Amendment
of section
13
(a ) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
'Yij Where an assessee, being an Indian company or a person (other than a company) 
resident in India, is engaged in the business of export out of India of any goods or 
merchandise to which this section applies, there shall, in accordance with and subject to the 
provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total income of the assessee, a 
deduction of the whole of the income derived by the assessee from the export of such goods 
or merchandise:
80HH C.
Provided that if the assessee, being a holder of an Export House Certificate or a Trading 
10 House Certificate, (hereafter in this section referred to as an Export House or a Trading
House, as the case may be,) issues a certificate referred to in clause (b) of sub-section 
(4A), that in respect of the amount of the export turnover specified therein, the deduction 
under this sub-section is to be allowed to a supporting manufacturer, then the amount of 
deduction in the case of the assessee shall be reduced by such amount which bears to the total 
15 profits of the export business of the assessee the same proportion as the amount of export
turnover specified in the said certificate bears to the total export turnover of the assessee.
(lA) Where the assessee, being a supporting manufacturer, has during the previous year, 
sold goods or merchandise to any Export House or Tading House in respect of which the 
Export House or Trading House has issued a certificate under the proviso to sub-section (1), 
20 there shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed in
computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction of the whole of the income derived 
by the assessee from the sale of goods or merchandise to the Export House or Trading House 
in respect of which the certificate has been issued by the Export House or Trading House.";
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
25 '(3A) For the purposes of sub-section (lA ),  profits derived by a supporting
manufacturer from the sale of goods or merchandise shall be,—
(a ) in a case where the business carried on by the supporting manufacturer consists 
exclusively of sale of goods or merchandise to one or more Export Houses or Trading 
Houses, the profits of the business as computed under the head "Profits and gains of 
business or profession";
(b ) in a case where the business carried on by the supporting manufacturer does not 
consist exclusively of sale of goods or merchandise to one or more Export Houses or 
Trading Houses, the amount which bears to die profits of the business (as computed under 
the head "Profits and gains of business or profession") the same proportion as the turnover
35 in respect of sale to the respective Export House or Trading House bears to the total
turnover of the business carried on by the assessee.';
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
30
"(4A) The deduction under sub-section (lA)  shall not be admissible unless the 
supporting manufacturer furnishes in the prescribed form along with his return of income,—
(a) the report of an accountant, as defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) 
of section 288, certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed on the basis of the 
income of the suporting manufacturer in respect of his sale of goods or merchandise to the 
Export House or Trading House; and
(b) a certificate from tlie Export House or Trading House containing such particulars
45 as may be prescribed and verified in the manner prescribed that in respect of the export
turnover mentioned in the certificate, the Export House or Trading House has not claimed 
the deduction under this section:


Provided that the certificate specified in clause {b) shall be duly certified by the auditor 
auditing the accounts of the Export House or Trading House under the provisions of this Act 
or under any other law.":
(d ) in tiic Explanation, after clause fc), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(d ) "Export House Certificate" or "Trading House’Certificate" means a valid Export 5  
House Certificate or Trading House Certificate, as the case may be, issued by the Chief 
Controller of Imports and Exports, Gov«nment of India;
(e) "supporting manufacturer" means a person being an Indian company or a person
(other than a company) resident in India, manufacturing goods or merchandise and selling
such goods or merchandise to an Export House or a Trading House for the purposes of 10 
export’.
Amendment 25. In section SOL of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), with effect from the 1st day of
of .  Aprfl, 1989,—section
80L.
(a ) after clause (Hi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(U ia) interest on deposits under the Post Office (Mojithly Income Account) Rules, 15 
1987;”;
(b) in clause fvi7), —
(i) in the opening paragraph, the words "or with a public company formed and regist^ed
in India with the main object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance for 
construction or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes" shall be omitted; 20
(ii) in the proviso, the words ”or, as the case may be, the company”  shall be omitted;
(c) after clause (ix), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
* '(x ) interest on deposits with, or dividend received from, any public company formed and 
registered in India with the main object of carrying on the business of providing long-term 
finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes: 25
Provided that the company is for the time being approved by the Central Government for 
the purpose of clause (viii) of sub-section (1) of section 36,”;
(d) for the first and second provisos, the following provisos shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that where the gross total income of the assessee includes any income by way of 
interest on any deposits referred to in clause (iia), or income in respect of units referred to in 
clause or clause or income by way of interest or dividend referred to in clause 
there sh^l be allow^ in computing the total income of the assessee, a further deduction of 
an amount equal to so much of such income as has not been allowed by way of deduction 
under the foregoing provisions of this sub-section; so, however, that the amount of such 
further deduction shall not exceed three thousand rupees: 35
Provided further that where any income by way of interest on any deposits referred to in 
clause (iia) or any dividends referred to in clause (iv) remains unallowed after the deduction 
under the foregoing provisions of this section, there shall be allowed in computing the total 
income of the assessee, an additional deduction of an amount equal to so much of such
income as has remained unallowed; so, however, that the amount of such additional deduction 40
shall not exceed three thousand rupees.”.
Amendment 26. In section 80-0 of the Income-tax Act (as amended by section 36 of the Finance Act,
of section 1987),— 1 1  of 1 9 8 7 .
(a ) in the caning paragraph,—
(i) for the words ”under an agreement approved by the Board in this behair, the words
14


10
15
20
25
30
35
"under an agreement approved in this behalf by the Chief Commissioner or the Director 
General”  shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989;
(ii) for the portion beginning with the words ”and such income is received in 
convertible foreign exchange”  and ending with the words "in computing the total income of 
the assessee”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"and such income is received in convertible foreign exchange in India, or having been 
received in convertible foreign exchange outside India, or having been converted into 
convertible foreign exchange outside India, is brought into India, by or on behalf of the 
assessee in accordance with any law for the time being in force f c M *  regulating payments 
and dealings in foreign exchange, there shall be allowed, in accordance with and subject to 
the provisions of this section, a deduction of an amount equal to fifty per cent, of the 
income so received in, or brought into, India, in computing the total income of the 
assessee";
(b) for the first and second provisos, the following provisos shall be substituted with effect 
from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely:—
”Provided that the application for the s^proval of the agreement referred to in this section 
is made to the Chief Commissioner or, as the case may be, the Director General in the 
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner before the 1st day of October of the 
assessment year in relation to which the s^proval is first sought:
Provided further that the approval of the Chief Commissioner or, as the case may be, the 
Director General shall not be necessary in the case of any such agreement which has been 
approved for the purposes of the deduction under this section by the Central Government 
before the 1st day of April, 1972, or by the Board before the 1st day of April, 1989, and 
every application for such approval of any such agreement pending with the Board 
immediately before the 1st day of April, 1989 shall stand transferred to the Chief 
Commissioner or the Director General for disposal:".
27. In section 80P of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (f), the words and 
figures "chargeable under section 18" shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 
1989.
28. Section 86A of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 
1989.
15
40
45
50
29. In section 89 of the Income-tax Act, sub-section (2) shall be omitted with effect from the 
1st day of April, 1989.
30. Section 112A of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1989.
31. Section 115B of the Income-tax Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and 
after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted with effect 
from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely:—
" '(2 ) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or in any other law for the time 
being in force or any instrument having the force of law, the assessee shall, in addition to the 
payment of income-tax computed under sub-section (1), deposit, during the previous year 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989, an amount equal to 
thirty-three and one-third per cent, of the amount of income-tax computed under clause (i) of 
sub-section (1), in such social security fund (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the 
security fund), as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
in this bahalf:
Provided that where the assessee makes during the said previous year any deposit of an 
amount of not less than two and one-half per cent of the profits and gains of the life insurance 
business in the security fund, the amount of income-tax payable by the assessee under the said 
clause (i) shall be reduced by an amount equal to two and one-half per cent, of such profits and 
gains and, accordingly, the deposit of thirty-three and one-third per cent, required to be made 
under this sub-section shall be calculated on the income-tax as so reduced.".
Amendment 
of section 
SOP.
Omission 
of section 
86A.
Amendment 
of section 
89.
Omission 
of section 
112A. 
Amendment 
of section 
115B.
32. In section 115F of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), 
April, 1989,—
with effect from the 1st day of Amendment
of section 
115F.


C o )  in the opening portion,—
(i) the w(xds "or deposited" shall be omitted;
(u) the words, brackets, figure and letto- "ot in an account referred to in clause (4A)," 
shall be omitted;
(iii) the words "or such deposit in the account aforesaid" shall be omitted;
(b) in the Explanation,  in clause f/j, the words, taickets, figures and letter "refared to 
in clause (4A) of section 10 or" shall be omitted.
16
Amendment 
of section 
131.
33. In section 131 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988,—
(a ) in sub-section {lA), for the words "If the Assistant Director of Inspection", the words, 
brackets and figures "If the Director General or Director or Deputy Director ot Assistant 
Director, or the authorised officer referred to in sub-section (1) of section 132 before he takes 
action under clauses (i) to fvj of that sub-section," shall be substituted;
10
Amendment 
of section 
132.
(b) in sub-section (3), in the proviso, in clause (b) [as amended by section 2 of the Direct 
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], for the words "the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner 
therefor", the words "the Chief Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner or Director 
therefor, as the case may be" shall be substituted.
34. In section 132 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989,—
(a ) in sub-section (I), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
4 of 1988.
15
"Provided further that where it is not possible or practicable to take physical possession of 
any valuable article or thing and remove it to a safe place due to its volume, weight or other 20 
physical characteristics or due to its being of a dangerous nature, the authorised officer may 
serve an order on the ow nCT or the person who is in immediate possession or control thereof 
that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise deal with it, except with the previous 
permission of such authorised officer and such action of the authorised officer shall be deemed 
to be seizure of such valuable article or thing under clause (Hi)/'; 25
(b) in sub-section (3), after the words "other valuable article or thing,", the words, brackets 
and figure "for reasons other than those mentioned in the second proviso to sub-section (1)/'  
shall be inserted.
Amendment 
of section 
139.
35. In section 139 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989,—
(a ) in sub-section (6A), after the words "require him to furnish", the words, figures and 
leiicrs "the report of any audit obtained under section 44AB, the" shall be inserted;
(b) in the Explanation below sub-section (9), after clause (b), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:—
30
Omission 
of section 
181.
Amendment
of
section
193.
’ \bb) the return is accompanied by the report of the audit obtained under section 44AB;"..
36. §ection 181 of the Income-tax Act and the sub-heading 'V.-Liability of State  35 
Governments'' above that section shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989.
37. In section 193 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989,—
(a) in the c^)ening paragr 2q ;)h , for the words 'chargeable und^ the head "Interest on securities" 
the words "by way of interest on securities" shall be substituted;
(b) in the proviso, clause shall be omitted. 40
Amendment 
of s^tion 
194C.
38. In section 194C of the Income-tax Act, aft^ sub-section (2), the foUowing Explanation 
shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, namely:—
*  Explanation, — For the purposes of this section, where any sum referred to m sub-section
(1) or sub-section f2; is credited to any account, whether called "Suspense account" or by any 
other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting 45


shall be deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this 
section shall apply accordingly.’ .
39. In section 195 of the Income-tax Act, in the sub-section (2), for the words "in the 
prescribed manner", the words "by general or special order" shall be substituted and shall be deemed 
to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of March, 1988.
40. After section 206B of the Income-tax Act, the following sub-heading and section shall be 
inserted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, namely:—
” BB.—Collection at source
17
Amendment 
of section 
195.
Insertion of 
new 
section 
206C.
206C. (1) Every person, being a seller referred to in section 44AC, shall, at the time of 
10 debiting of the amount payable by the buyer referred to in that section to the account of the 
buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said buyer in cash or by the issue of a 
cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, collect from the buyer, a sum equal to 
twenty per cent, of such amount as income-tax on income comprised therein.
(2) The power to recover tax by collection under sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice
15 to any other mode of recovery.
(3) Any  person collecting any amount under sub-section (I) shall pay within seven days 
the amount so collected to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs.
(4) Any amount collected in accordance with the provisions of this section and paid under 
sub-section (3) shall be deemed as payment of tax on behalf of the person from whom the
20 amount has been collected and credit shall be given to him for the amount so collected on the
production of the certificate furnished under sub-section (S) in the assessment made under this 
Act for the assessment year for which such income is assessable.
(5) Every person collecting tax in accordance with the provisions of this section shall 
within ten days from the date of debit or receipt of the amount furnish to the buyer to whose
25 account such amount is debited or from whom such payment is received, a certificate to the
effect that tax has been collected, and specifying the sum so collected, the rate at which the tax 
has been collected and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(6) Any person responsible for collecting the tax who fails to collect the tax in accordance 
with the provisions of this section, shall, notwithstanding such failure, be liable to pay the tax
30 to the credit of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) .
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (6), if the seller does not collect the 
tax or after collecting the tax fails to pay it as required under this section, he shall be liable to 
pay simple interest at the rate of two per cent, per month or part thereof on the amount of such 
tax from the date on which such tax was collectable to the ^ te  on which the tax was actually
35 paid.
(8) Where the tax has not been paid as aforesaid, after it is collected, the amount of the tax 
together with the amount of simple interest thereon referred to in sub-section (7) shall be a 
charge upon all the assets of the seller.".
41. In section 230A^of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (J), for the words "fifty thousand 
40 rupees", the words "two lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
42. After section 245D of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:—
"245DD. (J) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding before it, the Settlement 
Commission is of the opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interests of the revenue it 
45 is necessary so to do, it may, by order, attach pro^ionally any property belonging to the
applicant in the manner provided in the Second Schedule:
Provided that where a provisional attachment made under section 28IB is pending 
immediately before an 2q;)plication is made under section 24SC, an ord^ under this sub-section 
shall continue such provisional attachment up to Ae period up to which an order made under 
50 section 28 IB would have continued if such application had not been made:
Profits and 
gains from 
the
business of
trading in
alcoholic
liquor,
forest
produce,
scrap, etc.
Amendment 
of section 
230A.
Insertion of 
new section 
245DD.
Power of 
Settlement 
Commission 
to order 
provisional .  
attachment 
to protect 
revenue.


Provided further that where the Settlement Commission passes an order under this sub­
section after the expiry of the period referred to in the preceding proviso, the provisions of sub­
section (2) shall apply to such order as if the said order had originally been passed by the 
Settlement Commission.
(2) Every provisional attachment made by the Settlement Commission under sub- 5 
section (1) shall cease to have effect after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of 
the O T der made under sub-section fi) :
18
Amendment of section
246.
Amendment
of
section
263.
Provided that the Settlement Commission may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend 
the aforesaid period by such further period or periods as it thinks fit, so, however, that the total 
period of extension shall not in any case exceed two years.". 10
43. In section 246 of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section in clause fo), in sub-clause C iva), after the word, figures and letter 
"^section 272B", the words, figures and letters ''or section 272BB" shall be inserted and shall be 
deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987;
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), the words, figures and letters "or an order under 15 
section 104, as it stood immediately before the 1st day of April, 1988, in respect of any 
assessment for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987 or any earlier 
assessment years, made against the assessee, being a company" shall be inserted at the end.
44. In section 263 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), for tht Explanation,  the 
following Explanation shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, 20 
namely:—
'Explanation. — For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that, for the purposes of this 
sub-section, —
(a ) an order passed by the Assessing Officer shall include —
(i) an order of assessment made by the Assistant Commissioner or the Income-tax 25 
Officer on the basis of the directions issued by the Deputy Commissioner under section 
144A;
(ii) an order made by the Deputy Commissioner in exercise of the powers or in the 
performance of the functions of an Assessing Officer conferred on, or assigned to, him 
under the orders or directions issued by the Board or by the Chief Commissioner or 30 
Director General or Commissioner authorised by the Board in this behalf under section 1 2 0 ;
(b) "record" includes all recwds relating to any p-oceeding under this Act available at the 
time of examination by the Commissioner;
Amendment
of
section
271B.
(c) where any order referred to in this sub-section and passed by the Assessing Officer had 
been the subject matter of any appeal, the powers of the Commissioner under this sub- 35 
section shall extend to such matters as had not been considered and decided in such appeal.'.
45. In section 27 IB of the Income-tax Act, after the words, figures and letters "or obtain a 
report of such audit as required under section 44AB", the words, brackets and figures "or furnish the 
said report along with the return of his income filed under sub-section (7) of section 139, or along 
with the return of income furnished in response to a notice under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of 40 
section 142" shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989.
Insertion of 
new section 
276BB.
Failure to 
pay the tax 
collected at 
source.
46. After section 276B of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with 
effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, namely:—
"276BB. If a person fails to pay to the credit of the Central Government, the tax collected by 
him as required under the provisions of section 206C, he shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to 
seven years and with fine.".
45


47. In section 279 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989,— Amendment
of section
(a ) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :— 279.
\1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under section 275A, section 
276, section 276A, section 276B, section 276BB, section 276C, section 276CC, section 
5 276D, section 277 or section 278 except with the previous sanction of the Chief
Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner:
Provided that no such sanction shall be required if the prosecution is at the instance of the 
Commissioner (Appeals) or the ^propriate authority.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "appropriate authority”  shall have the 
10 same meaning as in clause (c) of section 269UA.’ ;
(b) (or  sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :—
'" (2 ) Any offence under this Chapter may, either before or after the institution of 
proceedings, be compounded by —
((^ the Board or a Chief Commissioner ot a Director General authorised by the Board 
15 in this behalf, in a case where the prosecution would lie at the instance of the
Commissioner (Appeals) or the approjjriate authority;
(b) the Chief Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner, in any other dlse.".
48. Chapter XXIIA of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted. Omission
of Chapter
49. In section 28IB of the Income-tax Act,— MOIA. Amendment
of section
20 (a ) in sub-section (1), the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely :— 281B.
"Explanation. — For the purposes of this sub-section, proceedings under sub-section (5) 
of section 132 shall be deemed to be proceedings for the assessment of any income or for the 
assessment or reassessment of any income which has escaped assessment.”;
(b) in sub-section (2), after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
25 namely:—
"Provided further that where an application for settlement under section 245C is made, the 
period commencing from the date on which such application is made and ending with the date 
on which an order under sub-section (I) of section 245D is made shall be excluded from the 
period specified in the preceding proviso.".
50. Section 285A of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted.
51. In section 293 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "any order made”, the words ”any Amendment 
proceeding taken or order made" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted °f section 
with effect from the 1st day of March, 1988.
52. In the First Schedule to the Income-tax Act, in rule 5, clause (b) shall be omitted with i^endment
35 effect from the 1st day of April, 1989. Schedule.
53. In the Eleventh Schedule to the Income-tax Act, for item 9, the following item shall be i^endment
substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely Lhedul^^
"9. Projectors.".
Conse-
54. The following amendments (being amendments of a consequential nature) shall be made m quential 
the Income-tax Act, namely:  —
19


(i) in section 2, in clause (24), sub-clause (viii) shall be omitted;
(ii) in section 18, in sub-section (1), in clause (i), the words, figures and letters "not 
being interest payable under section 280D in respect of any annuity deposit made under Chapter 
XXIIA”  shall be omitted;
(H i) in section 33, in sub-section (2) and the Explanation thereunder, the words, figures 5 
and letter "or section 280-0" shall be omitted;
(iv) in section 33A, in sub-section (2) and the Explanation thereunder, the words, figures 
and letter "w section 280-0" shall be omitted;
(v) in section 80B, in clause f5j, the words, figures and lettC T  "or under section 280-0" 
shall be omitted;
(vi) in section 80J, in sub-section (3), the words, figures and letter "or section 280-0" 
shall be omitted;
(vii) in section 80L, in sub-section (J), in clause (i), the brackets, words, figures and
letters "(not being interest payable under section 280D in respect of any annuity deposit made 
under Chapter XXIIA)" shall be omitted; 15
(viii) in section 253, in sub-section (1), in clause (c), the wwds, figures and letter "or 
under section 285A" shall be omitted.
Wealth-tax
Amendment 55 ^  section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter refOTed to as the Wealth-tax Act),— 2 7  of 1 9 5 7 .
of section
20
5. (c^ in sub-section (1),— 20
(i) after clause (xvie) and the Explanation thereto, the following clause shall be 
insoted, namely:—
"(xv^  in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided family, such Relief Bonds as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf;"; 25
(U ) for clause (xxxa), the following clause shall be substituted with effect from the 1st 
day of April, 1989, namely:—
"(xxxa) the value of one or more dwelling units (each having a plinth area of eighty 
square metres or less) belonging to the assessee and used solely for the purpose of 
residence of persons employed by the assessee in any plantation or industrial undertaking 30 
belonging to the assessee;";
(b) in sub-section (lA),  afta the brackets and figures "(xvi),", the brackets, figures and 
letter ’ ’ (xvie),'' shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989;
(c) in sub-secti(Mi (3).—
(i) intheopeningportion, after the brackets, figures and letter "('xvie),", the brackets, 35 
figures and lettw ” (xvif)," shall be inserted;
(U ) in clause (aa),—
(1) after the word, brackets, figures and letter "clause (xvie), ", the words, brackets, 
figures and letla "or Relief Bonds referred to in clause (xvif),” sh^l be inserted;
(2) after the words "Bonds or debentures", the words" or Relief Bcmds" shall be inserted. 40


21
56. After section 22D of the Wealth-tax 
namely:—
Act. the following section shall be inserted.
10
15
"22DD. (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding before it. the Settlement 
Commission is of the opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interests of the revenue it 
is necessary so to do. it may. by order, attach provisionally any property belonging to the 
applicant in the manner provided in the Second Schedule to the Income-tax Act as made 
applicable to this Act by section 32:
Provided that where a provisional attachment made under section 34C is pending immediately 
before an application is made under section 22C, an order under this sub-section shall continue 
such provisional attachment up to the period up to which an order made under section 34C 
would have continued if such application had not been made:
Provided further that where the Settlement Commission passes an order under this sub­
section after the expiry of the period referred to in the preceding proviso, the provisions of sub­
section (2) shall apply to such order as if the said order had originally b ^ n  passed by the 
Settlement Commission.
Insertion of 
new section 
22DD.
Power of 
Settlement 
Commis­
sion to 
order
provisional 
attachment 
to protect 
revenue.
(2) Every provisional attacnment made by the Settlement Commission under sub-section 
{1) shall cease to have effect after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of the 
order made under sub-section fi; :
Provided that the Settlement Commission may. for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend
20 the aforesaid period by such further period or periods as it thinks fit, so. however, that the total
period of extension shall not in any case exceed two years.".
57. In section 25 of the Wealth-tax Act. in sub-section (2), for the Explanation,  the 
following Explanation shall be substituted,with effect from the 1st day of June. 1988. namely :—
'Explanation. — For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that, for the purposes of this
25 sub-section,-
Amendment 
of section 
25.
30
(c ^ an order passed by the Assessing Officer shall include an order made by the Deputy 
Commissioner in exercise of the powers or in the performance of the functions of an 
Assessing Officer conferred on or assigned to him under orders or directions issued by the 
Board or by the Chief Commissioner or DirectOT General or Commissioner authorised by the 
Board in this behalf under section 120 of the Income-tax Act read with section 8 of this Act;
35
(b) "record" includes all records relating to any proceeding under this Act available at the 
time of examination by the Commissioner;
(c) where any order referred to in this sub-section and passed by the Assessing Officer had 
been the subject matter of any appeal, the powers of the Commissioner under this sub-section 
shall extend to such matters as had not been considered and decided in such appeal.’ .
58. In section 34AB of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-sections (1) and (2). for the word "Board", 
the words "Chief Commissioner or Director General" shall be substituted with effect from the 1st 34;^ , 
day of June, 1988.
40
59. In section 34ACC of the Wealth-tax Act, for the words "to the Board", occurring at the end, 
the words "to the Chief Commissioner or Director General" shall be substituted with effect from 
the 1st day of June, 1988.
60. In section 34AD of the Wealth-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988,-- 
{a i in sub-section ^ 7  > ,—
(i) for the word "Board", at both the places where it occurs, the words "Chief 
Commissioner or Director General" shall be substituted;
Amendment 
of section 
34ACC.
Amendment 
of section 
34AD.


(U ) for the words "it is satisfied", the words "he is satisfied" shall be substituted;
(U i) for the words "it thinks fit", the words "he thinks fit" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word "Board", the words "Chief Commissioner or Director 
General" shall be substituted;
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely :— 5
"(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2),  the Chief 
Commissioner or Director General shall, once in three years, rev^w the performance of all 
the registered valuers and may remove the name of any person from the Register of Valuers 
where he is satisfied, after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after 
such further inquiry, if any, as he thinks fit to make, that his performance is such that his lO 
name should not remain on the Register of Valuers.
(4) The Chief Commissioner or Director General may himself conduct the inquiry referred 
to in sub-section or sub-section or appoint an Inquiry Office'not below the rank of a 
Commissioner to conduct such inquiry, and for the purposes of such inquiry, the Chief 
Commissioner or Director General and the Inquiry Officer so appointed shall have the same 15  
powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when trying a suit in 5 of 1908. 
respect of the following matters, namely:—
fo ) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person including any officer of a banking company
and examining him on oath; 20
(c) compelling the producti(m of books of account and other documents;
(d ) issuing commission.".
Insertion of 61. In Chapter VIIB of the Wealth-tax Act, after section 34AD, the following section shall be
new section inserted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, namely;—34
_ . .  "MAE. (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, every person whose name 25
registered included in the Register of Valuers immediately before the 1st day of June, 1988, shall, if he
valuers to intends to continue to be registered under this Act, make an an>lication under sub-section (2) of
apply section 34AB within a period of three months from that date, for being registered afresh as a
afresh. valuer under this Chapter and the provisions of sub-section (3) of that section and the rules
made thereunder shall be applicable in respect of the verification of the application, the fees that ^0 
shall accompany such application and the declaration to be made by the applicant
(2) The provisions of this Chi^ter regarding the registration of a person as a valuer and other 
matters shall, so far as may be, apply to every application made under sub-section (1).
(3) Every tq>plication pending before the Board immediately before the 1st day of June, 1988, 
shall be deemed to be an i^lication received by the Chief Commissioner or Director General 33 
unda sub-section (1).".
Amendment 62. In section 34C of the Wealth-tax Act.—
of section
34C. (it^  in sub-section (J), the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
" E x p la n a tio nFor the purposes of this sub-section, the proceedings under sub-section
(5) of section 37A shall be deemed to be proceedings for the assessment of any net wealth or 40 
for the assessment or reasaeasment of any net wealth which has escaped assessment”;
Q } ) in sub-section (2), after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be insetted, 
namely:—
22


"Provided further that where an application for settlement under section 22C is made, the 
period commencing from the date on which such application is made and ending withihe date 
on which an order under sub-section (1) of section 22D is made shall be excluded from the 
period specified in the preceding proviso.".
5 63. For section 35-1 of the Wealth-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted with
effect from the 1st day of April, 1989, namely
”35-1. (1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under this Act except with 
the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner:
Provided that no such sanction shall be required if the prosecution is at the instance of the 
10 Commissioner (Appeals).
(2) Any such offence may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, be
compounded by —
(d ^ the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Director General authorised by the Board in 
this behalf, in a case where the prosecution would lie at the instance of the Commissioner
15 (^peals);
(b) the Chief Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner, in any other case.”.
64. In section 37 of the Wealth-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, —
(a ) after sub-section (]), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :—
"(lA) If the Director General or Director or Deputy Director or Assistant Director, or the 
20 authorised officer referred to in sub-section (1) of section 37A before he takes action under
clauses (i) to (vi) of that sub-section, has reason to suspect that any net wealth has been
concealed, or is likely to be concealed, by any person or class of persons within his 
jurisdiction, then, for the purposes of making any inquiry or investigation relating thereto, it 
shall be competent for him to exercise the powers conferred under sub-section (1) on the 
25 wealth-tax authorities referred to in that sub-section, notwithstanding that no proceedings
with respect to such person or class of persons are pending before him or any other wealth-tax 
authority.";
(b) in sub-section (3), in the proviso, in clause (b) [as amended by section 127 of the
4  of 1988. Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], for the words "the Chief Commissioner or
30 Commissioner therefor", the words "the Chief Commissioner or Director General or 
Commissioner or Director therefor, as the case may be" shall be substituted
65. In section 43 of the Wealth-tax Act, for the words "any order made", the words "any 
proceeding taken or order made" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted 
with effect from the 1st day of March, 1988.
23
Substitu­
tion of new 
section for 
section 3 5 -1 . 
Prose­
cutions to 
be with the 
previous 
sanction of 
certain 
wealth-tax 
authorities 
and their 
power to 
compound 
offences.
Amendment 
of section 
37.
Amendment 
of section 
43.
35 6 6. In Schedule I to the Wealth-tax Act, in Part I, the following shall be added at the end. Amendment
namely'  o fS c h e d u Je L
"Surcharge on wealth-tax
The amount of wealth-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of this Part shall, in 
relation to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, be increased by a 
40 surcharge calculated at the rale of ten per cent, of such wealth-tax.".
1 8  o f 1958. 67. In section 5 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958, (hereinafter tefened to as the Gift-tax Act), in sub-
section (1), after clause (iiic), the following clause shall be inserted, namely 5.
"(Hid) being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, of property in the form of such
45 Relief Bonds, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in


this behalf subject to a maximum of rupees five lakhs in value in the aggregate in one or more 
previous years:
Provided that the exemption conferred by this clause shall be available only to a person who 
has initially subscribed to the said Bonds;".
of^Tcafon Gift-lax Act, in sub-section (2), for the Explanation, the following 5
24 Explanation shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, namely :—
'Explanation :— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that, for the purposes of 
this sub-section,-
(a ) an order passed by the Assessing Officer shall include an O T der passed by the Deputy 
Commissioner in exercise of the powers or in performance of the functions of an Assessing 10 
Officer conferred on or assigned to him under orders or directions issued by the Board or by 
the Chief Commissioner or Director Gener^ or Commissioner authorised by the Board in 
this behalf under section 120 of the Income-tax Act read with section 7 of this Act;
(b) "record" includes all records relating to any proceeding under this Act available at the
time of examination by the Commissioner; 15
(c) where any order referred to in this sub-section and passed by the Assessing Officer had 
been the subject matter of any appeal, the powers of the Commissioner under this sub-section 
shall extend to such matters as had not been considered and decided in such appeal.'.
Amendment 69. In section 35 of the Gift-tax Act, for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections 
of section shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1989, namely :—  20
35.
"(5) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under this Act excq>t with the 
previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner:
Provided that no such sanction shall be required if the prosecution is at the instance of the 
Commissioner (Appeals).
(4) Any such offence may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, be 25 
compounded by —
(c ^ the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Director General authorised by the Board in 
this behalf, in a case where the prosecution would lie at the instance of the Commissioner 
(Appeals);
(b) the Chief Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner, in any other case.". 30
Amendment 79  section 36 of the Gift-tax Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be
of section inserted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, namely:—
36.
” (1A) If the DirectOT General or Director or Deputy Director or Assistant Director has reason 
to suspect that any gifts chargeable to tax under this Act have been concealed, or are likely to be 
concealed, by any person or class of persons within his jurisdiction, then, for the purposes of 35 
making any inquiry or investigation relating thereto, it shall be competent for him to exercise 
the powers conferred under sub-section (1) on the gift-tax authorities referred to in that sub­
section, notwithstanding that no proceedings with respect to such person or class of persons are 
pending before him or any other gift-tax authority.".
Amendment 7 1 , in section 42 of the Gift-tax Act, for the words "any order made", the words "any 40 
of section proceeding taken or order made" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted
42. with effect from the 1st day of March, 1988.
24


25
Expenditure-tax
3 5  of 1 9 8 7 . 72. In the Expenditure-tax Act. 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the Expenditure-tax Act), save Substitu-
as otherwise expressly provided herein, the references to any authorities specified in column (1) of authorii?cr 
the Table below shall be substituted by references to the authority or authorities speciHed in the 
5 corresponding entries in column (2) of the said Table and such consequential changes, as the rules 
of grammar may require, shall also be made.
10
(1) (2)
Commissioner Chief Commissioner or Commissioner
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner Deputy Commissioner
Income-tax Officer Assessing Officer
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the reference to "Commissioner”  
occurring in sections 21 and 23.
73. In section 6 of the Expenditure-tax Act.—
15 (a) for sub-section fix the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"'(I) Every Director General of Income-tax. Chief Commissioner of Income-tax. Director 
of Income-tax. Commissioner of Income-tax, Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals). 
Deputy Director of Income-tax. Deputy Commissioner of Income-tax. Assistant Director of 
Income-tax. Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax. Inconje-tax Officer. Tax Recovery 
20 Officer and Inspector of Income-tax shall have the like powers and perform the like functions
under this Act as he has and performs under the Income-tax Act. and for the exercise of his 
powers and the performance of his functions, his jurisdiction under this Act shall be the same 
as he has under the Income-tax Act.";
Amendment 
of section 6 .
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "Director of Inspection or by the Commissioner", the 
25 words "Director General or Director or by the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner" shall be 
substituted.
30
74. In section 13 of the Expenditure-tax Act. in sub-section (3), for the words and figures "the 
Commissioner, or. as the case may be, the order under section 22 or section 23 is received by the 
Commissioner", the words and figures "the Commissioner, or the order is received by the Chief 
Commissioner or Commissioner, as the case may be, under section 22 or section 23" shall be 
substituted.
Amendment 
of section 
13.
35
40
75. In section 24 of the Expenditure-tax Act,—
(a) for the figures, brackets, letters and w O T ds ” 2(43B) and (44), 118, 125, 125A, 128 to 
136 (both inclusive)", the figures, brackets and words ” 2(44)^ 118, 120, 129, 131 to 136 (both 
inclusive)" shall be substituted;
(b) the figures "231," shall be omitted.
CHAPTER IV 
INDIRECT TAXES 
Customs
76. The Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Tariff Act), shall be 
amended in the manner specified in the Second Schedule.
77. (1) In the case of goods mentioned in the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, or 
in that Schedule, as amended from time to time, there shall be levied and collected as an auxiliary 
duty of customs an amount equal to fifty per cent, of the value of the goods as determined in
52 of 1962. 4 5 accordance with the provisions of section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as
the Customs Act).
Amendment 
of section 
24.
Amendment 
of Act 51 
of 1975. 
Auxilliary 
duties of 
customs.


26
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of March, 1989, except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before such cesser; and section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been repealed 
by a Central Act
10 of 1897.
Amendment 
of section 
27.
(3) The auxiliary duties of customs referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in addition to any 
duties of customs chargeable on such goods under the Customs Act, or any other law for the 
time being in force.
(4) The provisions of the Customs Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder, 
including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in 
relation to the levy and collection of the auxiliary duties of customs leviable under this section 
in respect of any goods as they J^ply in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of 
customs on such goods under that Act or those rules and regulations, as the case may be.
78. In section 27 of the Customs Act, after sub-section (4), 
inserted, namely:-
10
the following sub-section shall be
” (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the provisions of this section 
shall also apply to a claim for refund of any amount collected as duty of customs made on the 
ground that the goods in respect of which such amount was collected were not leviable to such 
duty or were entitled to exemption from duty and no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect 
of such claim.".
15
Amendment 
of section 
115.
79. In section 115 of the Customs Act, in sub-section (2), in the opening paragraph, the words 
"and that each of them had taken all such precautions against such use as are for the time being 
specified in the rules" shall be omitted.
20
Amendment 
of section 
156.
80. In section 156 of the Customs Act, in sub-section (2), clause fc) shall be omitted.
Excise
Amendment 
of Act 5 of 
1986. 
Special 
duties of
81. The Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Excise Tariff 25 
Act), shall be amended in the manner specified in the Third Schedule.
S2. (1)  In the case of goods chargeable with a duty of excise und^ the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Excises Act), as amended from time to time, 1  of 1944.
read with any notification for the time being in force issued by the Central Government in relation 
to the duty so chargeable (not being a notification providing for any exemption for giving credit 30 
with respect to, or reduction of duty of excise und^ the said Act on such goods equal to, any duty 
of excise under the said Act, or the additional duty under section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 
already paid on the raw material or component parts used in the production or manufacture of such 
goodsX there shall be levied and collected a special duty of excise equal to five per cent of the 
amount so chargeable on such goods. 35
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of March, 1989, except as
respects things done or omitted to be done befwe such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses 
Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been repealed by a 1 0  of 1 8 ^
Central Act.
(3) The special duties of excise referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in addition to any duties 40 
of excise chargeable on such goods under the Central Excises Act, or any other law for the time 
being in force.
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act, and the rules made thereunder, including those 
relating to refunds and exemptions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the 
levy and collection of the special duties of excise leviable under this section in respect of any goods 45


27
as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that 
Act or those rules, as the case may be.
83. The Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (hereinafter 
referred to as the Additional Duties of Excise Act), shall be amended in the manner specified in the
5 Fourth Schedule.
84. (i) The notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) No. G.S.R. 97(E), dated the 23rd day of February, 1988, which was issued in exercise of 
the powers conferred by sub-rule ( 1) of rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, read with sub­
section (3) of section 3 of the Additional Duties of Excise Act, providing for withdrawal of
10 exemptions from additional duty of excise in relation to cotain varieties of sugar (ho^eafter in this 
section referred to as sugar), shall be deemed to have, and to have always had, effect on and from 
the 10th day of September, 1986.
(2) Any action or thing taken < w  done or purported to have been taken or done on or after the 
10th day of September, 1986 and before the 23rd day of February,1988, in relation to sugar under
15 the Additional Duties of Excise Act, shall be deemed to be, and to have always been, for all
purposes as validly and effectively taken or done as if the provisions of sub-section (1) had been in 
force at all material times and such action or thing had been taken or done under the Additional 
Duties of Excise Act read with the notification dated the 23rd day of February, 1988, referred to in 
sub-section (1). and, accord^gly, notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or
20 order of any court, tribunal or other authority,—
(o) all additional duties of excise levied, assessed or coUected or purporting to have been 
levied, assessed or collected on or after the 10th day of Sq>tember, 1986 and before the 23rd day 
of Fetmiary, 1988, on sugar, shall be deemed to be, and shall be deemed to have always been, as 
validly levied, assessed or collected as if the provisions of this section had been in force at all
25 material times;
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court, tribunal or 
other authority, for the refund of, and no enforcement shall be made by any court, tribunal or 
other authority, of any decree or order directing the refund of, any such additional duties of 
excise which have bem collected and which would have been validly collected if the provisions
30 of this section had been in f(»ce at all material times;
(c) recovery shall be made of all such additional duties of excise which have not been 
collected or, as die case may be, which have been refunded but which would have been collected 
or, as the case may be, would not have been refiinded, if the provisions of this section had been 
in force at all material times.
35 Explanation.—  For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or omission on the 
part of any person shall be punishable as an offence which would not have been so punishable if 
this section had not come into force.
Amend- 
ment of 
Act 58 of 
1957.
Provision 
as to 
additional 
duties of 
excise on 
certain 
varieties 
of sugar in 
relation to 
a certain 
period and 
validation.
5 of 19g6.
CHAPTER V
MISCEII^NEOUS
40 85. In section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,—
M for item (tia), the following item shall be substituted, namely:—
"(ua) codon fabrics covered under heading Nos. 52.05, 52.06, 52.07, 52.08, 52.09,
52.10, 52.11, 52.12, 58.01, 58.02, 58.03, 58.04, 58.05, 59.01, 59.03, 59.05, 59.06 and 
60.01 of the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985;";
Amend- 
mfmt of 
Act 74 of
1956.
45 (b) fot items (vii),(vitt).(ix) mi(x).  the foUowing items shall be substituted, namely:-


28
"(vii) man-made fabrics covered undw heading Nos. 54.08, 54.09, 54.10,54.11, 54.12, 
55.07, 55.08, 55.09, 55.10, 55.11, 55.12, 58.01, 58.02, 58.03, 58.04, 58.05, 59.01, 
59.02, 59.03, 59.05, 59.06 and 60.01 of the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 
1985; 5 of 1986.
(viii) sugar covered under sub-heading Nos. 1701.20,1701.31,1701.39 and 1702.11 of 5 
the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985; 5 of 1986.
(ix) unmanufactured tobacco and tobacco refuse covered unda sub-heading No. 2401.00, 
cigars and cheroots of tobacco covoed undo’  heading No. 24.02, cigarettes and cigarillos of 
tobacco covCTed under sub-heading Nos. 2403.11 and 2403.21, and other manufactured 
tobacco covered under sub-heading Nos. 2404.11, 2404.12, 2404.13, 2404.19, 2404.21,
2404.29, 2404.31, 2404.39, 2404.41 and 2404.50, of the Schedule to the Central Excise 
Tariff Act, 1985;
10
S  of 1986.
(x) woven fabrics of wool covered under heading Nos. 51.06, 51.07, 58.01, 58.02, 
58.03 and 58.05 of the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985.".
86 . After section 35 of the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972, theAmendment
of ^972^ following section shall be insoted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1988, namely:—
5 of 1986.
Deduction 
of income- 
tax not to 
be made on 
interest or 
dividend 
payable to 
the Corpo­
ration, etc. 
Amendment 
of Act 11 
of 1983.
"35A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 193 or section 194 of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961, no deduction of income-tax shall be made on any intm st or dividend payable to the 4 3  of 1 9 6 1 .
Corporation or to any of the four new companies formed by virtue of the schemes framed under 
sub-section (1) of section 16. in respect of any securities or shares owned by the Corpc^tion 20 
or such company or in which the Corporation or such company has full beneficial interest".
87. In section 40 of the Finance Act, 1983,—
(i) in sub-section (1), befcwe the Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:—
"Provided that the amount of wealth-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of 25 
this sub-section shall, in relation to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of 
April, 1988, be increased by a surcharge calculated at the rate of ten po* cent of such wealth- 
tax.";
(tt) in such-section (3), with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989,—
in clause (i), the words", not being any such precious metal or alloy held for use as 
raw material in industrial production" shall be inserted at the end;
30
(b) to clause (v), the fc^owing proviso shall be added, namely:—
"Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any unused land held by the 
assesaee for industrial purposes for a period of two years from the date of its acquisition 
by him;"; 35
(c) for clause fvi), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(yi) building or land appurtenant thereto, other than building or part th^m f used by 
the auessee as factory, ^odown, warehouse, cinema house, hotel or office for the 
purposes of iu business or as a hoq>ital, creche, school, canteen, library, recreational 
centre, shelto*, rest-room or lunch room mainly used for the welfare of its emi^oyees or 40 
used as residential accomnKXlation, except as provided in clauses (via) md(vib),  andthe 
land qipurtenant to such building or part;


(via) any building used as residential accommodation in the nature of a guest house 
and land appurtenant th^eto;
(vib) any building and the land an>urtenant to such building used as residential 
accommodation by any director, manager, secretary or any other employee of the assessee,
5 such employee holding not less than one p ^  cent, of the equity share of the assessee or
by any relative of any person who holds not less than one per cent of the equity share of 
the assessee.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, "relative”  shall have the meaning 
assigned to it in clause (b) of Explanation 1  to section 80F of the Income-tax Act.';
(d ^ after clausd (viii), the following proviso and Explanation shall be inserted, 
namely:—
"Provided that this section shall not apply to any asset referred to in clause (i), (ii),
(Hi), (iv), (v) or (vi), which is held by the assessee as stock-in-trade in a business 
carried on by it or, in the case of motor-cars referred to in clause (vii), they are held as 
15 stock-in-trade in such business or registered as taxies and used as such in a business of
running motor-cars on hire carried on by the assessee.
Explanation.— Where any question arises as to whethw all or any of the assets referred 
to in clause (i), (ii), (Hi) or (iv) are held by the assessee as stock-in-trade in a business 
carried on by it, the question shall be decided in accordance with such directions as the 
20 Board may, by general or special order, issue for the guidance of the Assessing Officer,
having regard to the ratio which the yearly turnover of a business of trading in such assets 
bears to the average of the stocks of such assets held from time to time during the year in 
such business ordinarily and other relevant factors.".
88. In the Direct Tax Laws ^Amendment) Act, 1987,— Amendmentof Act 4 of
29
25 (a) in section 36, clause shall be omitted;
(b) in section 37,—
(i) in clause fa), after the words, brackets and figure "in sub-section ('i)," , the words, 
figures and letters "with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988," shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause (b), the words, figures and letters "with effect firom  the 1st day of April, 
1988" shall be inserted at the end;
(c) in section 38, the words, figures and letters "widi effect from the 1st day of April, 
1988" shall be inserted at the end;
(c ^ section 92 shall be omitted;
(e) in section 128,—
35 (i) in clause (i), the words, figures and letters "with effect from the 1st day of April,
1988" shall be inserted at the end;
(U ) in clause (h V , after the words "shall be inserted", the words, figures and letters "with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1988" shall be insnted;
(iii) in clause (Ui). the words, figures and letters "with effect fixxn the 1  st day of April,
40 1988" shall be inserted at the end;
1988.


(iv) in clause (vii), d£ta  the wwds "shall be substituted", the words, figures and letters 
"with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988" shall be inserted;
(ft in section 153, clause (a) shall be omitted;
(g) in section 154,—
(i) in clause (1),— 5
(A) in sub-clause (b ), the words, figures and letters "with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1988" shall be insnted at the end;
in sub-clause (f) , the words, figures and letters "with effea from the 1st day of 
April, 1988" shall be inserted at the end;
(ii) in clause C 2^, in sub-clause the words, figures and letters "with effect from the 10 
1st day of April, 1988" shall be insoted at the end;
(h) in section 155, in clause fa), in sub-clause fitX the words, figures and letters "with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1988" shall be inserted at the end;
(i) in section 158, after the words "shall be inserted", the words, figures and letters "with
effect from the 1st day of April, 1988" shall be insoted; IS
(i) in section 162,—
(i) in clause (a), the words, figures and letto^ "with effect from the 1st day of April,
1988" shall be inserted at the end;
(ii) in clause (b), after the words "shall be inserted", the words, figures and letters
"with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988" shall be inserted; 20
(H i) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
” (c) (i) c]msis(yi),(via),(viia),(mi),(xv),(xvi) wA(xvia)  shall be omitted 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988;
(u) clause ('xvii) shall be omitted;";
(iv) in clause (g), after the words "shall be insCTted", the words, figures and letters 25
"with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988" shall be inserted;
(k) in sectioi 182, clause (a) shall be omitted.
30
Declaration under the Provisional Collection o f Taxes Act, 1931
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the provisions 
of clauses 76,77,81,82 and 83 of this Bill shall have immediate effect under 3 0  
the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. i6ofi93


10
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2)
PARTI 
INCXJME-TAX 
Paragraph A 
Sub-Paragraph I
In the case of eveiy individual or Hindu undivided family or unregistered firm or other association oi persons or body of 
individuals, whether incorporated or not,,or evwy artificial juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not beiitg a case to which Sub-Paragr^ II of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this 
Part applies,-
Rales of income-tax
1 5
20
(1) wh«e the total incwne does not exceed Rs. 18,000
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 18,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 25,000
0) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 50,000
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000
25
NU;
25 per cent, of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 18,000;
Rs. 1,750 plus 30  per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 25,000;
Rs. 9,250 plus 40 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 50,000;
Rs. 29,250 plus 50 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of five per cent, of such income-tax:
Provided that no such surcharge shall be pavable by a non-resident.
Sub-Paragraph II
In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time during the previous year has at least one member whose total 
income of the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, f988 exceeds Rs. 18,000,-
Rates of income-tax
30
35
40
(3 )
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 12,000
©  where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000
where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 40,000
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 60,000
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000
©  where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000
45
Nil;
25 per cent, of the amount by which the total incdme 
exceeds Rs. 12,000;
Rs. 2,000 plus 30 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 20,000;
Rs. 8,000 plus 40 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 40,000;
Rs. 16,000 plus 50 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 60,000;
Rs. 36,000 plus 55 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of five per cent of such income-tax:
Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident.
Paragraph B
In the case of every co-operative society,-
Rates of income-tax
50
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 ,
0  where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000
15 per cent, of the total income;
Rs. 1,500 plus 25 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 10,000;
Rs. 4,000 plus 40 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 20,000.
31


Surcharge < m  income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes oi  the Union 
calculated at the rate of five per cent of such income-tax.
Paragraph C 5
Stib-Paragraph I
In the case of every registered firm, not being a case to which Sub-Paragnqph n  of this Paragraph ^ lie s ,-
Rates of income-tax
(1) where die total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 Nil;
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 5 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds 10
not exceed Rs. 25,000 Rs. 10,000;
where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does Rs. 750 plus 1  p «  cent of the amount by which the total
not exceed Rs. 50,000 income exceeds Rs. 25,000;
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does Rs. 2,500 plus 15 per cent, of the amount by which the
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 total income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 1 5
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 10,000 plus 24 per cent, of the amount by which the
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every pwson having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 20 
calculated at the rate of five per cent of such iiKome-tax.
SiM^aragraph B
In the case of every registoed firm whose total income includes income derived firom  a profession carried on by it and the 
income so included is not less than fifty-one per cent of such total income,-
Rates of income-tax 25
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 Nil;
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 4 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds
not exceed Rs. 25,000 Rs. 10,000;
(3) w ho'e the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does Rs. 6 O O  plus 7 per cent of the amount by which the total
not exceed Rs. 50,000 income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 30
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does Rs. 2350 plus 13 per cent, of the amount by which the
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 total income exceeds Rs. 50,000;
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 8,850 plus 22  per cent, of the amount by which the
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.
Surcharge on income-tax 35
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every po^on having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of five per cent of such income-tax.
Explanation-  For the purposes of this Paragnq)h, "registered firm" includes an unregistered firm assessed as a registered
firm under clause (b) of section 183 of the Incom e-^ Act. ^
32
Paragraph D
In the case of every local authority
Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent
Surcharge on income-tax 45
The amount of income-tax com pu^ at the rate hweinbefore specified shall, in the case of every person having a total 
income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of five per
cen t of such income-tax.


10
15
20
In the case of a company
Rales of income-tax
I. In the case of a domestic company -
(1) where the company is a company'in which the public are substantially 
interested
(2) where the company is not a company in which the public are 
substantially interested -
(i) in the case of a trading company or an investment company
(U ) in any other case
n. In the case of a company other than a domestic company
(i) on so much of the total income as consists of-
(a ) royalties received from Government or an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the 
Indian concern ^ter the 31st day of March, 1961 but before the 1st day 
of April, 1976, or
(b) fees for rendering technical services received from Government 
or an Indian concm  in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the 
Government ot the Indian concern after the 29th day of February, 1964 
but before the 1st day of April, 1976,
and where such agreement has, in either case, been approved by the Central
Govonment
(a) on the balance, if any, of the total income
Surcharge on income-tax
33
Paragraph E
50 per cent, of the total income;
60 per cent, of the total income; 
55 per cent, of the total income.
50 per cent; 
65 per cent
25
30
35
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of item I of this Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge calculated at the rate of five per 
cent, of such inc«ne-tax.
PART II
RATES FOR DEDUCnCW OF TAX AT SOURCE IN CERTAIN CASES
In every case in which under Ae provisions of sections 193,194, 194A, 194B, 194BB, 194D and 195 of the Income-tax 
Act, tax is to be deducted at the rates in force, deduction shall be made from the income subject to deduction at the following 
rates:-__________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________Rate of income-tax________________
1. In the case of a person other than a company -
whoe the person is resident in India -
® on income by way of interest other than "Interest on 10 per cent;
securities”
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword 40 per cent;
puzzles
40
45
(H i) on income by way of winnings from horse races
(iv) on income by way of insurance commission
(v) on income by way of interest payable on-
(A) any security, other than a tax-free security, of the Central 
or a State Government;
(B >  any debentures or other securities for money issued by or 
on behalf of any local authority or a corporation 
established by a Central, State or Provincial Act;
40 per cent; 
10 per cent; 
10 per cent;


(Q anydcbenturesissuedby a company where such 
debentures are listed on a recognised stock 
exchange in India in accordance with the 
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act.1956 and 
any rules made thereunder,
(vi) on any other income (excluding interest payable on a 
tax-free security)
(b) where the person is not resident in India -
(i) in the case of a non-resident Indian -
34
20 per cent;
(A) on investment income and long-term capital 
gains
(B ) on income by way of interest payable on a tax- 
free security
(C) on income by way of winnings from lotteries 
and crosswOTd puzzles
(D ) on income by way of winnings from horse races
©  on the whole of other income
(ii) in the case of any other person-
(A ) on income by way of interest payable on a tax- 
free security
(B j on income by way of winnings from lotteries and 
crossword puzzles
(C ) on income by way of winnings from horse races
(D ) on the whole of the other income
2. In the case of a company -
(a ) where the company is a domestic company-
(i) on income by way of interest other than "Interest on 
securities"
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and 
crossword puzzles
20 per cent;
15 per cent;
40 per cent;
40 per cent;
income-tax at 30 per cent, of the amount 
of income
or
income-tax in respect of the income at the 
rates prescribed in Sub-Paragraph I of 
Paragraph A of Part III of this Schedule, if 
such income had been the total income,
whichever is higher;
15 per cent;
40 per cent.;
40 per cent.;
10
1 5
20
25
30
income-tax at 30 per cent, of the amount of income 
or
income-tax in respect of the income at the rates 
prescribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Paragraph A of Part 3 5  
III of this Schedule, if such income had been the total 
income,
whichever is higher;
40
20 per cent.; 
40 per cent.;


(H i) on income by way of winnings from horse races 40 per cent.;
(h f) on any other income (excluding interest payable on tax-free 21.5 per cent;
security)
(b) where the company is not a domestic company-
5  (i) on income by way of dividends payable by any domestic 25 per cent.;
company
(u ) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword 40 per cent.;
puzzles
(H i) on income by way of winnings from horse races 40 per cent.;
10 (iv) on income by way of interest payable by Government or an 25 per cent.;
Indian concern on moneys borrowed or debt incurred by 
Government or the Indian concern in foreign currency
(v ) on income by way of royalty payable by Government or an 30 per cent.;
Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the
1 5  Government or the Indian concern after the 31st day of March,
1976, where such royalty is in consideration for the transfer of 
all or any rights (including the granting of a licence ) in respect 
of copyright in any book on a subject referred to in the proviso 
to sub-section (lA)  of section 115A of the Income-tax Act, to 
20 the Indian concern
(vi) on income by way of royalty [not being royalty of the nature 
referred to, in sub-item (b)(v) ]  payable by Government or an 
Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the 
Government or the Indian concern and which has been approved
2 5  by the Central Government,-
(A) where the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 50 per cent.;
1961 but before the 1st day of April, 1976
(B ) where the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 30 per cent.;
1976
30 (vii) on income by way of fees for technical services payable by
Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement 
made by it with the Government or the Indian concern and 
which has been approved by the Central Govemment-
(A) where the agreement is made after the 29th day of February, 50 per cent.;
1964 but before the 1st day of April, 1976
(B) where the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 30 per cent.;
1976
(viu) on income by way of interest payable on a tax-free security 44 per cept.;
(ix) on any other income 65 per cent.
^  Explanation.- For the purposes of this Part, "investment income"", "long-term capital gains" and "non-rcsicent Ir Ji; : ”  ‘  i
have the meanings assigned to them in Chapter XII-A of the Income-tax Act.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax deducted in accordance with the provisions of-
fe ) sub-item (a) of item 1  of this Part shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union, and
(b) sub-item (a) of item 2 6f this Part shall be increased by a surcharge, 
calculated at the rate of five per cent of S H ch income-tax.
35


RATES FOR CALCULATING OR CHARGING INCC»ffi-TAX IN CERTAIN CASES, DEDUCTING INCOME-TAX FROM INCCfl^ 
CHARGEABLE UNECR THE HEAD "SALARIES" OR ANY PAYMENT REFERRED TO IN SUB-SECIUON (1) OFSECnON 194E
AND COMPUTING" ADVANCE TAX"
In cases in which income-tax has to be calculated under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income- 
tax Act or charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of 
section 176 of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from income chargeable under the head "Salaries" or 
deducted under sub-section (1) of section 194E of the said Act from any payment referred to in the said sub-section (1) or in 
which the "advance tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be computed at the rate or rates in fwce, such 
income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" [not being "advance tax" in respect of any income chargeable to tax under 
Chapter XII or Chapta X n - A  or sub-section (lA)  of section 161 or section 164 or section 164A or section 167A or section 
167B of the Income-tax Act at the rates as specified in that Chapter or section or surcharge on such "advance tax" in respect of 
any income chargeable to tax under section 115B], shall be calculated, charged, deducted or computed at the following rate or 
rates:-
Paragraph A 
Sub-Paragraph I
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or other association of persons or body of individuals, whether 
inc(»porated ot not, or every artificial juridical pC T S on referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income- 
tax Act, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph o ir any other Paragraph of this Part applies,-
36
PART III
10
1 5
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 18,000
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 18,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 25,000
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 50,000
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000
M ;
25 per cent, of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 18,000;
Rs. 1,750 plus 30 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 25,000;
Rs. 9,250 plus 40 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 50,000;
Rs. 29,250 plus 50 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.
Surcharge on incOme-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of five per cent of such income-tax:
Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident
Sub-Paragraph II
In the case of evoy Hindu undivided family which at any time during the previous year has at least one member whose total 
income of the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989 exceeds Rs.
18,000,-
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 12,000
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 40,000
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 60,000
(5) where the total income exceeds Ri. 60,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. IjOO flOO
(6) wbetc the total income exceeds Rs. 1.00,000
20
w ^ li
25
NU;
25 per cent, of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 12,000;
Rs. 2,000 plus 30 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 20,000;
Rs. 8,000 plus 40 per cent, of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 40,000;
Rs. 16,000 plus 50 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income oiceeds Rs. 60,000;
Rs. 36,000 plus 55 per cent, of the amount by whi£h the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.
30
35
40
45
Surcharge on income-tax
The (rf in c o m e s  cooqwted in aoconbnoe with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case <3i  
every petson having s  to tA income C K C —dfan fifty (houaind nq>ees. be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated « the m e of live per oenL of M Ch income-m:
Provided that no iiid i M charie AaU be payaWe by a non-resident.
»


In the case of every co-operative society
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 15 per cent, of the total income;
5 (2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does Rs. 1,500 plus 25 per cent, of the amount by which the
not exceed Rs. 20,000 total income exceeds Rs. 10,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 Rs. 4,000 plus 40 per cent, of the amount by which the
total income exceeds Rs. 20,000.
Surcharge on income-tax
10 The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding proviijions of this Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of five per cent, of such income-tax.
Paragraph C
In the case of every local authority,—
15 Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore specified shall, in the case of every person having a total 
income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of five per 
20 cent, of such income-tax
Paragrcph D
In the case of a company ,-
Rates of income-tax
I. In the case of a domestic company 
25 (1) where the company is a company in which the public are substantially interested 50 per cent, of the total income;
(2) where the company is not a company in which the public are substantially 
interested -
(i) in the case of a trading company or an investment company 60 per cent, of the total income;
(tt) in any othw case 55 per cent of the total income.
30 n. In the case of a company other than a domestic company ,-
(i) on so much of the total income as consists of-
(a) royalties received firom  Govonment or an Indian concern in pursuance of 
an agreement made by it with the Govemmoit or the Indian concern afta the 31st 
day of March, 1961 but before the 1st day of April, 1976, or
35 (b) fees for rendering technical services received from Govmunent or an Indian
concern in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the 
Indian concern after the 29th day of February, 1964 but before the 1st day of 
April. 1976,
and where such agreement has, in either case, been approved by lift Central 50 per cent,;
40 Government
(H ) on the balance, if any, of the total income 65 per cent.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the i»x>visions of item I of this Paragraph shaU, in the case of 
every p»son having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge calculated at the rate of five per 
^5 cent, of such income-tax.
37
Paragraph B


[S e e  xctkn2(9)(e) ]
RULES FOR CDMPUTATIW OF NET AOUCULTURAL INCOME
R ulel.  -Agricultural income of the nature refentd to in sulxlause (a) of clause C 7 ) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act 
shall be computed as if it were income chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head "Income from other sources" 5
and the provisions of sectims 57 to 59 < rf that Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly:
Provided that sub-section (2) of section 58 shall s^>ply subject to the modification that the reference to section 40A therein 
shall be construed as not including a reference to sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 40A.
Rule 2. -Agricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of  section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act [othC T  than income derived from any building required as a dwelling house by the receivCT of the rent or 10
revenue oc the cultivator or the receiver of rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause (c) ]  shall be computed as if it were 
income chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession" and the provisions 
of sections 30, 31, 32, 36, 37, 38, 40, 40A [other than sub-sections (3) and (4) thereof], 41, 43, 43A and 43B of the 
Income-tax Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
Ride 3. -Agricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause C c ) of clause fi) of section 2 of the Income-tax 15 
Act, being income derived from any building required as a dwelling house by the receiver of the rent or revenue or the 
cultivator or the receiver of rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause (c) shall be computed as if it were income chargeable 
to income-tax under that Act under the head "Income from house property" and the provisions of sections 23 to 27 of that Act 
shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly:
Provided that sub-section (2) of the said section 23 shall apply subject to the modifications that the references to "total 20 
income" therein shall be construed as references to net agricultu^ income and that the words, figures and letter "and before 
making any deduction under Chapter VI-A" shall be omitted.
Rule 4. -Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of these rules, in a case where the assessee derives 
income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by him in India, such income shall be computed in accordance with rule 8 of 
the Income-tax Rules, 1%2, and sixty per cent of such income shall be regarded as the agricultural income of the assessee. 25
Rule 5. -Where the assessee is a partner of a registered firm or an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm under 
clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act, which in the previous year has any agricultural income, or is a partner of an 
unregistered fmn which has not been assessed as a registered firm under clause (b) of the said section 183 and which in the 
previous year has either no income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act or has total income not exceeding the 
maximum amount not chargeable to tax in the case of an unregistered firm but has any agricultural income, then, the 30
agricultural income or loss of the firm shall be computed in accordance with these rules and his share in the agricultural 
income or loss of the firm shall be computed in the manner laid down in sub-section (1),, sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) 
of section 67 of the Income-tax Act and the share so computed shall be regarded as the agricultural income or loss of the 
assessee.
Rule 6. -Where the assessee is a member of an association of persons or a body of individuals (other than a Hindu 35
undivided family, a company or a fum) which in the previous year has either no income chargeable to tax under the Income- 
tax Act or has total income not exceeding the maximum amount not chargeable to tax in the case of an association of persons 
or a body of individuals (other than a Hindu undivided family, a company or a firm) but has any agricultural income, thfen, the 
agricultural income or loss of the association or body shall be computed in accordance with these rules and the share of the 
assessee in the agricultural income or loss so comput^ shall be regarded as the agricultural income or loss of the assessee. 40
Rule 1. -Where the result of the computation for the previous year in respect of any source of agricultural income is a loss, 
such loss shall be set off against the income of the assessee, if any, for that previous year from any other source of 
agricultural income:
Provided that where the assessee is a partner of an unregistered firm which has not been assessed as a registered firm under 
clause (b) of section 183 of die Income-tax Act or is a member of an association of persons or a body of individuals and the 45 
share of the assessee in the agricultural income of the firm, association or body, as the case may be, is a loss, such loss shall 
not be set off against any income of the assessee from any other source of agricultural income.
Rule 8. -Any sum payable by the assessee on account of any tax levied by' the State Government on the agricultural 
income shall be deducted in computing the agricultural income.
38
PART IV
Rule 9. -(1)  Where the assessee has, in the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of 
April, 1988, any agricultural income and the net result of the computation of the agricultural income of the assessee for any
50


one or more of the previous years relevant to the assessment years commencing on the 1st day of April, 1980 or the 1st day of 
April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983 or fhe 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 
1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987, is a loss, then, for the purposes of sub-section (2) of scctioii
2 of this Act,-
5  (i) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1980
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April; 1983 or 
the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987,
(u) the loss so computed for the prev^us year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
10 1981, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1984 
or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987,
(iii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1982, to the extent, if any, such loss has not b ^  set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to
1 5  the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985
or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987,
(iv) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1983, to the extent, if any, such loss has not b ^  set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 
or the 1st day of April, 1987,
39
20
(v) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1984, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,' 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987,
(vi) the loss so computed for the previous ye^ relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
2 5  1985, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987,
(vii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1986, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987, and
30 (viii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1987,
shall be set off against the agriculture income of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, i988.
(2) Where the assessee has, in the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989 
3 5  or, if by virtue of any provision of the Income-tax Act, income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a period other
than that previous year, in such other period, any agricultural income and the net result of the computation of the agricultural 
income of the assessee for any one or more of the previous years relevant to the assessment years commencing on the 1st day 
of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 
1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988, is a loss, then, for the purposes 
'* 0  of sub-section (8) of section 2 of this Act,-
(i) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1981, 
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984 or 
the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988,
45 (ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1982, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relcvani lo 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day ol April, 1985 
or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988,


(iii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1983, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultur^ income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 
or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988,
(rv) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 5
1984, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 
or the 1st day of April, 1988,
fv) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1985, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 10 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988,
(vi) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1986, to the extent, if any, such loss h^s not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988,
(vii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1 5
1987, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agriculture income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, and
(viii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1988,
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment year 20 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989.
(3) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm, nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle the 
firm to set off so much of the loss prop«tionate to the share of a retired or deceased partner computed in the manner laid down 
in sub-section (1 sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax Act as exceeds his share of profits,
if any, of the previous year in the firm, or entitle any partner to the benefit of any portion of the said loss (computed in the 25 
manner aforesaid) which is not apportionable to him.
(4) Whwe any person deriving any agricultural income from any source has been succeeded in such capacity by another 
person, otherwise than by inheritance, nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle any person, other than the person 
incurring the loss, to have it set off under sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2).
I 6 r f i^  (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, no loss which has not been determined by the Assessing 30 
I4cf 1 9 8 2 . Officer under the provisions of these rules or the rules contained in Part IV of the First Schedule to the Finance 
Il(fl983. (No. 2) Act, 1980, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1981, or of the First Schedule to the Finance 
Act, 1982, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1983, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1984, or 
23<f 1 9 0 6l of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1985, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1986, or of the First
11 cf 1 9 « 7 . Schedule to the Finance Act, 1987, shall be set off under sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be. sub-rule (2). 35
Rule 10. -Where the net result of the computation made in acccwdance with these rules is a loss, the loss so computed shall 
be ignored and the net agricultural income shall be deemed to be nil.
Rule 11. -The provisions of the Income-tax Act relating to procedure for assessment (including the provisions of section 
288A relating to rounding off of income) shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the computation of the 
net agricultural income of the assessee as they apply in relation to the assessment of the total income. 40
Rule 12. -For the purposes of computing the net agricultural income of the assessee, the Assessing Officer shall have the 
same powers as he has under the Income-tax Act for the purposes of assessment of the total income.
40


10
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 76)
In the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act,—
(i) in Chapters,—
(1) in sub-heading Nos. 0802.11 and 0802.12, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "100% plus Rs. 50 
per Kg." and "90% plus Rs. 50 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted:
(2) in sub-heading No. 0802.50, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "200% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and 
"190% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(3) in sub-heading No.0806.20, few  the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "100% plus Rs. 50 per Kg." and 
"90% plus Rs. 50 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(4) in sub-heading No. 0813.50, fw the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries " 200% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and 
"190% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(ii) in Chapter 12, in sub-heading No.1207.10, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "200%" and "190%" 
shall, respectively, be substituted;
1 5  (Hi) in Chapter 22, in sub-heading No. 2208.10, f(» the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 80 per litre or 270%,
whichever is higho-" shall be substituted;
(iv) in Chapter 28, in sub-heading Nos. 2801.10, 2801.20, 2801.30, 2802.00, 2803.00, 2804.10, 2804.21, 2804.29,
2804.30, 2804.40, 2804.50, 2804.61, 2804.69, 2804.70, 2804.80, 2804.90, 2805.11, 2805.19, 2805.21, 2805.22,
2805.30, 2805.40, 2806.10, 2806.20, 2807.00, 2808.00, 2809.10, 2809.20, 2810.00, 2811.11, 2811.19, 2811.21,
20 2811.22, 2811.23, 2811.29, 2812.10, 2812.90, 2813.10, 2813.90, 2814.10, 2814.20, 2815.11, 2815.12, 2815.20,
2815.30, 2816.10, 2816.20, 2816.30, 2817.00, 2818.10, 2818.20, 2818.30, 2819.10, 2819.90, 2820.10, 2820.90,
2821.10, 2821.20, 2822.00, 2823.00, 2824.10, 2824.20, 2824.90, 2825.10, 2825.20, 2825.30, 2825.40, 2825.50,
2825.60, 2825.70, 2825.80, 2825.90, 2826.11, 2826.12, 2826.19, 2826.20, 2826.30, 2826.90, 2827.10, 2827.20,
2827.31, 2827.32, 2827.33, 2827.34, 2827.35, 2827.36, 2827.37, 2827.38, 2827.39, 2827.41, 2827.49, 2827.51,
2 5  2827.59, 2827.60, 2828.10, 2828.90, 2829.11, 2829.19, 2829.90, 2830.10, 2830.20, 2830.30, 2830.90, 2831.10,
2831.90, 2832.10, 2832.20, 2832.30, 2833.11, 2833.19, 2833.21, 2833.22, 2833.23 , 2833.24, 2833.25, 2833.26,
2833.27, 2833.29, 2833.30, 2833.40, 2834.10, 2834.21, 2834.22, 2834.29, 2835.10, 2835.21, 2835.22, 2835.23,
2835.24, 2835.25, 2835.26, 2835.29, 2835.31, 2835.39, 2836.10, 2836.20, 2836.30, 2836.40, 2836.50, 2836.60,
2836.70, 2836.91, 2836.92, 28^36.93, 2836.99, 2837.11, 2837.19, 2837.20, 2838.00, 2839.11, 2839.19, 2839.20,
30 2839.90, 2840.11, 2840.19, 2840.20, 2840.30, 2841.10, 2841.20, 2841.30, 2841.40, 2841.50, 2841.60, 2841.70,
2841.80, 2841.90, 2842.10, 2842.90, 2843.10, 2843.21, 2843.29, 2843.30, 2843.90, 2844.10, 2844.20, 2844.30, 
2844.40. 2844.50, 2845.10, 2845.90, 2846.10, 2846.90, 2847.00, 2848.10, 2848.90, 2849.10, 2849.20, 2849.90, 
2850.00and2851.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry " 1 0 0 % R s .  25 per Kg." sliall be substituted;
35
40
45
(v) in Chapter 29,—
(1) in sub-heading Nos. 2901.10, 2901.21, 2901.22, 2901.23, 2901.24, 2901.29, 2902.11, 2902.19, 2902.41,
2902.42, 2902.43, 2902.50, 2902.70, 2902.90, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.15, 2903.16, 2903.19,
2903.21, 2903.22, 2903.23, 2903.29, 2903.30, 2903.40, 2903.51, 2903.59, 2903.61, 2903.62, 2903.69, 2904.10,
2904.20, 2904.90, 2905.11, 2905.12, 2905.13, 2905.14, 2905.15, 2905.16, 2905.17, 2905.19, 2905.21, 2905.22,
2905.29, 2905.31, 2905.32, 2905.39, 2905.41, 2905.42, 2905.43, 2905.44, 2905.49, 2905.50, 2906.11, 2906.12,
2906.13, 2906.14, 2906.19, 2906.21, 2906.29, 2907.11, 2907.12, 2907.13, 2907.14, 2907.15, 2907.19, 2907.21,
2907.22, 2907.23, 2907.29, 2907.30, 2908.10, 2908.20, 2908.90, 2909.11, 2909.19, 2909.20, 2909.30, 2909.41,
2909.42, 2909.43, 2909.44, 2909.49, 2909.50, 2909.60, 2910.10, 2910.20, 2910.30, 2910.90, 2911.00, 2912.11,
2912.12, 2912.13, 2912.19, 2912.21, 2912.29, 2912.30, 2912.41, 2912.42, 2912.49, 2912.50, 2912.60, 2913.00,
2914.11, 2914.12, 2914.13, 2914.19, 2914.22, 2914.23, 2914.29, 2914.30, 2914.41, 2914.49, 2914.50, 2914.61,
2914.70. 2915.11, 2915.12, 2915.13, 2915.21, 2915.22, 2915.23, 2915.24, 2915.29, 2915.31, 2915.32, 2915.33,
2915.34, 2915.35, 2915.39, 2915.40, 2915.50, 2915.60, 2915.70, 2915.90, 2916.11, 2916.12, 2916.13. 2916.14.
2916.15. 2916.19, 2916.20, 2916.31, 2916.32, 2916.33, 2916.39, 2917.11, 2917.12, 2917.13, 2917.14, 2917.19,
2917.20, 2917.31, 2917.32, 2917.33, 2917.34, 2917.35. 2917.39, 2918.11, 2918.12, 2918.13, 2918.14, 2918.15,
41


-913.16. 2918.17, 2918.19, 2918.21, 2918.22, 2918.23, 2918.29, 2918.30, 2918.90, 2919.00, 2920.10, 2920.90,
252..11, 2921.12, 2921.19, 2921.21, 2921.22, 2921.29, 2921.30, 2921.44, 2921.49, 2921.51, 2922.11, 2922.12,
2922.15, 2922.19, 2922.21, 2922.22, 2922.29, 2922.30, 2922.41, 2922.42, 2922.49, 2923.10, 2923.20, 2923.90,
2;24.10, 2924.21, 2924.29, 2925.19, 2925.20, 2926.10, 2926.20, 2926.90, 2927.00, 2928.00, 2929.10, 2929.90,
253G.10, 2930.20, 2930.30, 2930.40, 2930.90, 2931.00, 2932.11, 2932.12, 2932.13, 2932.19, 2932.21, 2932.29, 5
2932.90, 2933.11, 2933.19, 2933.21, 2933.29, 2933.31, 2933.39, 2933.40, 2933.51, 2933.59, 2933.61, 2933.69,
2933.79, 2933.90, 2934.10. 2934.20, 2934.30, 2934.90 and 2935.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% 
puiS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted;
i-; in sub-heading Nos. 2936.10. 2936.21. 2936.22. 2936.23, 2936.24, 2936.25, 2936.26, 2936.27, 2936.28, 
2936.29 and 2936.90, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries" 100% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and" 94% plus 1 0
Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(3) in sub-heading Nos. 2937.10, 2937.21, 2937.22, 2937.29, 2937.91, 2937.92 and 2937.99, for the entries in 
Cviiu;.ins (4) and (5), the entries "100% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and "90% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be
L  /  ^ t A  t .  la  i.0  v j y
(4) in sub-heading Nos. 2938.10, 2938.90,2939.10, 2939.21, 2939.29 and 2939.30, for the entry in column (4), the 1 5  
C iV s) "lOCvc plus Rs, 25 per Kg." shall be substituted;
(5) in sub-heading Nos. 2939.40 and 2939.50, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "100% plus Rs. 25 
per K^." and "90 % plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(6) in sub-heading Nos. 2939.60,2939.70,2939.90 and 2940.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% plus
Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted; 20
(7) in sub-heading Nos. 2941.10, 2941.20, 2941.30, 2941.40, 2941.50 and 2941.90, for the entries in columns (4) 
and (5), the entries "100 % plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and "94 % plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(c) in sub-heading No. 2942.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% plus  Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be
S iiD S L iiuiecl;
(■ ,ij in Chapter 38,— 2 5
(1) in sub-heading No. 3801.10, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "100% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and 
"9C 9c plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(1) in sub-heading Nos. 3801.20, 3801.30 and 3801.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% plus Rs. 25 
per Kg." shall be substituted;
(3) in sub-heading No. 3802.10, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "100% p/uy Rs. 25 per Kg." and 3 0
"90% plus Rs. 25 p < a - Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(4) in sub-heading Nos. 3802.90, 3803.00, 3804.00, 3805.10, 3805.20, 3805.90, 3806.10, 3806.20, 3806.30,
3S06.90, 3807.00, 3808.10, 3808.20, 3808.30, 3808.40, 3808.90, 3809.10, 3809.91, 3809.92, 3809.99, 3810.10, 
3S1C.90, 3811.11, 3811.19, 3811.21, 3811.29 and 3811.90. for the entry in column (4), the entry " 100% plus Rs. 25 
per Kg." shall be substituted; 3 5
(5) in sub-heading No. 3812.10. f(w the entries in columns (4) and (5). the entries "100% p/u5 Rs. 25 per Kg." and 
"90% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(6) in sub-heading Nos. 3812.20, 3812.30, 3813.00 and 3814.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% 
plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted;
(7) in sub-heading Nos. 3815.11 and 3815.12, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the enuies "100% plus Rs. 25 40
per Kg." and "90% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted;
(S) in sub-heading Nos. 3815.19, 3815.90, 3816.00, 3817.10, 3817.20, 3818.00, 3819.00, 3820.00, 382L00,
3822.00, 3823.10, 3823.20, 3823.30, 3823.40, 3823.50, 3823.60 and 3823.90, for the enuy in column (4), the-entry 
plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted;
42


(vU ) in Chapter 39, in sub-heading Nos. 3 9 1 9 .1 0 3 9 1 9 .9 0 , for the entry in cdumn (4), the entry " 100% plus 
Rs. 100 per Kg." shall be substituted;
(viii) in Chapter 89,—
(1) for the word "Note ”, occurring bdow  the title of the Ch^)ter, the wmd "Notes " shall be substituted;
S  (2) the existing Note  shall be numbered as Note  1, and after Note  1  as so numbered, the following NOTE shall be
inserted, namely:—
'2. In heading No. 89.08 "Light Dis|dacement Tonnage (LDl)" means LDT in metric tonnes as per Builder's 
Registered LDT referred to in the Stability Book or the builder's c(»tiricate at the time of initial commissionkig of die 
vessel or the floating structure:
10 Provided that in case of any change in the LDT, the highest of the LDT indicated in any of the documents refened
to above shall be taken for the purpose of levy of duty.';
(ix) in Chapter 99, in heading No. 99.12, in column (3), for the words "TRADE CATALOGUES AND
ADVERTISEMENTS ORaJLARS", the wofds "CCAIMERCIAL CATALOGUES IN BOOK PC»M" shall be substituted.
43


THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
{See section 81)
Part  i
In the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act—
(1) in Chapter 9,— 5
(a) in sub-heading No. 0902.11, for^'the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 2.50 per kilogram" shall be 
substituted; ,,5
(b) in sub-heading No. 0902.12, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 3.25 per kilogram" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-heading No. 0902.13, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted;
(2) in Chapter 15, in sub-heading No. 1508.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 1,900 per tonne" shall be 10
substituted;
(3) in Chapter 21,—
(d ^ in sub-heading No. 2101.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "30%" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-heading No. 2101.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-heading No. 2106.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry " 2 5 % R s . 4 0  per kilogram" shall be 1 5
substituted;
(4) in Chapter 22,—
(a ) in sub-heading Nos. 2201.11 and 2201.12, in column (4), for the figures and word "25 paise", the figures and 
word "50 paise" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-heading No. 2202.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry "75 paise" shall be substituted; 20
(c) in sub-heading No. 2202.12, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80 paise" shall be substituted;
(d) in sub-heading No. 2202.13, for the entry in column (4), the entry "90 paise" shall be substituted;
(e) in sub-heading No. 2202.14, in column (4), for the figures and word "65 paise", the figures and word "90 
paise”  shall be substituted;
(5) in Chapter 26, for NOTE 2, the following NOTES shall be substiOited, namely:— 2 5
"2. For the purposes of heading Nos. 26.01 to 26.17, the term "Ores" means minerals of mineralogical species 
actually used in the metallurgical industry for the extraction of mercury, of the metals of heading No. 28.44 or of the 
metals of Section XIV or XV, even if they are intended for non-metallurgical purposes. Heading Nos. 26.01 to 26.17 do 
not, however, include minerals which have been submitted to processes not normal to the metallurgical industry.
3. Heading No. 26.20 applies only to ash and residues of a kind used in industry either for the extraction of metals or 3 0
as a basis for the manufacture of chemical compounds of metals.";
(6) in Chapter 27,—
(a ) in NOTE 3, for the figures and word "2707.91,2707.92,2707.93, 2707.94 and 2707.95", the figures and word 
"2707.10,2707.20,2707.30 ,2101 AO and 2707.50" shall be substituted;
35
(b) in sub-heading Nos. 2701.00, 2702.00, 2703.00, 2704.00, 2705.00, 2707.40, 2708.19 and 2709.00, for the 
enU7  in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substiuited;
(c) in sub-heading No. 2710.50, for the entry in cohimn (4), the entry "Rs. 145 per kilolitre at 15®  C" shall be 
substituted;
44


(4 ) in sub-heading No. 2710.94, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 620 per tonne" shall be substituted;
(e) in sub-heading No. 2711.11 and 2711.21, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be
(f) in sub-heading No. 2713.21, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs.l60 p a tonne" shall be substituted;
(g) in sub-heading No. 2713.22, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 110 per tonne" shall be substituted;
5 (h) in sub-heading No. 2714.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 160 per tonne" shall be substituted;
(i) in sub-heading No. 2714.12, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 110 per tonne" shall be substituted;
(j) in sub-heading No. 2714.90, for the entry in column (4), the entty "15%" shall be substituted;
(k) in sub-heading No. 2715.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 160 per tonne" shall be substituted;
(!) in sub-heading No. 2715.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted;
10 (7) in Chapter 29, in sub-heading Nos. 2941.10, 2941.20, 2941.30, 2941.40,2941.50 and 2941.90, for the entry in
column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted;
(8) in Chapter 30, NOTE 6 shall be omitted;
(9) in Chi^ter 36, in sub-heading No. 3602.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substituted;
(10) in Chapter 37,—
1 5  ((^ in sub-heading Nos. 3701.20 and 3702.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 1.50 per metre" shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-heading No. 3702.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20% plus Rs. 24 per square metre”  shall b  
substituted;
(11) in Chapter 39,—
20 (a) for NOTE 6, the following NOTE shall be substituted, namely:—
'6. (a) In heading Nos. 39.01 to 39.14, the expression "primary forms" applies only to the following forms:-
(i) Liquids and pastes, including dispersions (emulsions and suspensions) and solutions;
(a) Blocks of irregular shape, lumps, powders (including moulding powers), granules, flakes and similar bull 
fc»ms.
^  (b) Notwithstanding anything contained in NOTE 3 to this Chapter, heading Nos. 39.01 to 39.14 shall also include
primary forms obtained from conversion of another primary form, falling under the same heading, and such conversioi 
shall amount to "manufacture".';
(b) for NOTE 13, the following NOTE shall be substituted, namely:—
'13. Notwithstanding anything contained in NOTE 12 to this Chapter, in heading Nos. 39.09, 39.21, 39.23, 39.24 
^  39.25 and 39.26, "rigid polyurethane foam" means cellular polyurethane with compressive strength of 0.418 to 28.1
Kg./Cm^ and flexural strength of 1.05 to 28.14 Kg.ATm^ when tested in accordance with American Standan 
(Designation ASTM-D-2341).’ ;
(c) after NOTE 14, the following NOTE shall be inserted, namely:—
15. For the purposes of heading Nos. 39.19, 39.20 and 39.21, the expression "film" means sheetings of 
35 thickness not exceeding 0.25 millimetres.’ ;
(c ^ in sub-heading Nos. 3909.60 and 3926.10, in column ( 4), for th e figures and abbreviation "75%". the flgures 
abbreviations and words "60% plus Rs. 40 per kilogram" shall be substituted.
45


(12) in Chapter 40, in sub-heading No. 4011.10, for the aitry in column (4), the «itry "60%" shall be substituted;
(13) in Chapter 48,—
(a) for NOTE 3, the following NOTE shall be substituted, namely:—
3. In this Chapter "newsfvint" means paper intended fw the (Hinting of newq>iq>ers.';
(b) for NOTE 8, the following NOTES shall be substituted, namely: — S
"8. Heading No. 48.20 does not cover loose sheets w  cards, cut to size, whether or not printed, embossed or 
perforated.
9. Heading No. 48.23 applies, inter alia, to perfcvated p ^ r  or p:q>eiboard cards for jacquard or similar machines 
and paper lace.
10. Except for the goods of heading No. 48.14 or 48.21, p^>er, pt^rboard, cellulose wadding and articles thereof, 10
printed with motifs, characters or pictorial representations, which are not merely incidental to the primary use of the 
goods, fall in Chapter 49.”;
(c) in sub-heading No. 4811.90, in column (4), fw the figures, abbreviations and word " 10% plus Rs. 2,000", the
figures, abbreviations and word "35% plus Rs. 2,000" shall be substituted;
(14) in Chapter 52, — ^
(a ) NOTES 3 and 4 shall be omitted;
(b) NOTES 5 and 6 shall be renumbered as NOTES 3 and 4, respectively;
(c) in sub-heading No. 5203.33, for the entry in column (4), the entry "26.40 paise plus 3.52 paise per count per
kilogram exceeding 35" shall be substituted;
(4 ) in sub-heading No. 5203.34, for the entry in column (4), the entry "61.60 p a i s e 5 . 2 8  paise per count per 20 
kilogram exceeding 45" shall be substituted;
(e) in sub-heading No. 5203.35, for the entry in column (4), the entry "114.40 paise plus 2.64 paise per count per 
kilogram exceeding 55" shall be substituted;
(f) in sub-heading No. 5203.43, for the entry in column (4), the entry "114.40 paise plus 5.28 paise per count per
kilogram exceeding 35" shall be substituted; 2 5
(g) sub-heading Nos. 5206.10 and 5206.20 and the entries relating th^eto shall be omitted;
(h) sub-heading Nos. 5206.31,5206.32, 5206.33,5206.34, 5206.35 and 5206.36 shall be renumbo’ ed as sub-heading
Nos. 5206.11, 5206.12, 5206.13, 5206.14, 5206.15 and 5206.16, respectively;
(15) in Chapter 70,—
(a) in NOTE 1, in item (c), for the words "fittings or insulating material", the words "fittings of insulating 30
material" shall be substituted;
(b) in heading No. 70.14, in column (4), for the figures and abbreviation "30%", the figures and abbreviation "35%" 
shall be substituted;
(16) in Section XV, for the NOTE, the following NOTES shall be substituted, namely :—
'Notes  3 5
1. This Section does not cover;
(a) Prepared paints, inks or other products with a basis of metallic flakes or powdCT (heading Nos. 32.07 to 32.10,
32.12, 32.13 or 32.15);
46


(b) Fcrro-cerium or other pyrophoric alloys (heading No. 36.06);
(c) Headgear or parts thereof of Chapter 65;
(d ) Umbrella frames or other articles of Chapter 66;
(e) Goods of Chapter 71 (for example, precious metal alloys, base metal clad with precious metal, imitation jewellery);
5  (f) Articles of Section XVI (machinery, mechanical appliances and elecu-ical goods);
(g) Assembled railway or tramway track (heading No. 86.08) or otherarticles of Section XVII (vehicles, ships and 
boats, aircraft);
(h) Instruments or apparatus of Section XVIII, including clock or watch springs;
(ij) Lead shot prepared for ammunition (heading No. 93.06) or other articles of Section XIX (arms and ammunition);
1 0 (k) Articles of Chapter 94 (for example, furniture, mattress supports, lamps and lighting fittings, illuminated signs,
prefabricated buildings);
(I) Articles of Chapter 95 (for example, toys, games, sports requisites); or
(m) Hand sieves, buttons, pens, pencil-holders. pen nibs or other articles of Chapter 96 (miscellaneous manufactured 
articles).
1 5  2. Throughout this Schedule, the expression "parts of general use" means:
(a) Articles of heading No. 73.07, 73.12, 73.15, 73.17 or 73.18 and similar articles of other base metal;
(b ) Springs and leaves for springs, of base metal, other than clock or watch springs (heading No. 91.14); and
(c ) Articles of heading Nos. 83.01, 83.02, 83.08, 83.10 and frames and mirrors, of base metal, of heading No. 
83.06.
In Chapters 73 to 76 and 78 to 82 (but not in heading No. 73.15) references to parts of goods do not include 
references to parts of general use as defined above.
Subject to the preceding paragraph and to NOTE 1  to Chapter 83, the articles of Chapter 82 or 83 are excluded from 
Chapters 72 to 76 and 78 to 81.
3. Classification of alloys (other than ferro-alloys and master alloys as defined in Chapters 72 and 74):
25 (a ) An alloy of base metals is to be classified as an alloy of the metal which predominates by weight over each of the
other metals;
(b) An alloy composed of base metals of this Section and of elements not falling within this Section is to be U 'cated 
as an alloy of base metals of this Section if the total weight of such metals equals or exceeds the total weight of the 
other elements present;
^  (c ) In this Section the term "alloys" includes sintered mixtures of metal powders, heterogeneous intimate mixtures
obtained by melting (other than cermets) and intermetallic compounds.
4. Unless the context otherwise requires, any reference in this Schedule to a base metal includes a reference to alloys which, 
by virtue of NOTE 3 above, are to be classified as alloys of that metal.
5. Classification of composite articles:
Except where the headings otherwise require, articles of base metal (including articles of mixed materials treated as articles of 
base metal under the Interpretative Rules) containing two or more base metals are to be u-eatcd as articles of the base mcuil 
predominating by weight over each of the o^er metals. For this purpose:
47


(a ) Iron and sieel, or different kinds of iron or slccl, are regarded as one and the same melal;
(h) An alloy is regarded as being entirely composed of that metal as an alloy of which, by virtue of NOTE 3, it is
classified; and
(c ) A cermet of heading No. 81.13 is regarded as a single base metal.
6. In this Section, the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them: 5
(a) WASTE AND SCRAP:
Metal waste and scrap from the manufacture or mechanical working of metals, and metal goods definitely not usable 
as such because of breakage, cutting-up, wear or other reasons.
(b) POWDERS:
Products of which 90% or more by weight passes through a sieve having a mesh aperture of 1  mm.‘ ; 1 0
(17) in Chapter 72, for the NOTES, the following NOTES shall be substituted, namely:—
’ Notes
1. In this Chapter and, in the case of Notes {d), (e) and (f) throughout this Schedule, the following expressions 
have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) PIG IRON:
Iron-carbon alloys not usefully malleable, containing more than 2% by weight of carbon and which may contain 
by weight one or more other elements within the following limits:
- not more than 10% of chromium
- not more than 6% of manganese
- not more than 3% of phosphorus ^
- not more than 8% of silicon
- a total of not more than 10% of other elements.
(b) SPIEGELEISEN:
Iron-carbon alloys containing by weight more than 6% but not more than 30% of manganese and otherwise 
conforming to the specification at fa) above. 2 5
(c ) FERRO-ALLOYS:
Alloys in pigs, blocks, lumps or similar primary forms, in forms obtained by continuous casting and also in 
granular or powder forms, whether or not agglomerated, commonly used as an additive in the manufacture of 
other alloys or as de-oxidants, de-sulphurising agents or for similar uses in ferrous metallurgy and generally not
usefully malleable, containing by weight 4% or more of the element iron and one or more of the following: ^
- more than 10% of chromium
- more than 30% of manganese
- more than 3% of phosphorus
- more than 8% of silicon
- a total of more than 10% of other elements, excluding carbon, subject to a maximum content of 10% in the 
case of copper.
(d ) STEEL:
Ferrous materials other than those of heading No. 72.03 which (with the exception of certain types produced in 
the form of castings) are usefully malleable and which contain by weight 2% or less of carbon. However, 
chromium steels may contain higher proportions of carbon. ^
(e ) STAINLESS STEEL:
Alloy steels containing, by weight, 1.2% or less of carbon and 10.5% or more of chromium, with or without 
other elements.
48


(f) OTHER ALLOY STEEL:
Steels not complying with the definition of stainless steel and containing by weight one or more of the 
following elements in the proportion shown:
- 0.3% or more of aluminium
5  - 0.0008% or more of boron
- 0.3% or more of chromium
- 0.3% or more of cobalt
- 0.4% or more of copper
- 0.4% or more of lead
10 - L65% or more of manganese
- 0.08% or more of molybdenum
- 0.3% or more of nickel m o
- 0.06% or more of niobium
- 0.6% or more of silicon
1 5  - 0.05% or more of titanium
- 0.3% or more of tungsten (wolfram)
- 0.1% or more of vanadium
- 0.05% or more of zirconium
- 0.1% or more of other elements (except sulphur, phosphorus, carbon and nitrogen), taken separately.
49
20 fe) REMELTING SCRAP INGOTS OF IRON OR STEEL:
Products roughly cast in the form of ingots without feeder-heads or hot tops, or of pigs, having obvious surface 
faults and not complying with the chemical composition of pig iron, spiegeleisen or ferro-alloys.
(h) GRANULES:
Products of which less than 90% by weight passes through a sieve with a mesh aperture of 1  mm and of which 
^  90% or more by weight passes through a sieve with a mesh aperture of 5 mm.
(ij) SEMI-FINISHED PRODUCTS:
Continuous cast products of solid section, whether or not subjected to primary hot-rolling; and
Other products of solid section, which have not been further worked than subjected to primary hot-rolling or 
roughly shaped by forging, including blanks for angles, shapes or sections.
3 0 These products are not presented in coils.
(k) FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS:
Rolled products of solid rectangular (other than square) cross-section, which do not conform to the definition at 
(ij) above in the form of:
- coils of successively superimposed layers, or
3 5  . straight lengths, which if of a thickness less than 4.75 mm are of a width measuring at least ten times the
thickness or if of a thickness of 4.75 mm or more are of a width which exceeds 150 mm and measures at least 
twice the thickness.
40
Flat-rolled products include those with patterns in relief derived directly from rolling (for example, grooves, 
ribs, chequers, tears, buttons, lozenges) and those which have been perforated, corrugated or polished, provided 
that they do not thereby assume the character of articles or products of other headings.
Rat-rolled products of a shape other than rectangular or square, of any size are to be classified as products of a 
width of 600 mm or more, provided that they do not assume the character of articles or products of other 
headings.
(I) BARS AND RODS, HOT-ROLLED, IN IRREGULARLY WOUND COILS:
Hot-rolled products in irregularly wound coils, which have a solid cross-section in the shape of circles, segments 
of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), mangles or other convex polygons. These products may have 
iijidentations, ribs, grooves or other deformations produced during the rolling process (reinforcing bars and 
rods);


(m) OTHER BARS AND RODS:
Products which do not conform to any of the definitions at ( i j ) ,  ( k ) or ( I ) above or to the definition of wire, 
which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length in the shape of circles, segments of circles, 
ovals, rectangles (including squares), triangles or other convex polygons. These products may:
- have indentations, ribs, grooves or other deformations produced during the rolling process (reinforcing bars 5  
and rods);
- be twisted after rolling.
( n ) ANGLES, SHAPES AND SECTIONS:
50
10
Products having a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length which do not conform to any of the 
definitions at (ij)y (k). (I) or (m) above or to the definition of wire.
Chapter 72 does not include products of heading No. 73.01 or 73.02.
(o) WIRE:
Cold-formed products in coils, of any uniform solid cross-section along their whole length, which do not 
conform to the definition of flat-rolled products.
(p) HOLLOW DRILL BARS AND RODS: 1 5
Hollow bars and rods of any cross-section, suitable for drills, of which the greatest external dimension of ihe 
cross-section exceeds 15 mm but does not exceed 52 mm, and of which the greatest internal dimension docs not 
exceed one half of the greatest external dimension. Hollow bars and rods of iron or steel not conforming to this 
definition are to be classified in heading No. 73.04.
(g) SKELP: 20
Hot-rolled narrow strip of width not exceeding 600mm with rolled (square, slightly round or bevelled) edge.
2. Ferrous metals clad with another ferrous metal are to be classified as products of the ferrous metal predominating 
by weight.
3. Iron or steel products obtained by electrolytic deposition, by pressure casting or by sintering are to be classified, 
according to their form, their composition and their appearance, in the headings of this Chapter appropriate to similar 2 5  
hot-rolled products.
Sub -HEADING Note  
In this Chapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) Non-alloy free-cutting steel
Non-alloy steel containing, by weight, one or more of the following elements in the specified proportions: ^
- 0.08% or more of sulphur
- 0.1  % or more of lead
- more than 0.05% of selenium
- more than 0.01% of tellurium
- more than 0.05% of bismuth. 3 5
(b) Silicon-electrical steel
Alloy steels containing by weight at least 0.6% but not more than 6% of silicon and not more than 0.08% of 
carbon. They may also contain by weight not more than 1% of aluminium but no other element in a proportion 
that would give the steel the characteristics of another alloy steel.
(c ) High speed steel 40
Alloy steels containing, with or without other elements, at leasi iwo of the three elements molybdenum.


10
1 5
20
tungsten and vanadium with a combined content by weight of 7% or more, 0.6% w  more of carbon and 3 to 6%  of 
chromium.
(d ^ Silicon-manganese steel
Alloy steels containing by weight:
- 0.35% or more but not more than 0.7% of carbon,
- 0.5% or m cH -e but not more than 1.2% of manganese, and
- 0.6% or more but not more than 2.3% of silicon, but not containing any other element in a proportion that
would give the steel the characteristics of another alloy steel.';
(18) in Chapter 73, for the NOTES, the following NOTES shall be substituted, namely:—
'N otes
1. In this Chapter the expression "cast iron" applies to products obtained by casting in which iron predominates by 
weight over each of the other elements and which do not comply with the chemical composition of steel as defined in 
Note \(d) to Chapter 72.
2. In this ChaptCT the word "wire" means hot or cold-formed products of any cross-sectional shape, of which no cross- 
sectional dimension exceeds 16 mm.';
(19) in Chapter 74, for the N O T T E S , the following NOTE shall be substituted, namely:—
'NOTE
In this Chapter the following exp-essions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) REHNED COPPER:
Metal containing at least 99.85% by weight of copper, or Metal containing at least 97.5% by weight of copper, 
provided that the content by weight of any other element does not exceed the limit specified in the following table:
TABLE—OTHER ELEMENTS
51
25
30
35
Element Limiting content % by weight
Ag S ilv C T 0.25
As Arsenic 0.5
Cd Cadmium L3
Q Chromium 1.4
Mg Magnesium 0.8
Pb Led 1.5
S Sulphur 0.7
Sn Tin 0.8
Te Tellurium 0.8
Zh Zinc 1
Zr Zirconium 0.3
______________Other elements*, each___ 0.3
40
Other elements are, for example, Al, Be, Co, Fe, Mn, Ni, Si.
(b) COPPER ALLOYS:
Metallic substances other than unrefined copper in which copper predominates by weight over cacn of tn; ciri-:r 
elements, provided that:
(i) the content by weight of at least one of the other elements shall be greater than the limit specified in the 
foregiong table; or
(ii) the total content by weight of such other elements exceeds 2.5%.
(c) MASTER ALLOYS:
Alloys containing with other elements more than 10% by weight of copper, not usefully malleable a;id


commonly used as an additive in the manufacture of other alloys or as de-oxidants, de-sulphurising agents or for 
similar uses in the metallurgy of non-ferrous metals. However, copper phosphide (phosphor copper) containing 
more than 15% by weight of phosphorus falls in heading No 28.48.
(d ) BARS AND RODS:
Rolled, extruded, drawn or forged products, not in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their 5  
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 
polygons (including "flattened circles”, and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, 
the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products, with a rectangular (including square), 
triangular or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such 
products which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the 1 0
width. The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms and dimensions, which have been 
subsequently worked after {H *oduction (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have 
not thereby assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
Wire-bars and billets with their ends tapered or otherwise worked simply to facilitate their entry into machines 
for converting them into, for example, drawing stock (wire-rod) or tubes, are however to be taken to be 1 5
unwrought copper of heading No. 74.03.
(e) PROFILES:
Rolled, extruded, drawn, forged or formed products, coiled or not, of a uniform cross-section along their whole 
length, which do not conform to any of the definitions of bars, rods, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes or 
pipes. The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms, which have been subsequently 20
worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have not thereby 
assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
(f) WIRE:
Rolled, extruded or drawn products, in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length 
in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons 2 5
(including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other 
two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), triangular 
or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such products 
which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width.
In the case of heading No. 74.14, however, the term "wire" applies only to products, whether or not in coils, of 30 
any cross-sectional shape, of which no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 mm.
(g) PLATES. SHEETS. STRIP AND FOIL:
Rat-surfaced products (other than the unwrought products of heading No. 74.03). coiled or not, of solid 
rectangular (other than square) cross-section with or without rounded comers (including "modified rectangles" of 
which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel) of a 3 5  
uniform thickness, which are:
- of rectangular (including square) shape with a thickness not exceeding one-tenth of the width.
- of a shape other than rectangular or square, of any size provided that they do not assume the character of 
articles or products of other headings.
Heading Nos. 74.09 and 74.10 apply, inter alia, to plates, sheets, strips and foil with pattems (for example. 40 
grooves, ribs, chequers, tears, buttons. k)zenges) and to such products which have been perforated, comigatcd, 
polished or coated, provided that they do not thereby assume the character of articles or products of other 
headings.
(h) TUBES AND PIPES:
Hollow products, coiled or not. which have a uniform cross-section with only one enclosed void along their 4 5  
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex
52


polygons, and which have a uniform wall thickness. Products with a rectangular (including square), equilateral 
triangular or regular convex polygonal cross-section, which may have cwners rounded along their whole length, 
are also to be taken to be tubes and pipes provided the inner and outer cross-sections are concentric and have the 
same form and orientation. Tubes and pipes of the foregoing cross-sections may be polished, coated, bent,
5  threaded, drilled, waisted, expanded, cone-shaped or fitted with flanges, collars or rings.
SUB-HEAE«NG NOTE
In this Qiapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a) Copper-zinc base alloys (brasses):
Alloys of copper and zinc, with or without other elements. When other elements are present:
10 - zinc predominates by weight over each of such other elements;
- any nickel content by weight is less than 5% [see copper-nickel-zinc alloys (nickel silvers)]; and
- any tin content by weight is less than 3% [see copper-tin alloys (tffonzes)].
(b) Copper-tin base alloys (bronzes):
Alloys of copper and tin, with or without other elements. When other elements are present, tin predominates by 
1 5  weight over each of such other elements, except that when the tin content is 3% or more the zinc content by
weight may exceed that of tin but must be less than 10%.
(c) Copper-nickel-zinc base alloys (nickel silvers):
Alloys of copper, nickel and zinc, with or without other elements. The nickel content is 5% or more by weight 
[see copper-zinc alloys (brasses)].
53
20
25
30
3 5
40
(c ^ Copper-nickel base alloys :
Alloys of copper and nickel, with or without other elements but in any case containing by weight not more than 
1% of zinc. When other elements are present, nickel predominates by weight over each of such other elements.’ ;
(20) in Chapter 75, below the tide of the Chapter, the following NOTE shall be inserted, namely:—
'NOTE
In this Chapter the following exix-essions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) BARS AND RODS:
Rolled, extruded, drawn or forged products, not in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their 
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 
polygons (including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, 
the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), 
triangular or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such 
products which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section«xceeds one-tenth of the width. 
The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms and dimensions, which have been 
subsequently worked after jK'oduction (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have 
not thereby assumed the character of articles or fnoducts of other headings.
(b) PROFILES:
Rolled, extruded, drawn, forged or formed products, coiled or not, of a uniform cross-section along their whole 
length, which do not conform to any of the definitions of bars, rods, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes or 
pipes. The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms, which have been subsequently 
worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have not thereby 
assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
(c) WIRE:
Rolled, extruded or drawn products, in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length


in the shape of circles, ovak, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons 
(including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other 
two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), triangular 
or polygonal cross<section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such products 
which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width. 5
(d) PLATES, SHEETS, STRIP AND FOIL:
Rat-surfaced products (other than the unwrought products of heading No. 75.02), coiled or not, of solid 
rectangular (other than square) crofis-3^tion with or without rounded comers (including "modified rectangles" of 
which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel) of a 
uniform thickness, which are: 10
- of rectangular (including square) shsp& with a thickness not exceeding one-tenth of the width,
- of a shape other than rectangular or square, of any size provided that they do not assume the character of 
articles or products of other headings.
Heading No. 75.06 applies, inter alia, to plates, sheets, strip and foil with pattems (for example, grooves, ribs, 
chequers, tears, buttons, lozenges) and to such products which have been perforated, corrugated, polished or coated, 1 5  
provided that they do not thereby assume the character of articles or products of other headings.
(e) TUBES AND PIPES:
Hollow products, coiled or not, which have a uniform cross-section with only one enclosed void along their whole 
length in the shsqpe of circles, ovals, lectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons, 
and which have a uniform wall thickness. Products with a rectangular (including square), equilateral triangular or 20 
regular convex polygonal cross-section, which may have comers rounded along their whole length, are also to be 
considered as tubes and pipes provided the inner and outer cross-sections are concentric and have the same form and 
orientation. Tubes and pipes of the foregoing cross-sections may be polished, coated, bent, threaded, drilled, 
waisted, expanded, cone-shapedor fitted with flanges, collars or rings.
Sub-heading No t e 25
In this Chapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) Nickel, not alloyed :
Metal containing by weight at least 99% qf nickel plus cobalt, provided that:
(i) the cobalt content by weight does not exceed 1.5%, and
(ii) the content by weight of any other element does not exceed the limit specified in the following table: 30
TABLE-OTHER ELEMENTS
54
Element Limiting content % by weight
Fe ion 0.5
0  Oxygen 0.4
Other elements, each 0.3 35
(b) Nickel alloys :
Metallic substances in which nickel predominates by weight over each of the other elements provided that:
(i) the content by weight of cobalt exceeds 1.5%,
(U ) the content by weight of at least one of the other elements is greater than the limit specified in the 
foregoing table, or
(U i) the total content by weight of elements other than nickel plus cobalt exceeds 1  %
40


(21) in Chapter 76, for the NOTES, the following NOTE shall be substituted, namely:—
*Note
In this Chapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) BARS AND RODS:
5  Rolled, extruded, drawn or forged products, not in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 
polygons (including "flattened circles”  and "^modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, 
the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), 
triangular or polygonal cross-scction may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such
1 0  products which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width.
The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same form and dimensions, which have been 
subsequently worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have 
not thereby assumed the character of articles or products of odier headings.
(b) PROFILES:
1 5  Rolled, extruded, drawn, forged or formed products, coiled or not, of a unifrom cross-section along their whole
length, which do not conform to any of the definitions of bars, rods, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes or 
pipes. The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms, which have been subsequently 
worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have not thereby 
assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
2 0  (c ) WIRE:
Rolled, extruded or drawn products, in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length 
in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons 
(including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other 
two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), triangular 
or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such products 
which have a rectangular (inclduing "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width.
55
2 5
3 0
(d) PLATES, SHEETS, STRIP AND FOIL:
Flat-surfaced products (other than the unwrought products of heading No. 76.01), coiled or not, of solid 
rectangular (other than square) cross-section with or without rounded comers (including "modified rectangles" of 
which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel) of a 
uniform thickness, which are:
- of rectangular (including square) shape with a thickness not exceeding one-tenth of the width,
- of a shape other than rectangular or square, of any size provided that they do not assume the character of 
articles or products of other headings.
Heading Nos. 76.06 and 76.07 apply, inter alia, to plates, sheets, strip and foil with pattems (for example, grooves, 
ribs, chequers, tears, buttons, lozenges) and to such products which have been perforated, corrugated, polished or coatcd, 
provided that they do not thereby assume the character of articles-or products of other headings.
(e ) TUBES AND PIPES:
40
Hollow products, coiled or not, which have a uniform cross-section with only one enclosed void along their 
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 
polygons, and which have a uniform wall thickness. Products with a rectangular (including square), equilateral 
triangular or regular convex polygonal cross-section, which may have comers rounded along their whole length, 
are also to be considered as tubes and pipes provided the inner and outer cross-scctions are concentric and have the


same form and orientation. Tubes and pipes of the foregoing cross-sections may be polished, coated, bent, 
threaded, drilled, waisted, expanded, cone-shaped or fitted with flanges, collars or rings.
Sub-heading N ote
In this Chapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a) Aluminium, not alloyed:
Metal containing by weight at least 99% of aluminium, provided that the content by weight of any other element 
does not exceed the limit specified in the following table:
56
TABLE -  OTHER ELEM EN TS
Element Limiting content % by weight
Fe + Si (iron plus silicon) 1 10
Other elements (1), each 0 .1 (2)
(1) Other elements are, for example, Cr, Cu, Mg, Mn, Ni, Zn.
(2) Copper is permitted in a proportion greater than 0.1% but not more than 0.2%, provided that neither the 
chromium nor manganese content exceeds 0.05%.
(b) Aluminium alloys: 1 5
Metallic substances in which aluminium predominates by weight over each of the other elements, provided that:
(i) the content by weight of at least one of the other elements or of iron plus silicon taken together is greater 
than the limit specified in the foregoing table;
(ii) the total content by weight of such other elements exceeds 1%.';
(22) in Chapter 78, for the NOTE, the following NOTE shall be substituted, namely:— 2 0
NOTE
In this Chapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) BARS AND RODS:
Rolled, extruded, drawn or forged products, not in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their 
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 2 5
polygons (including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, 
the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), 
U-iangular or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such 
products which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width.
The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms and dimensions, which have been 30 
subsequently worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have 
not thereby assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
(h) PROFILES:
Rolled, cxu-uded, drawn, forged or formed products, coiled or not, of a uniform cross-section along their whole 
length, which do not conform to any of the definitions of bars, rods, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes or 35 
pipes. The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms, which have been subsequently 
worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have not thereby 
assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
(c) WIRE:
Rolled, extruded or drawn products, in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length in 40
the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons 
(including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other


two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), triangular 
or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such products 
which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width.
(d) PLATES, SHEETS, STRIP AND FOIL:
5 Flat-surfaced products (other than the unwrought products of heading No. 78.01), coiled or not, of solid
rectangular (other than square) cross-section with or without rounded comers (including "modified rectangles" of 
which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel) of a 
uniform thickness, which are:
- of rectangular (including square) shape with a thickness not exceeding one-tenth of the width,
- of a shape other than rectangular or square, of any size provided that they do not assume the character of
1 0  articles or products of other headings.
Heading No.78.04 applies, inter alia, to plates, sheets, strip and foil with pattems (for example, grooves, ribs, 
chequers, tears, buttons, lozenges) and to such products which have been perforated, corrugated, polished or coated, 
provided that they do not thereby assume the character of articles or products of other headings.
1 5  (e) TUBES AND PIPES:
Hollow products, coiled or not, which have uniform cross-section with only one enclosed void along their whole 
length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 
polygons, and which have a uniform wall thickness. Products with a rectangular (including square), equilateral 
triangular or regular convex polygonal cross-section, which may have comers rounded along their whole length, 
2 0 are also to be considered as tubes and pipes provided the inner and outer cross-sections are concentric and have the
same form and orientation. Tubes and pipes of the foregoing cross-sections may be polished, coated, bent, 
threaded, drilled, waisted, expanded, cone-shaped or fitted with flanges, collars or rings.
SUB-HEADING NOTE
In this Chapter the expression "refined lead" means:
2 5  Metal containing by weight at least 99.9% of lead, provided that the content by weight of any other element does
not exceed the limit specified in the following table:
57
30
3 5
4 0
TABLE—O TH ER EL EM EN T S
Element Limiting content % by weight
Ag Silva- 0.02
As Arsenic 0.005
Bi Bismuth 0.05
a Calcium 0.002-
ca Cadmium '0.002
Cu Copper 0.08
Fe Im n 0.002
S Sulphur 0.002
Sb Antimony 0.005
Sn Tm 0.005
Zh Zinc .0.002
Other (for example Te), each 0.001’ ;
45
(23) in Chapter 79, for the NOTES, the following NOTE shall be substituted, namely:-
’ NOTE
In this Chapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) BARS AND RODS:
Rolled, extruded, drawn or forged products, not in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their


whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 
polygons (including "flattened circles”  and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, 
the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), 
triangular or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such 
products which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width. 5  
The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms and dimensions, which have been 
subsequently worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have 
not thereby assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
(b) PROFILES:
Rolled, extruded, drawn, forged or formed products, coiled or not, of a uniform cross-section along their whole 1 0  
length, which do not conform to any of the definitions of bars, rods, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes or 
pipes. The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms, which have been subsequently 
worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have not thereby 
assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
(a WIRE: 1 5
Rolled, extruded or drawn products, in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length 
in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons 
(including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other 
two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), triangular 
or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such products 20 
w  hich have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width.
(d ) PLATES, SHEETS, STRIP AND FOIL:
Flat-surfaced products (other than the unwrought products of heading No.79.01), coiled or not, of solid 
rectangular (other than square) cross-section with or without rounded comers (including "modified rectangles" of 
which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel) of a 2 5  
uniform thickness, which are:
- of rectangular (including square) shape with a thickness not exceeding one-tenth of the width,
- of a shape other than rectangular or square, of any size provided that they do not assume the character of 
articles or products of other headings.
Heading No.79.05 applies, inter alia, to plates, sheets, strip and foil with patterns (for example, grooves, ribs, 
chequers, tears, buttons, lozenges) and to such products which have been perforated, corrugated, polished or coated, 
provided that they do not thereby assume the character of articles or products of other headings.
(e ) TUBES AND PIPES:
Hollow products, coiled or not, which have a uniform cross-section with only one enclosed void along their 
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 3 5  
polygons, and which have a uniform wall thickness. Products with a rectangular (including square), equilateral 
triangular or regular convex polygonal cross-section, which may have comers rounded along their whole length, 
arc also to be considered as tubes and pipes provided the inner and outer cross-sections are concentric and have the 
same form and orientation. Tubes and pipes of the foregoing cross-sections may be polished, coated, bent, 
threaded, drilled, waisted, expanded, cone-shaped or fitted with flanges, collars or rings. 40
Sub-heading N ote 
In this Chapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) Zinc, not alloyed:
Metal containing by weight at least 97.5% of zinc.
58


(b) Zinc alloys:
Metallic substances in which zinc iwedominates by weight over each of the other elements, provided that the total 
content by weight of such other elements exceeds 2.5%.
(c) Zinc dust
Dust obtained by condensation of zinc v j^u r, consisting of spherical particles which are finer than zinc powders. 
At least 80% by weight of the particles pass through a sieve with 63 micrometres (microns) mesh. It must 
contain at least 85 % by weight of metallic zinc.';
(24) in Ch^ter 80, below the title of the Chapter, the following NOTE shall be inserted, namely:—
■ N O T E
0 In this ChaptCT the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a ) BARS AND RODS:
Rolled, extruded, drawn or forged products, not in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their 
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles cx regular convex 
polygons (including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, 
the otho- two sides i)eing straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), 
triangular or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such 
products which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width. 
The expression also covers cast or sintered products, of the same forms and dimensions, which have been 
subsequently worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have 
2 0  not thereby assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
(b) PROFILES:
Rolled, extruded, drawn, forged or formed products, coiled or not, of a uniform cross-section along their whole 
length, which do not conform to any of the definitions of bars, rods, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes or 
pipes. The expression also covers cast or sintered products of the same forms, which have been subsequently 
2 5  worked after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), provided that they have not thereby
assumed the character of articles or products of other headings.
(c) WIRE:
Rolled, extruded, or drawn products, in coils, which have uniform solid cross-section along their whole length in 
the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons 
30 (including "flattened circles" and "modified rectangles", of which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other
two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel). Products with a rectangular (including square), triangular 
or polygonal cross-section may have comers rounded along their whole length. The thickness of such products 
which have a rectangular (including "modified rectangular") cross-section exceeds one-tenth of the width.
(d) PLATES, SHEETS, STRIP AND FOIL:
3 5  Flat-surfaced products (other than the unwrought prbducts of heading No. 80.01), coiled or not, of solid
rectangular (otho* than square) cross-section with or without rounded cmiers (including "modified rectangles" of 
which two opposite sides are convex arcs, the other two sides being straight, of equal length and parallel) of a 
uniform thickness, which are:
- of rectangular (including square) shape with a thickness not exceeding one-tenth of the width,
- of a shape otho- than rectangular or square, of any size provided that they do not assume the character of 
articles or products of other headings.
Headings Nos. 80.04 and 80.05 apply, inter alia ,to plates, sheets, strip and foil with patterns (fw example.
59


grooves, ribs, chequers, tears, buttons, lozenges) and to such products which have been perforated, corrugated, 
polished or coated, provided that they do not thereby assume the character of articles o t products of otho- headings.
(e ) TUBES AND PIPES:
Hollow products, coiled or not, which have a uniform cross-section with only one enclosed void along their 
whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex 5  
polygons, and which have uniform wall thickness. Products with a rectangular (including square), equilateral 
triangular or regular convex polygonal cross-section, which may have comers rounded along their whole length, 
are also to be considered as tubes and pipes provided the inner and outer cross-sections are conc^tric and have the 
same form and orientation. Tubes and pipes of the foregoing cross-sections may be polished, coated, bent, 
threaded, drilled, waisted, expanded, cone-shaped or fitted with flanges, collars or rings. 10
SUB-HEADING NOTE
In this Chapter the following expressions have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
(a) Tin, not alloyed :
Metal containing by weight at least 99% of tin, provided that the content by weight of any bismuth or copper is 
less than the limit specified in the following table: 1 5
60
TABLE — OTHER ELEMENTS
Element Limiting content % by weight
Bi Bismuth 0 .1
Cu Copper 0.4
(b) Tin alloys ; 2 0
Metallic substances in which tin predominates by weight over each of the other elements, provided that
(i) the total content by weight of such other elements exceeds 1 %; or
(ii) the content by weight of either bismuth or copper is equal to or greato- than the limit specified in the 
foregoing table.';
(25) in Chapter 81, below the title of the Chapter, the following NOTE shall be inserted, namely:— 2 5
■ N O T E
Note 1  to Chapter 74, defining "bars and rods", "profiles", "wire" and "plates, sheets, strip and foil" applies, mutatis 
mutandis, to this Ch^ter.';
(26) in Chapter 82, aftC T  NOTE 2, the following NOTE shall be inserted, namely:—
"3. Sets consisting of one or more knives of heading No. 82.11 and at least an equal number of articles of heading 30
No. 82.15 are. to be classified in heading No. 82.15.";
( 27) in Chapter 83, for the NOTES, the following NOTES shall be substituted, namely:—
'NOTES
1. For the purposes of this Chapter, parts of base metal are to be classified with their parent articles. However, articles
of iron and steel of heading No. 73.12, 73.15, 73.17, 73.18 or 73.20, or similar articles of other base metal (Chapters 35
74 to 76 and 78 to 81) are not to be taken as parts of articles of this Chapter.
2. For the purposes of heading No. 83.02, the word "castors" means those having a diameter (including, where


appropriate, tyres) not exceeding 75 mm, or those having a diameter (including, where appropriate, tyres) exceeding 75 
mm provided that the width of the wheel or tyre fitted thereto is less than 30 mm.';
(2S) in Section XVI, in NOTE 1 , for item C A j , the following item shall be substituted, namely
"(h) Drill Pipe (heading No.73.04);";
Q .9 ) in Chapter 84,—
{ c ^ for NOTE 1 , for item {d) , the following item shall be substituted, namely:—
"(d ) Articles of heading No. 73.21 or 73.22 or similar articles of otho- base metals (Chapters 74 to 76 or 78 to 81);";
(b) for NOTE 6, the following NOTE shall be substituted, namely:—
"6. Heading No. 84.82 applies, mter alia ,to polished steel balls, the maximum and minimum diameters of which do 
10 not differ from the nominal diameter by more than 1% or by more than 0.05 mm, whichever is less. Other steel balls 
are to be classified in heading No. 73.26.";
(30) in Chapter 87, in heading No. 87.16, in column (4), for the figures and abbreviation "15%”, the figures and 
abbreviation "20%" shall be substituted;
(31) in Ch£^ter 89,—
15 (a) fO T  the word "NOTE", occurring below the title of the Chapter, the word "NOTES" shall be substituted;
(b) the existing NOTE shall be numbered as NOTE 1, and after NOTE 1, as so numbered, the following NOTE shall 
be inserted, namely:—
'2. In heading No. 89.08, "Light Displacement Tonnage (LDT)" means LDT in metric tonnes as per Builder's 
Register LDT referred to in the Stability Book or the builder's certificate at the time of initial commissioning of the 
20 vessel or the floating structure:
Provided that in case of any change in the LDT, the highest of the LDT indicated in any of the documents referred 
to above shall be taken for the purpose of levy of duty.';
(32) in Chapter 94, in heading No. 94.03, in column (4), for the figures and abbreviation "25%", the figures and 
abbreviation "30%" shall be substituted.
61
1 5 PART II
Heading No Sub-heading No. Description of goods Rate of duty
(1 ) (2) (3) (4)
In the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act,—
(1) in Chapter 26, for heading Nos. 26.01 to 26.02, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
25
"26.01 2601.00 IRON ORES AND CONCENTRATES, INCLUDING ROASTED IRON PYRITES 12%
26.02 2602.00 MANGANESE ORES AND CONCENTRATES, INCLUDING MANGANI- 
FEROUS IRON ORES AND CONCENTRATES WITH A MANGANESE 
CONTENT OF 20% OR MORE, CALCULATED ON THE DRY WEIGHT
12%
26.03 2603.00 COPPER ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.04 2604.00 NICKEL ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.05 2605.00 COBALT ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.06 2606.00 ALUMINIUM ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.07 2607.00 LEAD ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.08 2608.00 ZINC ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.09 2609.00 TIN ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.10 2610.00 CHROMIUM ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.11 2611.00 TUNGSTEN ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%


(1) (2) 6) (4)
26.12 2612.00 URANIUM OR THORIUM ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.13 2613.00 MOLYBDENUM ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.14 2614.00 TITANIUM ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.15 2615.00 NIOBIUM, TANTALUM, VANADIUM OR ZIRCONIUM ORES AND 
CONCENTRATES
12%
5
26.16 2616.00 PRECIOUS METAL ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.17 26\7W OTHER ORES AND CONCENTRATES 12%
26.18 2618.00 GRANULATED SLAG (SLAG SAND) FROM THE MANUFACTURE OF IRON 
OR STEEL
12%
26.19 2619.00 SLAG. DROSS (OTHER THAN GRANULATED SLAG), SCALINGS AND 
OTHER WASTE FROM THE MANUFACTURE OF IRON OR STEEL
12% 1 0
26.20 2620.00 ASH AND RESIDUES (OTHER THAN FROM THE MANUFACTURE OF 
IRON OR S THHL), CONTAINING METALS OR METALLIC COMPOUNDS
12%
2621 2621.00 OTHER SLAG AND ASH, INCLUDING SEAWEED ASH (KELP) 12%";
(2) in Chapter 27,— 1 5
20
25
(a ) after sub-heading No. 2710.13, the following sub-heading shall be inserted, namely:—
"2710.14 - - Raw Naphtha Rs.2,750 per
kilo litre at
15°C":
(b) for sub-heading Nos. 2710.41 and 2710.49, the following sub-heading shall be substituted, namely:—
”2710.40 - Diesel oil, not elsewhere specified, that is to say, any hydrocarbon oil, Rs.l55per
which satisfies the following requirements:- kilo litre
at 15°C";
(i) has a smoke point of less than 10 millimetres;
(ii) leaves carbon residue of not less than 1/4 per cent., by weight when tested by 
Ramsbottom Carbon Residue Apparatus;
(iii) is as dark as, or darker than, 0.04 Normal Iodine solution 
when tested by colour comparison test; and
(iv) possesses a viscosity of less than 100 seconds by 30
Redwood I Viscometer at 37.8°C
(c) for sub-heading Nos. 2713.31,2713.32 and 2713.39, the following sub-heading shall be substituted, namely:—
"271330 - Other residues of petroleum oils or of oils obtained firom  bituminous minerals, Rs.l55per
including Heavy Petroleum Stock, Low Sulphur Heavy Stock and tonne";
other residual fuel oils 3 5
(3) in Chapter 30, for heading No. 30.03, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:—
"30.03 MEDICAMENTS (INCLUDING VETERINARY MEDICAMENTS)
3003.10 - Patent or proprietary medicaments, other than those medicaments which are 15%
exclusively Ayurve^c, Unani, Siddha, Homoeopathic or Bio-chemic 40
3003J20 - Medicaments (othC T  than patent or proprietary) other than those which are exclu- M
sively used in Ayurvedic, Unani, Siddha, Homoeopathic or Bio<hemic systems
3003.30 - Medicaments, including those used in Ayurvedic, Unani, Siddha, Nil";
Homoe(^athic or Bio-chemic systems 
(4) in ChaptCT 39, —
(a ) for heading Nos. 39.01 and 39.02, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
"39.01 POLYMERS OF ETHYLENE IN PRIMARY FORMS
3901.10 -Polyethylene having a specific gravity of less than 0.94 60%
390120 -Polyethylene having a specific gravity of 0.94 or more 60%
3901.30 -Ethylene-vinyl acetate o^wlymCTS 60%
3901.90 -Other 60%
45
50


10
1 5
(1) g) (3) (4)
39.02 POLYMERS OF PROPYLENE OR OF OTHER OLEFINS, IN PRIMARY FORMS
3902.10 -Polypropylene 60%
3902.20 -Polyisobutylene 60%
3902.30 -Propylene copolymers 60%
3902.90 -Otfier 60%";
(b) for heading No. 39.04, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:—
"39.W POLYMERS OF VINYL CHLORIDE OR OF OTHER HALOGENATED
OLEFINS, IN PRIMARY FORMS
3904.10 - Polyvinyl chloride, not mixed with any other substances 
-Other polyvinyl chloride:
3904.21 - -Non-pliticised
3904.22 - -Plasticised
3904.30 -Vinyl chloride-vinyl acetate copolymers
3904.40 -Other vmyl chloride copolymers
3904.50 -VinylidOTe chloride polymers
-Fluoro-polymers:
3904.61 - -Polyletrafluoroethylene
3904.69 --Other
3904.90 -Other
63
60%
60%
60%
60%
20
25
30
3 5
(c) for heading Nos. 39.07 and 39.08, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
"39.07 POLYACETALS, OTHER POLYETHERS AND EPOXIDE RESINS, IKPRIMARY
FORMS, POLYCARBONATES. ALKYD RESINS, POLYALLYL ESTERS AND
OTHER POLYESTERS, IN PRIMARY FORMS
3907.10 -Polyacetels
3907.20 -Other polyethers
3907.30 -Epoxide resins
3907.40 -Polycarbonates
3907.50 -AU^d resins including maleic resins and fumeric resins
3907.60 -Polyethylene terq>hthalate
3907.70 -Diallylphthalate resins
3907.80 -Polybutylene terq)hthalate
-Other polyesters:
3907.91 - -Unsaturated
3907.99 --Other
39.08 POLYAMIDES IN PRIMARY FORMS
3908.10 -Polyamide-6, -11, -12, -6,6,-6,9, -6,10 or -6,12
3908.90 -Other
(d)  for heading Nos. 39.11, 39.12 and 39.13, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
40
4 5
5 0
55
39.13
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
"39.11
39.12
3911.10
3911.20
3911.90
3912.11
3912.12 
3912.20
3912.31
3912.39
3912.90
3913.10
PETROLEUM RESINS, COUMARONE-INDENE RESINS, POLYTERPENES, 
POLYSULPHIDES, POLYSULPHONES AND OTHER PRODUCTS SPECIFIED 
IN NOTE 3 TO THIS CHAPTER, NOT
ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED OR INCLUDED, IN PRIMARY FORMS 
-Petroleum resins, coumarone, indene or coumarone-indene resins and polyterpenes 
-Polysulphones 
-O th C T
CELLULOSE AND ITS CHEMICAL DERIVATIVES, AND CELLULOSE 
ETHERS, NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIHED OR INCLUDED IN PRIMARY FORMS 
-Cellulose acctates:
- -Non-plasticised
- -Plasticised
-Cellulose nitrates (including collodions)
-Cellulose ethers:
- -Carboxymethyl cellulose and its salts 
--Other
-Other
NATURAL POLYMERS (FOR EXAMPLE.ALGINIC ACID) AND MODIFIED 
NATURAL POLYMERS (FOR EXAMPLE,HARDENED PROTEINS, CHEMICAL 
DERIVATIVES OF NATURAL RUBBER), NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIHED OR 
INCLUDED, IN PRIMARY FORMS 
-Algihic acid, its salts and esters
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%


64
(1 )
(e)
"39.15
(2)
391320
3913.30
3913.90
(3)
-Dextran
-Chlorinated rubber 
-Other
(4)
60%
60%
for heading No. 39.15, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:—
WASTE, PARINGS AND SCRAP, OF PLASTICS 
3915.10 -Of polymers of ethylene
391520 -Of polymers of s t^ n e
3915.30 -Of polymers of vinyl chloride
3915.90 -Of other plastics
(f) for heading No. 39.18, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:- 
"39.18
60%
&)%plus 
Rs. 40
per kilogram"
10
3918.10
3918.90
FLOOR COVERINGS OF PLASTICS, WHETHER OR NOT SELF ADHESIVE, 
IN ROLLS OR IN THE FORM OF TILES; WALL OR CEILING COVERINGS 
OF PLASTICS, AS DEFINED IN NOTE 9 TO THIS CHAPTER 
-Of polymers of vinyl chloride 
-Of other plastics
15
60%
60%";
(g) for heading Nos. 39.20, 39.21, 39.22, 39.23, 39.24 and 39.25, the following headings shall be substituted, 
namely:—
"39.20 OTHER PLATES, SHEETS, FILM, FOIL AND STRIP, OF PLASTICS, NON- 
CELLULAR, WHETHER LACQUERED OR METALLISED OR LAMINATED, 
SUPPORTED OR SIMILARLY COMBINED WITH OTHER MATERIALS OR NOT 
- Of polymers of vinyl chloride:
20
3920.11 - -Rigid, plain 60%
3920.12 - -Flexible, plain 60%
3920.13 - -Rigid, lacquered 60%
3920.14 - -Flexible lacquered 60%
3920.15 - -Rigid metallised 60%
3920.16 - -Rexible, metallised 60%
3920.17 - -Rigid, laminated 60%
3920.18 - -Flexiblejaminated 60%
3920.19 --OAer 60%
-Of regenerated cellulose;
3920.21 - -Film, plain 60%
392022 - -Film, lacquered 60%
392023 - -Film, metallised 60%
3920.24 - -Him, laminated 60%
392025 - -Sheet, plain 60%
392026 - -Sheet, lacquered 60%
3920.27 - -Sheet, metallised 60%
392028 - -Sheet, laminated 60%
392029 -Other 60%
-Of other plastics;
3920.31 - -Rigid, plain 60%
392032 - -Flexible, plain 60%
3920.33 --Rigid, lacquered 60%
3920.34 - -Flexftle, lacquered 60%
3920.35 - -Rigid, metallised 60%
3920.36 - -Flexible, metallised 60%
3920.37 - -Rigid, laminated 60%
3920.38 - -Flexible, laminated 60%
3920.39 --Other 60%
25
30
35
40
45
50
3921
3921.11
OTHER PLATES, SHEETS. FILM, FOIL AND STRIP, OF PLASTICS
-Cellular
- -Of polyurethanes 60% plus Rs. 40 
per kilogram 55


65
(1)
39.22
3923
10
1 5
39.24
20
39.25
25
30
_____
3921.19
3921.90
3922.10
3922.20
3922.90
3923.11
3923.19
3923.90
3924.11
3924.19
3924.90
3925.10
392520
3925.30
3925.91
3925.99
(3)
- -Of other plastics 
— Other
BATHS, SHOWER-BATHS, WASH-BASINS, BIDETS. LAVATORY PANS,
SEATS AND COVERS, FLUSHING CISTERNS AND SIMILAR SANITARY
WARE, OF PLASTICS
-Baths, shower-baths and wash- basins
-Lavatory seats and covers
-Other
ARTICLES FOR THE CONVEYANCE OR PACKING OF GOODS, OF 
PLASTICS; STOPPERS, LIDS, CAPS AND OTHER 
CLOSURES, OF PLASTICS 
-Cellular:
- -Of polyurethanes
- -Of other plastics 
-Otho-
TABLEWARE, KITCHENWARE, OTHER HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES AND
TOILET ARTICLES, OF PLASTICS
-Cellular:
--Of polyurethanes
- -Of other plastics 
-Other
BUILDERS’  WARE OF PLASTICS, NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED 
OR INCLUDED
-Reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers, of a capacity 
exceeding 300 litres
-Doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doors 
-Shutters, blinds (including Venetian blinds) and similar 
articles and parts thereof 
-Other:
- - Of polyurethanes 
--Other
(4)
60%
60%
30%
30%
30%
60% plus Rs. 40 
per kilogram 
30%
30%
60% plus Rs. 40 
per kilogram 
30%
30%
30%
60% plus Rs. 40
perl^ogram
30%";
35 (5) in Chapter 48,—
(a ) for sub-heading Nos. 4811.31 and 4811.39, the following sub-heading shall be substituted, namely:—
"4811.30 - Paper and paperboard coated, impregnated or covered with
plastic (excluding adhesives)
40
35% plus 
Rs. 1,600 
per tonne";
(b) for heading Nos. 48.17 and 48.18, the following headings shall be substiuited, namely:—
"48.17 4817.00
45
50
48.18 4818.00
48.19
55
ENVELOPES, LETTER CARDS, PLAIN POSTCARDS AND CORRESPON­
DENCE CARDS, OF PAPER OR PAPERBOARD; BOXES, POUCHES, 
WALLETS AND WRITING COMPENDIUMS, OF PAPER OR PAPER­
BOARD. CONTAINING AN ASSORTMENT OF PAPER STATIONERY
12%
12%TOILET PAPER. HANDKERCHIEFS.CLEANSING TISSUES. TOWELS, 
TABLECLOTHS. SERVIETTES. NAPKINS FOR BABIES. TAMPOONS, 
BEDSHEETS AND SIMILAR HOUSE-HOLD, SANITARY OR HOSPITAL 
ARTICLES, ARTICLES OF APPAREL AND CLOTHING ACCESSORIES. OF 
PAPER PULP, PAPER. CELLULOSE WADDING OR W E B S OF C EL L U LO SE  F IB R E S
CARTONS, BOXES. CASES, BAGS AND OTHER PACKING CONTAINERS.
OF PAPER, PAPERBOARD. CELLULOSE WADDING OR WEBS OF CELLULOSE 
FIBRES; BOX FILES. LETTER TRAYS. AND SIMILAR ARTICLES, OF PAPER 
OR PAPERBOARD OF A KIND USED IN OFFICES, SHOPS OR THE LIKE


66
(1) a.) (3) (4)
- Cartons, boxes, containers and cases (including flattened or folded boxes and
flattened or folded cartons), whether in assembled or unassembled condition:
4819.11 - - Intended for packing of match slicks m
4819.12 - - Printed cartons, boxes, containers and cases 35%
4819.19 --Other m 5
4819.90 - Other 12%
48.20 4820.00 REGISTERS, ACCOUNT BOOKS, NOTE BOOKS, ORDER BOOKS, 12%
RECEIPT BOOKS, LETTER PADS, MEMORANDUM PADS,
DIARIES AND SIMILAR ARTICLES, EXERCISE BOOKS, BLOTTING-
PADS, BINDERS (LOOSE-LEAF OR OTHER), FOLDERS, FILE 1 0
COVERS, MANIFOLD BUSINESS FORMS, INTERLEAVED
CARBON SETS AND OTHER ARTICLES OF STATIONERY, OF
PAPER OR PAPERBOARD; ALBUMS FOR SAMPLES OR FOR
COLLECTIONS AND BOOK COVERS, OF PAPER OR PA PE R B O A R D
48.21 4821.00 PAPER OR PAPERBOARD LABELS OF ALL KINDS, WHETHER 12% 1 5
OR NOT PRINTED
48.22 4822.00 BOBBINS, SPOOLS, COPS AND SIMILAR SUPPORTS OF 12%
PAPER PULP, PAPER OR PAPERBOARD (WHETHER OR NOT
PERFORATED OR HARDENED)
48.23 OTHER PAPER, PAPERBOARD, CELLULOSE WADDING AND 20
WEBS OF CELLULOSE RBRES, CUT TO SIZE OR SHAPE;
OTHER ARTICLES OF PAPER PULP, PAPER, PAPERBOARD,
CELLULOSE WADDING OR WEBS OF CELLULOSE FIBRES
- Other paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding and webs of cellulose fibres.
cut to size or shape: 2 5
4823.11 - - Gummed or adhesive paper in strips or rolls 10% plus Rs. 1,600
per tonne
4823.12 - - Cards, not punched, for punchcard machines. 10% plus Rs. 1,600
whether or not in strips per tonne
4823.13 - - Braille paper m 30
4823.14 - - Blotting paper 10% plus Rs. 1,200
per tonne
4823.19 - - Other 10% plus Rs. 1,600
per tonne
4823.90 -Other 12%";
(6) in Chapter 52, for heading Nos. 52.07 and 52.08, the following headings shall be substituted, namely :— 3 5
”52.07
52.08
5207.00 COTTON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED 
UNDER HEADING NOs.52.09, 52.10 AND 52.11),—
(a ) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS, AND 
(h) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, 
MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING, WATER-PROOFING, 
SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE 
PROCESSES, WITHOUT THE AID OF POWER OR STEAM
Fifty per cent, of the duty 
leviable under sub-heading 
Nos. 5206.11 to 5206.16 
and 5206.91 to 5206.94, 
as the case may be, 
depending upon the average 
count of yam in the fabric 
and the value per square 
metre of the fabric
COTTON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER 
HEADING NOS.52.09, 52.10, 52.11 AND 52.12), —
(a ) WOVEN ON HANDLOOMS, AND
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. 
MERCERISING, DYEING. PRINTING, WATER-PROOHNG, 
SHRINK- PROOFING, ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES
40
45
50
5208.10 - Processed without the aid of power or steam Fifty per cent, of the duty 
levi^le under sub-heading 
Nos. 5206.11 to 5206.16 
and 5206.91 to 5206.94,
55


67
(1 ) (2) < 3 )
5208.21
- Processed with the aid of power or steam:
- - Processed by an independent processor approved in this behalf by
the Government of India on the recommendation of the 
Development Commissioner for Handlooms
10
15
5208.22
5208.29
- - Processed by a factory owned by a registered handloom co-opera-
tive society or any organisation set up or approved by the Govern­
ment for the purpose of development of handlooms
- - Other
20
25
__________(4 )
as the case maybe, 
depending upon the average 
count of the yam in the 
fabric and the value per 
square metre of the fabric
Forty per cent of the duty 
leviable under sub-heading 
Nos. 5206.11 to 5206.16 
and 5206.91 to 5206.94, 
as the case may be,depend- 
ing upon the average count 
of the yam in the fabric and 
the value per square metre 
of the fabric 
N U
Duty leviable under 
sub-heading Nos.5206.1 1  
to 5206.16 and 5206.91 
to 5206.94, as the case 
may be, depending 
upon the average 
count of the yam in the 
fabric and the value per 
square metre of the fabric";
(7) in Chapter 72, for heading Nos. 72.01 to 72.15, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
30
35
72.01
72.02
72.03
72.04
7201.00
7202.00
7203.00
40
45 72.05
7204.10
7204.20
7204.30
7204.90
7205.10
7205.20
7205.90
50
72.06
7206.10
7206.90
"I — ^PRIMARY MATERIALS: PRODUCTS IN GRANULAR OR 
POWDER FORM 
PIG IRON AND SPIEGELEISEN IN PIGS, BLOCKS OR OTHER 
PRIMARY FORMS 
FERRO-ALLOYS
FERROUS PRODUCTS OBTAINED BY DIRECT REDUCTION OF 
IRON ORE AND OTHER SPONGY FERROUS PRODUCTS, IN 
LUMPS, PELLETS OR SIMILAR FORMS; IRON HAVING A 
MINIMUM PURITY BY WEIGHT OF 99.94%, IN LUMPS, PELLETS 
OR SIMILAR FORMS
FERROUS WASTE AND SCRAP; REMELTING SCRAP 
INGOTS OF IRON OR STEEL 
-Of iron
- Of stainless steel
- Of other alloy steel 
-Other
GRANULES AND POWDERS, OF PIG IRON, SPIEGELEISEN,
IRON OR STEEL 
-Of iron
- Of alloy steel 
-Other
II—IRON AND NON-ALLOY STEEL
IRON AND NON-ALLOY STEEL IN INGOTS OR OTHER 
PRIMARY FORMS (EXCLUDING IRON OF HEADING NO.72.03) 
-Of iron 
-Other
Rs. 100 per tonne 
12%
Rs. 100 per tonne
Rs.lOO per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
Rs. 100 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
Rs.lOO per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne


68
_  0) ___
(n 72.07
72.08
72.09
72.10
72.11
____^
7207.10
7207.90
(3 )
7208.11
7208.19
7208.21
7208.29
7208.31
7208.39
7208.40
7208.91
7208.99
7209.10
720920
7209.30
7209.90
7210.11
7210.19
7210.20 
7210.30 
7210.90
7211.11
7211.19
721121
7211.29
7211.30
7211.41
7211.42 
7211.49
7211.51
7211.52
7211.59
7211.60
7211.91
7211.92 
7211.99
SEMI-FINISHED PRODUCTS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL 
-Of iron 
-Other
FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL.
OF A WIDTH OF 600 MM OR MORE, HOT-ROLLED, NOT CLAD, 
PLATED OR COATED
- Plates and universal plates;
- - Exceeding 5 mm in thickness 
--OthCT
- Sheets:
- - Exceeding 5 mm in thickness 
--Other
- Strips :
- - Exceeding 5 mm in thickness
- - Other
- Skelp
- Other flat products;
- - Exceeding 5 mm in thickness
- - Other
FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL,
OF A WIDTH OF 600 MM OR MORE, COLD-ROLLED (COLD- 
REDUCED), NOT CLAD, PLATED OR COATED 
-Plates 
-Sheets
- Strips 
-Other
FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL,
OF A WIDTH OF 600 MM OR MORE, CLAD, PLATED OR COATED
- Plated or coated with zinc :
- - Corrugated 
--Other
- Hated o t coated with tin
- Painted, lacquered, varnished or plastic coated 
-Other
FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL, OF 
A WIDTH OF LESS THAN 600 MM, NOT CLAD, PLAW> OR COATED
- Flats :
__________^
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.800 per tonne
Rs. 1,200 per tonne 
Rs. 1,200 per tonne 
Rs. 1,200 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne 
15%
72.12
- - Exceeding 5 mm in thickness 
--Other
- Universal plates:
- - Exceeding 5 mm in thickpess 
--Other
-Hoops
- Sheets:
- - Cokl-rolkd (cold-reduced)
- - Hot-rolled, exceeding 5mm in thickness 
-O ther
-Strips:
- - Coki-iolled (cdd-reduce<0
- - Hot-rolled, exceeding 5 mm in thickness 
--Other
- Skelp
-Other flat products:
- - Cold-rdled (cdd-reduced)
- - Ha-rolled, exceeding 5 mm in thickness 
--Other
FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL,
OF WIDTH OF LESS THAN 600 MM, CLAD, PLATED OR COATED
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne 
Rs.550 per lonne
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.4(X) per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne
10
1 5
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55


69
10
72.13
72.14
15
72.15
20
25
30
72.16
72.17
35
G)____________________
- Plated or coated with zinc:
7212.11 --Corrugated
7212.19 --Other
721220 - Plated or coated with tin
7212.30 - Painted, lacquered, varnished or plastic coated
7212.90 -Other
BARS AND RODS, HOT-ROLLED, IN IRREGULARLY WOUND 
COILS, OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL
7213.10 - Of fipee-cutting steel
7213.90 -Other
OTHER BARS AND RODS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL,
NOT FURTHER WORKED THAN FORGED, HOT-ROLLED, 
HOT-DRAWN OR HOT-EXTRUDED BUT INCLUDING 
THOSE TWISTED AFTER ROLLING
7214.10 -Ftaiged
721420 - Of free-cutting steel
7214.90 -Other
OTHER BARS AND RODS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL
7215.10 - Of free-cutting steel not further woiked than cold-formed or cold-finished
721520 - Other, not further worked than cold-formed or cold-finished
7215.30 - I^ated or coated with zinc
7215.40 - Plated or coated with other base metals
7215.90 -Other
ANGLES, SHAPES AND SECTIONS OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL
7216.10 - Not further worked than hot-rolled, hot-drawn or extruded
721620 - Not furtha-worked than cold-formed or cold-finished
7216.30 - Plated or coated with zinc
7216.40 - Plated or coated with other base metals
7216.50 - Slotted angles and slotted channels
7216.60 - Forged
721650 -Other
WIRE OF IRON OR NON-ALLOY STEEL
7217.10 - Electric resistance wire (including electric resistance heating wire)
7217.90 - Other
m —STAINLESS STEEL
( 4 )
Rs.1200 per tonne 
Rs.1200 per tonne 
Rs. 1,200 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
15%
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
Rs.550 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.1200 per tonne 
Rs.1200 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.800 per tonne 
Rs.1200 per tonne 
Rs.l200pertonne 
15%
Rs.550 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
Rs.400 per tonne
40
45
72.18 7218.00 STAINLESS STEEL IN INGOTS OR OTHER PRIMARY
FORMS; SEMI-HNISHED PRODUCTS OF STAINLESS STEEL
72.19 FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF STAINLESS STEEL, OF A WIDTH 
OF 600 MM OR MORE
7219.10 - Not fiirther worked than hot-rolled, whether or not in coils
721920 - Not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced)
7219.90 -Other
7220 FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF STAINLESS STEEL, OF A WIDTH OF 
LESS THAN 600 MM
7220.10 - Not further worked than not-rolled, whether or not in coils
722020 - Not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced)
7220.90 -Other
7221 7221.00 BARS AND RODS, HOT-ROLLED, IN IRREGULARLY WOUND COILS,
OF STAINLESS STEEL
50 7222 OTHER BARS AND RODS OF STAINLESS STEEL; ANGLES, SHAPES
AND SECTIONS OF STAINLESS STEEL
7222.10 - Bars and rods, not furthC T  wcvked than hot-rolled, hot-drawn or extruded
722220 - Bars and rods, not further worked than cold-formed or cold-finished
722230 -Other bars and rods
7222.40 - Angles, shapes and sections
7223 7223.00 WIRE OF STAINLESS STEEL
5 5
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.l,5(X) per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne


(1) (2)
70
C 3 )
IV— OTHER ALLOY STEEL; HOLLOW DRILL BARS AND RODS, 
OF ALLOY OR NON-ALLOY STEEL
(4)
72.24
72.25
72.26
722/
7228
72.29
72.30
7224.00
7225.10
7225.20
7225.30
7225.40
7225.90
7226.10
7226.20
7226.91
7226.92 
7226.99
7227.10
7227.20
7227.90
7228.10
7228.20
7228.30 
7228.40 
7228.50 
7228.60
7228.71
7228.72 
7228.79
7228.81
7228.82
7228.89
7229.10
7229.20
7229.30
7229.90 
7230.00
OTHER ALLOY STEEL IN INGOTS OR OTHER PRIMARY FORMS; 
SEMI- FINISHED PRODUCTS OF OTHER ALLOY STEEL 
FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF OTHER ALLOY STEEL. OF 
A WIDTH OF 600 MM OR MORE
- Of silicon-electrical steel
- Of high speed steel
- Other, not further worked than hot-rollcd, whether or not in coils
- Other, not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced)
-Other
FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF OTHER ALLOY STEEL, OF 
A WIDTH OF LESS THAN 600 MM
- Of silicon-electrical steel 
-O f high speed steel
- Other:
- - Not further worked than hot-rolled
- - Not further worked than cold-rolled (cold-reduced)
--Other
BARS AND RODS, HOT-ROLLED, IN IRREGULARLY WOUND COILS, 
OF OTHER ALLOY STEEL 
-O f high speed steel
- Of silico-manganese steel 
-Other
OTHER BARS AND RODS OF OTHER ALLOY STEEL; ANGLES, 
SHAPES AND SECTIONS, OF OTHER ALLOY STEEL; HOLLOW 
DRILL BARS AND RODS, OF ALLOY OR NON-ALLOY STEEL
- Bars and tods of high speed steel
- Bars and rods of silico-numganese steel
- Other bars and rods not further woiked than hot-iolled, hot-drawn or extruded
- Other bars and rods, not further woiked than forged
- Other bars and rods, not further worked than cold-formed or cold-finished
- Other bars and rods
- Angles, shapes and sections :
- - Not further woriced than hot-rolled, hot drawn or extruded
- - Not further worked than cold-formed or cold-finished 
--Other
- Hollow drill bars and rods:
- - Of alloy steel
- - Of non-alloy steel, forged 
--OthCT
WIRE OF OTHER ALLOY STEEL
- Of high speed steel
- Of silico-manganese steel
- Electric resistance wire (including electric resistance heating wire)
- Other
GOODS AND MATERIALS OF CHAPTER 72 OBTAINED BY BREAKING 
UP OF SHIPS, BOATS AND OTHER FLOATING STRUCTURES
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs. 1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.l ,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.l ,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs.l ,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.550 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
10%
Rs.1,500 per tonne 
Rs. 1,800 per tonne";
(8) in Chapter 73, for heading Nos. 73.01 to 73.09, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
"73.01 SHEET PILING OF IRON OR STEEL,WHETHER OR NOT DRILLED,
PUNCHED OR MADE FROM ASSEMBLED ELEMENTS; WELDED 
ANGLES, SHAPES AND SECTIONS, OF IRON OR STEEL
7301.10 -Sheet piling
7301.20 - Angles, shapes and sections
73 02 RAILWAY OR TRAMWAY TRACK CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL OF
IRON OR STEEL. THE FOLLOWING: RAILS, CHECK-RAILS AND 
RACK RAILS, SWITCH BLADES, CROSSING FROGS, POINT RODS 
AND OTHER CROSSING PIECES, SLEEPERS (CROSS-TIES).
Rs.400 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
10
1 5
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55


7 1
(1)
73.03
73.04
10
73.05
15
20
73.06
73.07
25 73.08
30
35
73.09
40
73.10
45
50
73.11
73.12
(2)
7302.10
7302.20
7302.90
7303.00
7304.10
7304.90
7305.10
7305.90
7306.10
7306.90
7307.00
7308.10
7308.20
7308.30
7308.40
7308.90
7309.00
7310.00
7311.00
7312.10
7312.90
_________________________0)______________________
nSH-PLATES, CHAIRS, CHAIR WEDGES, SOLE PLATES 
(BASE PLATES), RAIL CLIPS, BEDPLATES, TIES AND OTHER 
m a t e r ia l SPECIALIZED FOR JOINTING OR HXING RAILS 
-Rails
- Sleepers (cross-ties)
-Other
TUBES. PIPES AND HOLLOW PROFILES, OF CAST IRON 
TUBES, PIPES AND HOLLOW PROFILES, SEAMLESS,
OF IRON (OTHER THAN CAST IRON) OR STEEL
-Of iron
-Other
OTHER TUBES AND PIPES (FOR EXAMPLE, WELDED, RIVETED 
OR SIMH ARLY CLOSED), HAVING INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL 
CIRCULAR CROSS-SECTIONS, THE EXTERNAL DIAMETER 
OF WliiCH EXCEEDS 406.4 MM, OF IRON OR STEEL 
-Of iron 
-Other
OTHER TUBES, PIPES AND HOLLOW PROFILES (FOR EXAMPLE, 
OPEN SEAM OR WELDED. RIVETED OR SIMILARLY CLOSED),
OF IRON OR STEEL
-Of iron
-Other
TUBE OR PIPE RTTINGS (FOR EXAMPLE, COUPLINGS, ELBOWS, 
SLEEVES), OF IRON OR STEEL
STRUCTURES (EXCLUDING PREFABRICATED BUILDINGS OF 
HEADING NO. 94.06) AND PARTS OF STRUCTURES (FOR 
EXAMPLE,BRIDGES AND BRIDGE-SECTIONS, LOCK-GATES, 
TOWERS, LATTICE MASTS, ROOFS, ROOFING FRAMEWORKS, 
DOORS AND WINDOWS AND THEIR FRAMES AND THRESHOLDS 
FOR DOORS, SHUTTERS, BAL-USTRADES, PILLARS AND 
COLUMNS), OF IRON OR STEEL; PLATES, RODS, ANGLES,
SHAPES. SECTIONS, TUBES AND THE LIKE. PREPARED FQR 
USE IN STRUCTURES. OF IRON OR STEEL
- Bridges and bridge-sections
- Towers and lattice masts
- Doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doon
- Props and similar equipment for scaffolding, shuttering or pit-propping 
-Olho-
RESERVOIRS. TANKS, VATS AND SIMILAR CONTAINERS FOR ANY 
MATERIAL (OTHER THAN COMPRESSED OR LIQUEFIED GAS), OF 
IRON OR STEEL, OF A CAPACITY EXCEEDING 300 L, WHETHER OR 
NOT LINED OR HEAT- INSULATED, BUT NOT FITTED WITH 
MECHANICAL OR THERMAL EQUIPMENT 
TANKS, CASKS, DRUMS, CANS. BOXES, AND SIMILAR CON­
TAINERS, FOR ANY MATERIAL (OTHER THAN COMPRESSED 
OR LIQUEHED GAS), OF IRON OR STEEL. OF A CAPACITY NOT 
EXCEEDING 300 L.WHETHER OR NOT LINED OR HEAT- INSULATED, 
BUT NOT HTTED WITH MECHANICAL OR THERMAL EQUIPMENT 
CONTAINERS FOR COMPRESSED OR LIQUEFIED GAS, OF IRON 
OR STEEL
STRANDED WIRE, ROPES, CABLES, PLAITED BANDS, SLINGS AND 
THE LIKE, OF IRON OR STEEL, NOT ELECTRICALLY INSULATED
- Stranded wire, ropes and cables 
-Other
(4)
Rs.4(X) per tonne 
Rs.4(X) per tonne 
15%
R s.lC X ) per tonne
Rs.l00 per tonne 
Rs.l,5(X) per tonne
Rs. 100 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne
Rs. 100 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
20% plus 
Rs. 100 per 
container
20% plus Rs.100 
per container
15%
15%


72
_(1)__
73.13
73.14
73.15
73.16
73.17
(2)
7313.00
7314.00
7315.00
7316.00
7317.00
(3 ) (4)
BARBED WIRE OF IRON OR STEEL; TWISTED HOOP OR SINGLE FLAT 15%
WIRE, BARBED OR NOT, AND LOOSELY TWISTED DOUBLE WIRE,
OF A KIND USED FOR FENCING, OF IRON OR STEEL
CLOTH (INCLUDING ENDLESS BANDS). GRILL, NETTING AND FENCING.
OF IRON OR STEEL WIRE; EXPANDED METAL OF IRON OR STEEL 15%
CHAIN AND PARTS THEREOF, OF IRON OR STEEL 1 .5 %
ANCHORS. GRAPNELS AND PARTS THEREOF. OF IRON OR STEEL 15%
NAILS, TACKS, DRAWING PINS, CORRUGATED NAILS, STAPLES 15%  ,
(OTHER THAN THOSE OF HEADING No. 83.05) AND SIMILAR ARTICLES,
OF IRON OR STEEL, WHETHER OR NOT WITH HEADS OF OTHER 
MATERIAL, BUT EXCLUDING SUCH ARTICLES WITH HEADS OF COPPER
1 0
73.18 SCREWS. BOLTS. NUTS. COACH-SCREWS, SCREW HOOKS, RIVETS. 
COTTERS, COTTER-PINS, WASHERS (INCLUDING SPRING WASHERS) 
AND SIMILAR ARTICLES, OF IRON OR STEEL
7318.10 - Threaded articles
- Non-threaded articles:
7318.21 - - Circlips
7318.29 --OthCT
7318.90 -Other
73.19 7319.00 SEWING NEEDLES, KNITTING NEEDLES. BODKINS, CROCHET HOOKS,
EMBROIDERY STILETTOS AND SIMILAR ARTICLES, FOR USE 
IN THE HAND, OF IRON OR STEEL; SAFETY PINS AND OTHER PINS 
OF IRON OR STEEL, NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED OR INCLUDED
73.20 7320.00 SPRINGS AND LEAVES FOR SPRINGS. OF IRON OR STEEL
73.21 STOVES. RANGES, GRATES, COOKERS (INCLUDING THOSE WITH 
SUBSIDIARY BOILERS FOR CENTRAL HEATING), BARBECUES, 
BRAZIERS, GAS-RINGS, PLATE WARMERS AND SIMILAR 
NON-ELECTRIC DOMESTIC APPLIANCES, AND PARTS THEREOF,
OF IRON OR STEEL
7321.10 - Cooking appliances and plate warmers
7321.20 - Other appUmces
7321.90 -Parts
73.22 7322.00 RADIATORS FOR CENTRAL HEATING, NOT ELECTRICALLY
HEATED, AND PARTS THEREOF, OF IRON OR STEEL; AIR 
HEATERS AND HOT AIR DISTRIBUTORS WHICH CAN ALSO 
DISTRIBUTE FRESH OR CONDITIONED AIR, NOT ELECTRICALLY 
HEATED, INCORPORATING A MOTOR-DRIVEN FAN 
OR BLOWER. AND PARTS THEREOF OF IRON OR STEEL
7323.00 TABLE. KITCHEN OR OTHER HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES AND 
PARTS THEREOF, OF IRON OR STEEL; IRON OR STEEL WOOL;
POT SCOURERS AND SCOURING OR POLISHING PADS, GLOVES 
AND THE LIKE OF IRON OR STEEL
7324.00 SANITARY WARE AND PARTS THEREOF, OF IRON OR STEEL 
OTHER CAST ARTICLES OF IRON OR STEEL
7325.10 -Of iron
7325.20 - Of alloy steel
7325.30 - Of stainless steel
7325.90 -Otha- 
OTHER ARTICLES OF IRON OR STEEL
- Forged or stamped, but not further worked:
7326.11 - - Grinding balls and similar articles for mills
7326.19 --Other
7326.20 - Articles of iron or steel wire
7326.90 -Other
73 27 7327.00 GOODS AND MATERIALS OF CHAPTER 73 OBTAINED BY THE
BREAKING UP OF SHIPS, BOATS AND OTHER FLOATING 
STRUCTURES
73J23
73.24
73.25
73.26
20%
20%
15%
15%
15%
15%
1 5
ao
15%
15%
20%
15%
2 5
30
15%
15%
35
40
Rs. 100 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne 
Rs. 1,500 per tonne 
Rs.400 per tonne
15%
15%
15%
15%
R s. 1 ,8 0 0  per to n n e ":
45
50
55


73
(1) (2) (i) (4)
(9) in Chapter 74, for heading Nos. 74.01 lo 74.13, the following headings shall be substituted, namely;—
"74.01
5  74.02
74.03
10
1 5
74.04 
20 74.05
74.06
74.07
25
74.08
30
35
40
74.09
74.10
45
50
74.11
55
7401.10
7401.20
7402.00
7403.11
7403.12
7403.13 
7403.19
7403.21
7403.22
7403.23
7403.29
7404.00
7405.00
7406.00
7407.11
7407.12
7407.21
7407.29
7408.11
7408.19
7408.21
7408.29
7409.10
7409.20
7409.30
7409.40
7409.90
7410.11
7410.12
7410.21
7410.22
7411.10
7411.21
7411.22
COPPER MATTES; CEMENT COPPER (PRECIPITATED COPPER)
- C oppCT mattes
- Cement copper (precipitated copper)
UNREFINED COPPER; COPPER ANODES FOR ELECTROLYTIC 
REHNING
REFINED COPPER AND COPPER ALLOYS, UNWROUGHT
- Refined copper:
- - Cathodes and sections of cathodes
- - Wire-bars
- - Billets 
--Other
- Copper alloys:
- - Copper-zinc base alloys (brass)
- - Copper-tin base alloys (bronze)
- - Copper-nickel base alloys (cupro-nickel) or copper-nickel-zinc base 
alloys (nickel silver)
- - Other copper alloys (other than master alloys of heading No.74.05)
COPPER WASTE AND SCRAP
MASTER ALLOYS OF COPPER 
COPPER POWDERS AND FLAKES 
COPPER BARS, RODS AND PROHLES
- Bars and rods:
- - Of refined copper
- - Of copper alloys
- Profiles:
- - Hollow profiles 
--Other
COPPER WIRE
- Of refined copper:
- - Of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 mm 
--Other
- Of copper alloys:
- - Of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 mm 
--OthCT
COPPER PLATES, SHEETS (INCLUDING CIRCLES) AND STRIP. OF A 
THICKNESS EXCEEDING 0.15 MM
- Of refined copper
- Of copper-zinc base alloys (brass)
- Of copper-tin base alloys (bronze)
- Of copper-nickel base alloys (cupro-nickel) or copper-nickel-zinc base 
alloys (nickel silver)
- Of other copper alloys
COPPER FOIL (WHETHER OR NOT PRINTED OR BACKED WITH P A P E R , 
PAPERBOARD, PLASTICS OR SIMILAR BACKING MATERIALS) OF A 
THICKNESS (EXCLUDING ANY BACKING) NOT EXCEEDING 0.15 MM
- Not backed:
- - Of refined copper
- - Of copper alloys
- Backed:
- - Of refined copper
- - Of copper alloys 
COPPER TUBES AND PIPES
- Of refined coppcr
- Of copper alloys :
- - Of copper-zinc base alloys (brass)
- - Of copper-nickel base alloys (cupro-nickel) or copper-nickel-
zinc base alloys (nickel silver)
Rs.6,200 per tonne 
Rs.6,2(X) per tonne 
Rs.6,2(X) per tonne
Rs.6,200 per tonne 
Rs.6,2(K) per tonne 
Rs.6,200 per tonne 
Rs.6,200 per tonne
Rs.6,200 per tonne 
Rs.6,200 per tonne 
Rs.6,200 per tonne
Rs.6,200 per tonne 
Rs.6,2(X) per tonne 
Rs.6,2(X) per tonne 
15%
Rs.6,2(X) per tonne 
Rs.6,200 per tonne
15%
Rs.7,400 per tonne
Rs.6,200 per tonne 
20%
Rs.6,200 per tonne
Rs.7,400 per tonne 
Rs.7,400 per tonne 
Rs.7,400 per tonne 
Rs.7,400 per to n n e
Rs.7,400 per tonne
Rs.7,400 per tonne 
Rs.7,400 per tonne
Rs.7,4(X) per tonne 
Rs.7,400 per tonne
15%
15%
15%


74
(1)
74.12
74.13
74.14
74.15
74.16
74.17
74.18
74.19
g)
7411.29
7412.10
7412.20
7413.00
7414.10
7414.90
(3) (4)
7415.10
741521
741529
7415.31
7415.32 
7415.39
7416.00
7417.00
7418.10 
741820
7419.10
7419.91
7419.99
--Other
COPPER TUBE OR PIPE FITTINGS (FOR EXAMPLE, COUPLINGS, 
ELBOWS, SLEEVES)
- Of refined copper 
-Of copper alloys
STRANDED WIRE, CABLES, PLAITED BANDS AND THE LIKE,
OF COPPER, NOT ELECTRICALLY INSULATED
CLOTH (INCLUDING ENDLESS BANDS),GRILL AND NETONG, OF 
COPPER WIRE; EXPANDED METAL OF COPPER
- Endless bands, for machinery 
-Other
NAILS, TACKS, DRAWING PINS, STAPLES (OTHER THAN THOSE OF 
HEADING NO. 83.05) AND SIMILAR ARTICLES, OF COPPER OR OF 
IRON OR STEEL WITH HEADS OF COPPER; SCREWS, BOLTS, NUTS, 
SCREW HOOKS, RIVETS, COTTERS, COTTER-PINS, WASHERS (IN­
CLUDING SPRING WASHERS) AND SIMILAR ARTICLES. OF COPPER
- Nails and tacks, drawing pins, staples and similar articles
- Other articles, not threaded:
- - Washers (including spring washers)
--Other
- Other threaded articles:
- - Screws for wood
- - Other screws; bolts and nuts 
--Other
COPPER SPRINGS
COOKIiN'G OR HEATING APPARATUS OF A KIND USED FOR 
DOMESTIC PURPOSES, NON ELECTRIC, AND PARTS THEREOF.
OF COPPER
TABLE, KITCHEN OR OTHER HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES AND PARTS 
THEREOF, OF COPt>ER; POT SCOURERS AND SCOURING OR 
POLISHING PADS, GLOVES AND THE LIKE, OF COPPER; SANITARY 
WARE AND PARTS THEREOF. OF COPPER
- Table, kitchen or other household articles and parts thereof; pot 
scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves and the like
- Sanitary ware and parts thereof
OTHER ARTICLES OF COPPER
- Chain and parts thweof 
-Other:
- - Cast.moulded, stamped or forged, but not further worked 
--Other
15%
15%
15%
20%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
20%
20%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%’ ’;
10
1 5
20
25
30
35
40
(10) in Chapter 75, for heading No. 75.01, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
"75.01
75.02
75.03
75.04
75.05
75.06
NICKEL MATTES, NICKEL OXIDE SINTERS AND OTHER 
INTERMEDIATE PRODUCTS OF NICKEL METALLURGY
7501.10 - Nickel mattes
750120 - Nickel oxide sinters and other intermediate products of nickel metallurgy
UNWROUGHT NICKEL
7502.10 - Nickel, not alloyed 
750220 -Nickel alloys
7503.00 NICKEL WASTE AND SCRAP
7504.00 NICKEL POWDERS AND FLAKES
NICKEL BARS, RODS, PROFILES AND WIRE 
- Bars, rods and profiles;
7505.11 - - Of nickel, not alloyed
7505.12 - - Of nickel alloys 
-Wire:
750521 - - Of nickel, not alloyed
750522 - - Of nickel alloys
NICKEL PLATES, SHEETS, STRIP AND FOIL 
7506.10 - Of nickel, not alloyed
750620 - Of nickel alloys
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
45
50
55
60


75
(1)
75.07
(2)
7507.11
7507.12 
7507.20 
7508.00
(3)
NICKEL TUBES. PIPES AND TUBE OR PIPB P irn il6 S  
(FOR EXAMPLE, COUPLINGS. I^BOWS, SLEIVIS) 
-Tubeaandptpei:
- - Of nickel, aot alloyed 
-• Of nickel aUoyi
- Tube or pipe fittings 
OTHER ARTICLES OF fnCKEL
(4)
15%
15%
15%
15%";75.08
(11) in Chapter 76, for heading Nos. 76.01 to 76.13. the foUowing hcaiBiigs shall be substituted, namely:—
"76.01
10
15
76.02 
20 76.03
76.04
25
30
76.05
35
40
76.06
45
76.07
50
55
7601.10 
760120
7601.30 
7601.90
7602.00
7603.00
7604.10
760421
760429
7604.30
7605.11
7605.19
760521
760529
7606.10
7606.20
7607.10
760720
7607.30
UNWROUGHT ALUMINIUM. WHETHER OR NOT ALLOYO)
- Ingots, billets
-Wire^ws
-Wire^ods
-OthCT
ALUMINIUM WASTE AND SCRAP
ALUMINIUM POWDERS AND FLAKES
ALUMINIUM BARS. RODS AND PROFILES, WHETOER OR
NOT ALLOYED
-Wiie-rdds
-Profiles:
- - HoUow
--Other
- Bars and other rods
ALUMINIUM WIRE
- Of aluminium, not alloyed:
- - Of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 mm 
--Other
- Of aluminium alloys:
- - Of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 mm 
-O ther
SWhplus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
5iy%plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50%p/us Rs.4,000 
per tonne
5Woplus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
5m>plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% p/us Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50%p/iis Rs.4,000 
per tonne
ALUMINIUM PLATES, SHEETS (INCLUDING CIRCLES) AND STRIP 
OF A THICKNESS EXCEEDING 0.2 MM 
- Of aluminium, not aUoyed
- Of aluminium alloys
ALUMINIUM FOIL (WHETHER OR NOT PRINTED 
OR BACKED WITH PAPER, PAPERBOARD, PLASTICS 
OR SIMILAR BACKING MATERIALS) OF A THICKNESS 
(EXCLUDING ANY BACKING) NOT EXCEEDING 02 MM 
-Plain
-Embossed
- Perforated or cut-to-shape
SWoplus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
5Woplus Rs.4,000 per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000 
per tonne


76
M __________® ______________________0) _________
7607.40 -Coated
7607.50 -Printed
7607.60 -Ractad
7607.90 -OAer
76.08 ALUMINIUM TUBES AND PIPES
7608.10 - Of aluminium, not alloyed
7608.20 - Of aluminium alloys
76.09 7609.00 ALUMINIUM TUBE OR PIPE Fim N G S (FOR EXAMPLE.
COUPLINGS. ELBOWS. SLEEVES)
76.10 ALUMINIUM STRUCTURES (EXCLUDING PREFABRICATED 
BUILDINGS OF HEADING NO. 94.06) AND PARTS OF STRUCTURES 
(FOR EXAMPLE. BRIDGES. AND BRIDGE-SECTIONS. TOWERS. 
LATTICE MASTS. ROOFS. ROOFING FRAMEWORKS.
DOORS AND WINDOWS AND THEIR FRAMES AND 
THRESHOLDS FOR DOORS. BALUSTRADES. PILLARS 
AND COLUMNS); ALUMINIUM PLATES. RODS. PROFILES. TUBES 
AND THE LIKE, PREPARED FOR USE IN STRUCTURES
7610.10 - Doots. windows and their frames and thresholds for doc»^
7610.90 -Other
76.11 7611.00 ALUMINIUM RESERVOIRS, TANKS. VATS AND SIMILAR
CONTAINERS. FOR ANY MATERIAL (OTHER THAN 
COMPRESSED OR LIQUEFIED GAS), OF A CAPACITY 
EXCEEDING 300 L.WHETHER OR NOT LINED OR HEAT- 
INSULATED. BUT NOT FITTED WITH MECHANICAL OR 
THERMAL EQUIPMEI>^
76.12 ALUMINIUM CASKS. DRUMS. CANS. BOXES AND SIMILAR 
CONTAINERS (INCLUDING RIGID OR COLLAPSIBLE TUBULAR 
CONTAINERS). FOR ANY MATERIAL (OTHER THAN 
COMPRESSED OR LIQUEFIED GAS). OF A CAPACITY NOT 
EXCEEDING 300 L. WHETHER OR NOT LINED OR 
HEAT-INSULATED. BUT NOT FITTED WITH MECHANICAL OR 
THERMAL EQUIPMENT
- Collapsible tubular containers :
7612.11 --Plain
7612.12 --Lacquered
7612.13 --Printed 
761119 --Other
- Other:
7612.91 --Plain
7612.92 --Lacquoed 
761293 --Printed
7612.99 --Other
7613 ALUMINIUM CONTAINERS FOR COMPRESSED OR
LIQUEFIED GAS
7613.10 -Plain
7613.20 -Lacquered
7613.30 -Printed
7613.90 -Other
(4)
______________
50% plus Rs.4,000  
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000  
p o ’tonne
50%plus Rs.4,000 5
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000  
per tonne
50%pZitf Rs.4,000 10
per tonne
50% plus Rs.4,000  
per tonne
20% 1 5
20
20%
20%
20%
25
30
35
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
40
45
50


77
(1 )
76.14
(2)
7614.10
7614.90
(3)
5  76.15
10
76.16
1 5
7615.10 
761520
7616.10 
7616.90
STRANDED WIRE, CABLES. PLAITED BANDS AND THE LIKE, OF 
ALUMINIUM. NOT ELECTRICALLY INSULATED
- With steel core 
-Otho’
TABLE. KITCHEN OR OTHER HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES AND PARTS 
THEREOF. OF ALUMINIUM; POT SCOURERS AND SCOURING OR 
POLISHING PADS. GLOVES AND THE LIKE, OF ALUMINIUM; 
SANITARY WARE AND PARTS THEREOF. OF ALUMINIUM
- Table, kitchen or other household articles and parts thereof; pot 
scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves and the like
- Sanitary ware and parts thereof 
OTHER ARTICLES OF ALUMINIUM
- Nails, tacks, staples (other than those of heading No. 83.05), screws,
bolts, nuts, screw hooks, rivets, cotters, cotter-pins, washers and similar articles 
-Other
(4)
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
25%";
(12) in Chapter 78, for heading Nos. 78.01 to 78.08, the following headings shall be substituted, namely;— 
"78.01
20
2 5
30
35
40
UNWROUGHT LEAD
7801.10 -Refined lead
7801.90 -O thCT
78.02 7802.00 LEAD WASTE AND SCRAP
78.03 LEAD BARS, RODS, PROFILES AND WIRE
7803.10 - Lead bars and rods
- Profiles :
7803.21 - - HoUow
7803.29 --OthCT
7803.30 - Lead wire
78.04 LEAD PLATES, SHEETS (INCLUDING CIRCLE^, STRIP 
AND FOIL; LEAD POWDERS AND FLAKES
7804.10 - Plates, sheets (including circles), strip and foil >
'T
7804.20 - Powders and flakes
78.05 LEAD TUBES, PIPES AND TUBE OR PIPE Fm iN G S (FOR EXAMPLE, 
COUPLINGS, ELBOWS, SLEEVES)
7805.10 -Lead tubes and pipes
7805.20 - Lead tube or pipe fittings (for example, couplings, elbows, sleeves)
7806.00 OTHER ARTICLES OF LEAD
Rs.930 
p »  tonne 
Rs.930 
po-tonne 
Rs.930 
p a  tonne
Rs.1,100 
p a  tonne
17%
Rs.1,100 
per tonne 
Rs.930 
p a  tonne
Rs.1,100 
per tonne 
15%
17%
15%
15%’ ’;78.06
fiij in Chapter 79, for heading Nos. 79.01 to 79.10, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
"79.01
45
50
UNWROUGHT ZINC
7901.10 - Zinc, not alloyed
7901.20 -Zinc alloys
79.02 7902.00 ZINC WASTE AND SCRAP
79.03 ZINC DUST, POWDERS AND FLAKES
7903.10 - Zinc dust
7903.90 -Other
Rs.3,600 
per tonne 
Rs.3.600 
per tonne 
Rs.3.600 
per tonne
17%
17%
79.04 ZINC BARS, RODS (INCLUDING WIRE-RODS), PROHLES AND WIRE


78
(1) (2 ) (3)
7904.10 -Z jik bars aiK l rods (including wiie-iods)
790421
7904.29
■  Profiles: 
-HoUow 
-Other
79.05
790430 -Zinc wire
ZINC PLATES. SHEETS (INCLUDING CIRCLES AND CALOTS), STRIP 
AND FOIL
7905.10 -ZincCalots
7905.90 -Othff
ZINC TUBES. PIPES AND TUBE OR PIPE F m iN G S  ( FOR EXAMPLE, 
COUPLINGS. ELBOWS. SLEEVES)
7906.10 - Zinc tubes and pipes
7906.20 - Zinc tube or pipe fittings (for example, couplings, elbows, sleeves)
OTHER ARTICLES OF ZINC
7907.10 - Gutters, roof capping, skylight frames and other fabricated building
components
7907.90 -Other
(14) in Cluster 80, for heading No. 80.01, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
79.06
79.07
"80.01
80.02
80.03
80.04
80.05
8001.10
800120
8002.00
8003.00
8004.00
80.06
8005.10
800520
8006.00
80.07 8007.00
UNWROUGHT TIN
- Tin, not alloyed
- Tin alloys
TIN WASTE AND SCRAP
TIN BARS, RODS, PROFILES AND WIRE
TINPLATES, SHEETS AND STRIP, OF A THICKNESS
EXCEEDING 0.2 MM
TIN FOE. (WHETHER OR NOT PRINTED OR BACKED WITH PAPER, 
PAPERBOARD, PLASTICS OR SIMILAR BACKING 
MATERIALS), OF A THICKNESS (EXCLUDING ANY BACKING) NOT 
EXCEEDING 0.2 MM; TIN'POWDERS AND FLAKES
- Foil
- Powders and flakes
TIN TUBES, PIPES A I®  TUBE OR PIPE F im N G S  (FOR EXAMPLE. 
COUPLINGS, ELBOWS, SLEEVES)
OTHER ARTICLES OFTIN
w
RM.lj60d
p ern m e
28%
RS4.200
per tome 
Rs.3.000 
per tome
R».5225 
po’tonne 
Rs.4.200 
po^ tonne
28%
15%
15%
15%":
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
fJS) in Chapter 81, for heading No. 81.01, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
"81.01 8101.00 TUNGSTEN (WOLFRAM) AND ARTICLES THEREOF. INCLUDING
WASTE AND SCRAP
81.02 8102.00 MOLYBDENUM AND ARTICLES THEREOF. INCLUDING WASTE
AND SCRAP
81.03 8103.00 TANTALUM AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE
AND SCRAP
81.04 8104.00 MAGNESIUM AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE
AND SCRAP
81.05 8105.00 COBALT MATTES AND OTHER INTERMEDIATE PRODUCTS
OF COBALT METALLURGY: COBALT AND ARTICLES THEREOF, 
INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
8106 8106.00 BISMUTH AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
8107 8107.00 CADMIUM AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
8108 8108.00 TITANIUM AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
81.09 8109.00 ZIRCONIUM AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
81 10 8110.00 ANTIMONY AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
8U1 8111.00 MANGANESE AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
81 12 8112.00 BERYLLIUM, CHROMIUM, GERMANIUM, VANADIUM, GALLIUM,
HAFNIUM, INDIUM, NIOBIUM (COLUMBIUM), RHENIUM AND THALLIUM, 
AND ARTICLES OF THESE METALS, INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
15%
15%
15%
15%"
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
1 0
1 5
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60


(1 ) (2)
79
w
81.13 8113.00 CERMETS AND ARTICLES THEREOF, INCLUDING WASTE AND SCRAP
(16) in Chapter 82, for heading Nos. 82.01 to 82.08, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
J4) ___
15% ";
1 5
20
"82.01 8201.00 HAND TOOLS, THE FOLLOWING: SPADES, SHOVELS. MATTOCKS,
PICKS, HOES, FORKS AND RAKES; AXES, BILL HOOKS AND SIMILAR 
5  HEWING TOOLS: SECATEURS OF ANY KIND; SCYTHES, SICKLES, HAY
KNIVES, HEDGE SHEARS, TIMBER WEDGES AND OTHER TOOLS OF A 
KIND USED IN AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE OR FORESTRY
82.02 8202.00 HAND SAWS; BLADES FOR SAWS OF ALL KINDS (INCLUDING
SLnriNG, SLOTTING OR TOOTHLESS SAW BLADES)
1 0  82.03 8203.00 FILES, RASPS, PLIERS (INCLUDING CUTTING PLIERS), PINCERS,
TWEEZERS, METAL CUTTING SHEARS, PIPE-CUTTERS,
BOLT CROPPERS, PERFORATING PUNCHES AND SIMILAR HAND TOOLS
82.04 8204.00 HAND-OPERATED SPANNERS AND WRENCHES (INCLUDING TORQUE
METER WRENCHES BUT NOT INCLUDING TAP WRENCHES); 
INTERCHANGEABLE SPANNER SOCKETS, WITH OR WTTHOUT HANDLES
82.05 8205.00 HAND TOOLS (INCLUDING GLAZIERS’  DIAMONDS), NOT ELSEWHERE
SPECIFIED OR INCLUDED; BLOW LAMPS; VICES, CLAMPS AND 
THE LIKE, OTHER THAN ACCESSORIES FOR AND PARTS OF,
MACHINE TOOLS; ANVILS; PORTABLE FORGES; HAND OR PEDAL- 
OPERATED GRINDING WHEELS WTTH FRAMEWORKS
82.06 8206.00 TOOLS OF TWO OR MORE OF THE HEADINGS NOS. 82.02
TO 82.05, PUT UP IN SETS
82.07 8207.00 INTERCHANGEABLE TOOLS FOR HAND TOOLS, WHETHER
OR NOT POWER-OPERATED, OR FOR MACHINE-TOOLS (FOR 
EXAMPLE, FOR PRESSING. STAMPING, PUNCHING, TAPPING, 
THREADING, DRILLING. BORING. BROACHING. MILLING.
TURNING. OR SCREWDRIVING), INCLUDING D EBS FOR DRAWING OR 
EXTRUDING METAL, AND ROCK DRILLING OR EARTH BORING TOOLS
82.08 8208.00 KNIVES AND CUTTING BLADES. FOR MACHINES OR FOR
MECHANICAL APPLIANCES
82.09 8209.00 PLATES, STICKS. TIPS AND THE LIKE FOR TOOLS, UNMOUNTED,
OF SINTERED METAL CARBIDES OR CERMETS
82.10 8210.00 HAND-OPERATED MECHANICAL APPLIANCE^WEIGHING 10 KG
OR LESS, USED IN THE PREPARATION. CONDthONING OR SERVING 
OF FOOD OR DRINK
82.11 8211.00 KNIVES WITH CUTTING BLADES. SERRATED OR NOT (INCLUDING
PRUNING KNTVES). OTHER THAN KNIVES OF HEADING NO. 82.08. AND 
BLADES THEREFOR
82.12 8212.00 RAZORS AND RAZOR BLADES (INCLUDING RAZOR BLADE
BLANKS IN STRIPS)
82.13 8213.00 SCISSORS. TAILORS’  SHEARS AND SIMILAR SHEARS. AND
BLADES THEREFOR
82.14 8214.00 OTHER ARTICLES OF CUTLERY (FOR EXAMPLE. HAIR CLIPPERS.
BUTCHERS’  OR KITCHEN CLEAVERS. CHOPPERS AND 
MINCING KNIVES. PAPER KNIVES); MANICURE OR PEDICURE SETS 
AND INSTRUMENTS (INCLUDING NAIL FILES)
82.15 8215.00 SPOONS. FORKS. LADLES. SKIMMERS. CAKE-SERVERS. FISH-KNIVES.
BUTTER-KNIVES. SUGAR TONGS AND SIMILAR KITCHEN OR TABLEWARE
20%
25
30
35
40
45
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
(17) in Chapter 83. for heading Nos. 83.01 to 83.15. the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
50 "83.01 8301.00 PADLOCKS AND LOCKS (KEY. COMBINATION OR ELECTRICALLY
OPERATED). OF BASE METAL; CLASPS AND FRAMES WITH CLASPS. 
INCORPORATING LOCKS. OF BASE METAL; KEYS FOR ANY OF THE 
FOREGOING ARTICLES. OF BASE METAL
15%


83.02 8302.00 BASE METAL MOUNTINGS, nTTINGS AND SIMILAR ARTICLES 25%
SUITABLE FOR FURNITURE, DOORS, STAIRCASES, WINDOWS,
BLINDS, COACHWORK, SADDLERY. TRUNKS, CHESTS, CASKETS 
OR THE LIKE; BASE METAL HAT-RACKS,HAT-PEGS, BRACKETS 
AND SIMILAR FDCTURES; CASTORS WITH MOUNTINGS OF BASE 
METAL; AUTOMATIC DOOR CLOSERS OF BASE METAL
83.03 8303.00 ARMOURED OR REINFORCED SAFES, STRONG-BOXES AND 35%
DOORS AND SAFE DEPOSIT LOCKERS FOR STRONG-ROOMS.
CASH OR DEED BOXES AND THE LIKE. OF BASE METAL
83.04 8304.00 FILING CABINETS, CARD-INDEX CABINETS, PAPER TRAYS, 25%
PAPER RESTS, PEN TRAYS, OFHCE-STAMP STANDS AND SIMILAR 
OFHCE OR DESK EQUIPMENT, OF BASE METAL, OTHER THAN 
OFHCE FURNITURE OF HEADING NO. 94.03
83.05 8305.00 Fm iNGS FOR LOOSE-LEAF BINDERS OR FILES, LETTER 15%
CLIPS, LETTER CORNERS, PAPER CLIPS, INDEXING 
TAGS AND SIMILAR OFRCE ARTICLES, OF BASE METAL;
STAPLES IN STRIPS (FOR EXAMPLE, FOR OFHCES,
UPHOLSTERY, PACKAGING), OF BASE METAL
83.06 8306.00 BELLS, GONGS AND THE LIKE, NON-ELECTRIC, OF BASE 20%
METAL; STATUETTES AND OTHER ORNAMENTS, OF BASE 
METAL; PHOTOGRAPH, PICTURE OR SIMILAR FRAMES,
OF BASE METAL; MIRRORS OF BASE METAL
83.07 8307.00 FLEXIBLE TUBING OF BASE METAL, WITH OR WITHOUT HTTINGS 15%
83.08 8308.00 CLASPS, FRAMES WITH CLASPS, BUCKLES, BUCKLE-CLASPS, 15%
HOOKS, EYES. EYELETS AND THE LIKE. OF BASE METAL,
OF A KIND USED FOR CLOTHING, FOOTWEAR, AWNINGS, HANDBAGS,
TRAVEL GOODS OR OTHER MADE UP ARTICLES; TUBULAR OR 
BIFURCATED RIVETS, OF BASE METAL; BEADS AND 
SPANGLES, OF BASE METAL
83.09 STOPPERS, CAPS AND LIDS (INCLUDING CROWN CORKS, SCREW
CAPS AND POURING STOPPERS), CAPSULES FOR
BOTTLES, THREADED BUNGS, BUNG COVERS, SEALS AND 
OTHER PACKING AtCESSORIES, OF BASE METAL
8309.10 - Crown corks with or without washers or other fittings of 5 paise each
cork, rubber, polyethyelene or any other nutterial 
830920 - Pilfer proof caps for packaging, all sorts, with or without washers or 5 paise each
other fittings of coik, rubber, polyethyelene or any other material
8309.90 - Other 15%
83.10 8310.00 SIGN-PLATES, NAME-PLATES, ADDRESS-PLATES AND SIMILAR 15%
PLATES, NUMBERS, LETTERS AND OTHER SYMBOLS, OF 
BASE METAL, EXCLUDING THOSE OF HEADING NO. 94.05
83.11 8311.00 WIRE, RODS, TUBES, PLATES, ELECTRODES AND SIMILAR 20%
PRODUCTS OF BASE METAL OR OF METAL CARBIDES, COATED 
OR CORED WITH FLUX MATERIAL, OF A KIND USED FOR SOLDERING,
BRAZING, WELDING OR DEPOSITION OF METAL OR OF METAL 
CARBIDES; WIRE AND RODS, OF AGGLOMERATED BASE METAL 
POWDER, USED FOR METAL SPRAYING 
83 12 8312.00 ELECTRICAL STAMPINGS AND LAMINATIONS, OF 20%";
BASE METAL, ALL SORTS
_0)__________® ® ________________________________________________(4)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(18) in Chapter 85, for heading Nos. 85.23 and 85.24, the following headings shall be substituted, namely:—
"g5 23 PREPARED UNRECORDED MEDIA FOR SOUND RECORDING OR SIMILAR
RECORDING OF OTHER PHENOMENA, OTHER THAN PRODUCTS 
OF CHAPTER 37
- Magnetic tapes:
- - Audio tapes in the form of jumbo rolls, pancakes, mini- pancakes, hubs 25% plus Rs. 4 per
or reels square metre
- - Audio cassettes 25%
- - Video tapes in the form of jumbo rolls, pancakes, mini-pancakes, 25%
hubs or reels
50
8523.11
8523.12
8523.13
55


81
(1 ) < 2 ) (3) (4)
8523.14 • - Video cassettes 25%
8523.19 -O ther 25%
8523.20 - Magnetic discs 25%
8523.90 - O thC T 25%
5 85.24 RECORDS, TAPES AND OTHER RECORDED MEDIA FOR
SOUND OR OTHER SIMILARLY RECORDED PHENOMENA,
INCLUDING MATRICES AND MASTERS FOR THE
PRODUCTION OF RECORDS, BUT EXCLUDING PRODUCTS
OF CHAPTER 37
1 0 8524.10 - Giamaphonerecrads 30%
- Magnetic tapes:
852421 - - Audio tapes in any fwrn 30%
8524.22 --Audio cassettes 30%
8524.23 - - Video tapes in any form 30%
1 5 8524.24 -  - Video cassettes 30%
8524.29 --Other 30%
8524.30 - Magnetic discs 30%
8524.90 - Other 30%";
m In Chapta 89 ', after heading No. 89.07, the following heading shall be inserted, namely:-
20 "89.08 8908.00 VESSELS AND OTHER FLOATING STRUCTURES FOR Rs. 400 per
BREAKING UP Light Displace­
ment Tonnage".
V }
n ,


THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 83)
PART I
In the First Schedule to the Additicmal Duties of Excise Act,—
(1) sub-heading Nos. 5206.10 and 5206.20 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted;
(2) sub-heading Nos. 5206.31,5206.32, 5206.33, 5206.34, 5206.35 and 5206.36 shall be. renumbwed as sub-heading 
Nos. 5206.11, 5206.12, 5206.13, 5206.14,5206.15 and 5206.16, respectively.
PART n
82
Heading Sub-heading Descr^tion Rate of
No. No. ofKoods additional duty
(1) (2) (3) (4)
In the First Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise Act,—
(1) for heading No. 52.07, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:—
10
’ ’52.07 5207.00 COTTON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED
UNDER HEADING NOS. 52.09,52.10 AND 52.11),—
(e^ WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN 
HANDLOOMS, AND
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING,
MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING, WATER-PROOFING, 
SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR 
ANY OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF 
THESE PROCESSES, WITHOUT THE AID OF POWER 
OR STEAM
(2) for heading No. 52.08, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:—
Fifty per cent of the duty 
leviid>le under sub- heading 
Nos. 5206.11 to 5206.16 and 
5206.91 to 5206.94, as the 
case may be, d^)ending u p c M i 
the average count of the yam 
in the fabric and the value per 
square metre of the fabric";
1 3
20
2 5
"52.08 COTTON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED
UNDER HEADING NOS.52.09,52.10,52.11 AND 52.12), —
(a ) WOVEN ON HANDLOOMS, AND
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, 
MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING, WATER-PROOFING, 
SHRINK-PROOFING. ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR 
ANY OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF 
THESE PROCESSES
5208.10 - Processed without the aid of power or steam Fifty per cent, of the duty 
leviable under sub- heading 
Nos. 5206.11 to 5206.16 and 
5206.91 to 5206.94, as the 
case may be, dq>ending upon 
the average count of the yam 
in the fabric and the value per 
square metre (rf the Obric
3 0
3 5
40


(1 )
83
(2 ) O )
- Processed with the aid of power or steam:
(4 )
520821 - - Processed by an independent processor iq>proved
in this behalf by the Government of India 
on the recommenda tion of the Development 
Commissioner fw Handlooms
Forty per cent, of the duty 
leviable under sub-heading 
Nos. 5206.11 to 5206.16 and 
5206.91 to 5206.94, as the 
case may be, depending upon 
the avoBge count of the yam 
in the fabric and the value per 
square metre of the fabric
10 5206.22 •• Processed by a CKtory owned by a registered
handloom co-operative society or any 
organisation set iq >  or approved by the Government 
for the purpose of development of handlooms
5208J29 --Other
1 5
20
NU
D uQ r leviable undo- 
sub-heading Nos. 5206.11 
to 5206.16 and 5206.91 
to 5206.94, as the case mfiy 
be, depending upon the avenge 
count of the yam in the fabric 
and the value per square metre 
of the fabric".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The objcct of the Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals of the 
Central Government for the financial year 1988-89. The notes on clauses 
explain the various provisims contain^ in the Bill.
NEW DELHI: NARAYAN DATT TIWARI.
The 29th February, 1988.
P r e s id e n t s r e c o m m e n d a t io n u n d e r a r t ic l e s i i7 a n d 
274 OF t h e c o n s t it u t io n OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. F. 3(l)-B(D)/88, dated the 29th February, 1988 from 
Shri Narayan Datt Tiwaii, Minister of Finance, to the Secretary-General, 
Lok Sabha.]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under clause (1 ) of article 117, read with 
clause ( 1 ) of article 274, of the Constitution of India, the introduction of 
the Finance BiU, 1988, to the Lok Sabha.
2. The Bill will be introduced in the Lx)k Sabha immediately aftC T  the 
presentation of the Budget on the 29th February, 1988.
84


Notes on clauses
Clause 2, read with the First Schedule to the Bill, seeks to prescribe the rates at which income-tax (including surcharge thereon) 
is to be levied on income chargeable to tax for the assessment year 1988-89. Further, it lays down the rates at which tax is to be 
deducted at source during the financial year 1988-89 from income subject to such deduction under the Income-tax Act; and the rates 
at which "advance-tax" is to be paid and tax is to be calculated and charged in special cases for the financial year 1988-89.
Rates of income-tax for the assessment year 1988-89:
Part I of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates of income-tax on incomes liable to tax for the assessment year 1988- 
89. These rates are the same as those specified in Part III of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1987, as amended by the 
Finance (Amendment) Act, 1987, for the purposes of deduction of tax at source from "Salaries”  and for computation of "advance- 
tax" payable during the financial year 1987-88.
As provided by the Finance (Amendment) Act, 1987, the amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of 
this Part shall in the case of every person having income exceeding fifty thousand rupees be increased,-
® in the case of every person, being a resident, not being an Indian company, by a surcharge for purposes of the Union, and
(ii) in the case of an Indian company, by a surcharge,
calculated at the rate of 5 per cent of such income-tax.
Rates for deduction of tax at source during the financial year 1988-89from income other than "Salaries’ ’  and any payment referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 194E :
Part II of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rate at which income-tax is to be deducted at source during the financial year 
1988-89 from incomes other than "Salaries" and payments made as interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by 
whatever name called, by a firm to its partner. These rates are the same as those specified in Part II of the First Schedule to the 
Finance Act, 1987, as amended by the Finance (Amendment) Act, 1987, for the purposes of deduction of tax at source during the 
financial year 1987-88.
During the financial year 1988-89, on any income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles and income by way 
of winnings from horse races, accruing to a non-resident or a company (both domestic as well as non-domestic companies), tax 
shall be deducted at source at the rate of 40 per cent, of the amount of income.
This provision is in line with the existing provision for deduction of tax at source on such incomes where the payment is made 
to a person resident in India.
The amount of tax so deducted at source shall be increased-
(0 in the case where the payment is made to a person, other than a company, resident in India, by a surcharge for purposes 
of the Union, and
(ii) in the case of a po-son, being a domestic company, by a surcharge, 
calculated at the rate of 5 per cent of such income-tax.
Rates for deduction of tax at source from ''Salaries”  and interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name 
called, paid by a firm to its partners, computation of "advance-tax" and charging of income-tax in special cases during the financial 
year 1988-89:
Part III of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates at which income-tax is to be deducted at source from "Salaries" and 
any income by way of interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name called, where such income is paid 
by a firm to its partners in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 194E of the Income-tax Act and also the 
rates at which "advance-tax" is to be paid and income-tax is to be calculated or charged in special cases for the financial year 
1988-89.
Rates of income-tax in respect of individuals, Hindu undivided families, certain categories of associations of persons and body of 
individuals specified in Paragraphs A and B are the same as specified in the corresponding Paragraphs of Part III of the Finance 
Act, 1987, as amended by the Finance (Amendment) Aa, 1987.
The Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, has made substantial amendmeiits in the provisions of the Income-tax Act 
relating to the assessment of firms. The taxable income in the case of every finn, as arrived at after allowing deduction in resist 
of any payment of interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name called, to the partners as admissible 
under the Act shall now be taxed at the maximum marginal rate. Also, advance tax shall be paid by the firms during the financial 
year at the maximum marginal rate. Accordingly, no rate of incomc-tax has been prescribed in respect of firms in this Part
85


The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the i»x>visions of this Part shall, in the case of every person being an 
individual, Hindu undivided family, association of persons or body of individuals, being resident in India, cooperative society and 
local authority, having the income during the year on which the tax is deducted at source or on which "advance tax" is payable, 
exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of five per cent of such 
income-tax. In the case of domestic companies, the amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of this Part 
shall, in the case of every domestic company having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge 
calculated at the rate of five per cent, of such income-tax.
Clause 3 seeks to insert a new clause (28B) in section 2 of the Income-tax Act to define the expression "interest on securities" 
since the said separate head of income is proposed to be omitted from the Act
This amendment will take effect & t> m  1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 4 seeks to amend section 10 of the Income-tax Act
Sub-clause (a)(i) proposes to substitute a new sub-clause (ii) for sub-clauses (ii) to (v) of clause (6) relating to exemption of 
remuneration received by diplomatic personnel of foreign missions and their staff. The proposed amendment is by way of 
simplification of the existing provisions containad in sub-clauaes (ii) to (v) of clause (6) by inccnporating them into a single sub­
clause.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Sub-clause (a)(ii) sedcs to amend sub-clauae (viia) of clause (6).
Under the existing provision, the exemption from total income of remuneration upto an amount calculated at the rate of 
Rs.4,000 per month received by a foreign technician in the employment of Government or of a local authority or of any 
corporation set up under any q)ecial law or of any such institution or body established in India for carrying on scientific research as 
is approved for the purposes of this sub-clause by the prescribed authority is given, and if the remuneration exceeds Rs.4,000 per 
month, the tax paid to the Central Government by the employer on such excess is exempt
Under the proposed amendment, the scheme of exemption being given, as mentioned above, to the remuneration received by a 
foreign technician is proposed to be dispensed with and a uniform exemption on the tax paid by the employer to the Government 
is sought to be retained.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to make a consequential amendment in clause (6A) of this section to provide that the Explanation below 
that clause will also be applicable to the new clause (6B) proposed to be inserted by sub-clause (c) of this clause.
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert a new clause (6B) to provide that the amount of tax paid by Government or an Indian concern on 
behalf of a non-resident or a foreign company in respect of its income will not be included in computing the total income of such 
non-resident or foreign company where such income is arising to a non-resident or foreign company in pursuance of an agreement 
entered between the Central Government and the Government of a foreign State or an international OTganisation under the terms of 
that agreemoit or of any related agreement which has been approved by the Central Govemment
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988, and will, accordingly, app\y in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 
and subsequent years.
Sub-clause (d) sedcs to amend clause (15) by inserting a new sub-clause (iic). Under the proposed amendment, interest payable 
to an individual or a Hindu undivided family on such Relief Bonds as may be notified in this behalf by the Central Govemment 
will not be included in computing the total income of such individual or family.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Sub-clauses (e), (f) and (h) sedt to amend clauses (20), ( 23A) and (24) to omit refo-ences to the head "Interest on securities". 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April. 1989.
Sub^lause (g) seeks to amend clause (23D) which exempts the income of such Mutual Fund set up by a public sector bank or a 
pubUc financial institution as the Central Goveniment may specify.
86


The amendments made by items (i) and (ii) of this sub-clause are clarincatory in nature.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April. 1988, and will, accordingly, ^p ly  in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 
and subsequent years.
Sub-clause (i) sedcs to insert a new clause (31). The new clause steks to provide that the amount of any subsidy received by an 
assessee engaged in the business of growing and manufacturing rubber, coffee, cardamom or other specified commodity in India, 
from or through the Rubber Board, Coffee Board, Spices Board or any other Board, in respect of any other commodity under any 
scheme for replantation or replacement of rubber, coffee, cardamom or other plants, or for rejuvenation or consolidation of areas 
used for cultivation of all such commodities will be exempt from income-tax. Under the proviso to the new clause, the aforesaid 
exemption will be available only if the assessee furnishes to the Assessing Officer with his return for the relevant assessment year 
(or within the extended time allowed by the Assessing Officer) a certificate from the concerned Board as to the amount of subsidy 
received by him during the previous year.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 5 seeks to amend section lOA of the Income-tax Act relating to special provision in respect of newly established 
industrial undertakings in free trade zones.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-section (7) of section lOA in view of the amendment made in new sub-section (1) of section 
139 for furnishing the return of income on or before the due date specified therein and the omission of sub-section (2) of that 
section by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (8) of section lOA to remove the difficulties which may arise in implementing the 
provisions of sub-section (5) of that s^tion consequent upon the amendment made in section 139 of the Income-tax Act by the 
Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 6 seeks to insert a new section lOB in the Income-tax Act relating to special provision in respect of income from a 
hundred per cent export-oriented undertaking.
Sub-section (1) of section lOB seeks to provide that any profits and gains derived by an assessee from a hundred per 
cent, export-oriented undertaking to which the section applies will not be included in the total income of the assessee.
Sub-section (2) of section lOB provides that the section will apply to a hundred per cent, export-oriented undertaking which 
fulfils certain conditions, namely, that it manufactures or produces any article or thing during the previous year, it has not been 
formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction of, a business already in existence; and it is not formed by the transfer to a new 
business of machinery or plant previously used for any purpose. For the purpose of the section, reconditioned imported machinery 
or plant will be regarded as new. Further, where the total value of the machinery or plant transferred to the new business does not 
exceed 20 per cent, of the total value of the machinery or plant used in that business, the condition mentioned in clause (ii) of sub­
section (2) of section lOB will be deemed to have been complied with.
Sub-section (3) of section lOB seeks to provide that the benefit of the section will be available to the’assessee in respect of any 
five consecutive assessment years falling within a period of eight years beginning with the initial assessment year in which the 
undertaking begins to manufacture or produce articles or things. The period of five consecutive assessment years will be as 
specified by the assessee at his option subject to the condition that it will not in any case cover ^ y  period after the expiry of the 
said eight year period.
Sub-section (4) of section lOB seeks to provide that, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of the Income- 
tax Act, in computing the total income of the assessee of the prevtous year relevant to the last assessment year immediately 
succeeding the last of the relevant assessment years (or of the previous year relevant to any subsequent assessment year), the 
unabsorbed depreciation allowance, the unabsorbed investment allowance, the unabsorbed development rebate, the unabsorbed 
capital expenditure on family planning relating to the relevant assessment years will not be taken into consideration. Similarly, 
unabsorbed business losses or loss under the head "Capital g2uns" relating to the relevant assessment years will not be taken into 
account Where the assessee was entitled to a deduction in the relevant assessment years in respect of the profits and gains from the 
newly established industrial undertakings in backward areas or small-scale industrial undertakings in rural areas or the tax holiday, 
no deduction will be admissible in the assessment years subsequent to the relevant assessment years. Further, in computing the 
depreciation allowance on any assets in the assessment years following the relevant assessment years, the wntten down value of
87


the assets win be computed as if the assessee had claimed and been allowed the depreciation in accordance with the provisions of 
tl\e Income-tax Act during each one of the relevant assessment years.
Sub-section (5) of section lOB seeks to provide that where a hundred per cent, export-oriented undertaking has begun to 
manufacture or produce articles or things during any previous year relevant to the assessment year prior to the assessment year 
commencing on and from the 1st day of April, 1989, such assessee may, at his option, before the due date of furnishing his return 
of income under sub-section (1) of section 139 for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989, furnish to the 
Assessing Officer, a declaration L n  writing that the provisions of this secticm may be made applicable to him for the relevant 
assessment years other than the assessment years commencing bef(we the assessment year 1989-90; and if he does so, then the 
provisions of complete tax holiday specified in this section will apply for such assessment years and the prbvisions of new sub­
section (4) will also apply in relation to smy assessment year following the relevant assessment years.
Sub-section (6) of section lOB seeks to j^ l y  the provisions of sub-section (8) and sub-section (9) of section 80-1 relating to tax 
holiday, to the hundred per cent export-oriented undertakings.
Explanation to section lOB defines certain expressions for the purposes of that section.
The expression "hundred per cent, export-oriented undertaking" means an undertaking which has been approved as a hundred 
per cent, export-oriented undertaking by the Board appointed in this behalf by the Central GovCTiment in exercise of the pow C T S  
conferred by section 14 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and the rules made under that Act. The 
expression "relevant assessment year" means the five consecutive assessment years specified by the assessee at his option under 
sub-section (3) of section lOB. The expression"manufacture" for this section shall also include any processing, or assembling, or 
recording of programmes on any disc, tape, perforated media or otho’  inform aticM i storage device.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 13A of the Income-tax Act regarding special provision relating to income of political parties so 
as to omit the reference to the head "Interest on securities".
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clauses 8 and 10 seek to omit the head "B. Interest on securities" from section 14 of the Income-tax Act, and the related 
sections 18,19,20 and 21 of the Income-tax Act, respectively, consequent upon the omission of the said head.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 9 seeks to make an amendment in clause (i) of section 16 of the Income-tax Act relating to standard deduction in the case 
of salaried assessees.
Under the existing provisions, a standard deduction is granted to salaried assessees at a rate of thirty per cent, of the salary 
subject to a maximum of Rs.10,000.
Under the pressed amendment, the standard deduction will be allowed at the rate of thirty-three and one-third per cent, of the 
salary subject to an enhanced ceiling of Rs.12,000.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent assessment years.
Clause 11 seeks to amend section 40 of the Income-tax Act relating to the disallowability of an amount as deductible in 
computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession".
Sub-clause (i) seeks to amend clause (a) of section 40 by substituting sub-clause (i) of the clause by a new sub-clause.
Under the existing provisions of sub-clause (i), any interest, not being an intCTest on a loan issued for public subscription before 
the 1st day of April, 1938, payable outside India shall not be allowed as deduction if tax thereon has not been either paid or 
deducted at source and in respect of which there is no person in India who may be treated as an agent under section 163 of the 
Income-tax Act on behalf of the person receiving the amount
The proposed amendment seeks to enlarge the provision and provide that any amount of interest, not being an interest on a loan 
issued for public subscription before the 1st day of April. 1938, royalty, fees for technical services or other sum chargeable under
88


the Act which is payable outside India shall not be allowed as deduction if tax there<H i has not either been paid o t deducted at 
source, ineq)ective of whether an agent on behalf of the non-resident has been i^ in te d  or not.
The proviso to the new sub-clause (i), however, seeks to provide that in r e ^ t  of such amount if tax is paid or in any
subsequent year, the amount wiU be allowed as deduction in the subsequoit year in which die tax is paid or
The expressions "royalty" and "fees for technical services" shall have the same meanings as assigned to them respectively in 
Explanation 2 to clause (vi) and cknise (vii) of sub-section (1) section 9.
Sub-clause (ii) sedcs to omit clause (d) o£ section 40 relating to disallowance in computing the income chargeable under the head 
"Profits and gains of business or profession" of any amount in the case of a banking company, which has been allowed as 
deduction in computing its income chargeable under the head "Intaest on securities", consequent upon the deletion of this head 
from the heads income, referred to in section 14. These amendments will lake effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accwdingly, 
apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 and subsequent years.
Clause 12 sedcs to amend section 43B of the Income-tax Act relating to allowability of cotain sums only on actual payment.
Sub-clause (i) seeks to substitute existing clause (a) by a new clause so as to extend the scope of the section to cover any cess or 
fee, by whatever name called, payable by the assessee under any law for the time being in force.
Sub-clause (iii) seeks to insert a new clause (d) in section 43B of the Act to provide that any sum payable as intoest on any 
loan or borrowing from any public financial institution, in acccvdance with the terms and conditions of tte agreement governing 
such loan or borrowing, shall not be allowed as a deduction in the computation of die profits and gains from business ot profession 
if the same is not actually paid by the assessee before the due date applicable in his case for furnishing the return of income. 
Further, a new Explanation 3 is being inserted by sub-clause (v) to provide that "public financial institution" shall have the 
meaning assigned to it in section 4A of the Companies Act, 19S6. Sub-clauses (ii) and (iv) seek to make certain consequential 
amendments.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, ^ l y  in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 13 seeks to insert a new section 43C in the Income-tax Act for making special provision for the computation of the cost 
of acquisition of certain assets.
Sub-section (1) of the proposed new secticM i provides that whae an asset, which has become the property of an amalgamated 
company under a scheme of amalgamation, is sold after the 29th day of February, 1988, as stock-in-trade, then, in computing the 
income from such transfer, the cost of acquisition of the asset to the amalgamated company shall be the cost of acquisition of the 
asset to the amalgamating company, as increased by the cost, if any, of any improvement m ^  thereto and the expenditure incurred 
wholly and exclusively in connection with such transfer.
Sub-section (2) of the proposed new section provides that when an asset which has been acquired by the assessee on ttansfa^, 
either by way of total or partial partition of a Hindu undivided family or under a gift or will or an irrevocable trust, is sold after the 
29th day of February, 1988, as stock-in-tiade, then, in computing the income from such transfer, the cost of acquisition shall be 
the cost of acquisition in the hands of the transfercH' or the donor, as increased by the cost, if any, of any improvement made and the 
expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in ccmnection with such transfer including the payment of gift-tax, by the transferor or 
the dcmor, as the case may be.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 and 
subsequent years.
Clause 14 sedcs to amend section 44 AB of die Income-tax Act, relating to audit of accounts of c»tain persons.
Under the existing provisions, it is obligatory for a person carrying on business or profession to get his accounts audited before 
the "specified date" by iui accountant, if the sales tumovCT or the professional receipts exceed the prescribed limit The "specified 
date" in relation to the accounts of the previous year means the date of expiry of four months from the end of that year or where 
thwe is more than one previous year, from the end of the previous year which expued last before the commencement of the 
assessment year or the 30th June of such assessment year, whichever date falls later.
Under sub-clause (a), the references to assessment year commencing from 1st April, 1985 and subsequent assessment years are 
proposed to be om itt^ in clauses (a) and (b) of this section so as to changc the reference to any previous year.
89


UndCT the pnqinsed amendment, the "specified date" in relation to the accounts of the previous year will \ ! t -
(a) where die assessee is a company - 31st December of the assessment year,
(b) wheretheassesaeeisapeiBon - 31st October of die assessment year, 
other than a company.
TWs amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, ^iply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subaequent yaars.
Clause 15 seeks to insert a new section 44AC in the Income-tax Act.
The new section provides for determination of the income of an assessee, being a buyer of any goods in the nature of alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption (other than Indian-made foreign liquor) or any forest produce, scrq> or waste, whether industrial or 
n(Hi-industrial, or such other goods as may be notified by the Central Government, in any sale by way of auction, tender or any 
other mode, conducted by the seller as a sum equal to sixty per coit of the amount paid or payable by the buyer. The Central 
Govonment is also proposed to be empowered to exempt certain sales from the operation of this section, having regard to the 
amount involved in such sales, the nature of the goods and other factors. It is also being inovided that ihe section shall not apply 
to a buyer in the furtho* sale of any goods obtained under, or in pursuance of, the said sale.
Tbc Explanation to the section defines the expression "seller" to mean the Central Govmunent, a State Government or any 
local authority or corporation or authority established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or any company.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year ,1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 16 seeks to amend section 44BB of the Income-tax Act, relating to computation of profits and gains in connection with 
the business of exploration, etc., of mineral oils.
Under the existing provisions, the income of an assessee engaged in the business of providing services and facilities in  
cooMCtion with, or supplying plant and machinery on hire used or to be used in. the exploration for and exploitation of mineral 
o9a win be determined at 10 per cent, of the aggregate of certain amounts. The provision applies both to residents as well as non­
residents.
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that the provision shall be and shall be deemed always to have been applicable only 
in respect of non-resident assesaees.
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April. 1983 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment 
year 1983-84 aqd subsequent years. i
Clause 17 seeks to amend section 47 (rf the Income-tax Act, relating to certain transactions which are not treated as transfer for 
the purposes of coital gains.
Under the existing provision profits and gains arising from the transfer of a ci^ital asset shall not be treated as capital gains 
chargeable to income-tax, in cases where the transfo* of the capital asset is made by a holding company to its subsidiary company 
or vice versa, refared to in clauses (iv) and (v). subject to the fulfilment of the conditions laid down.
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that such exemption will not be available in respect of transfers effected after 29th 
February. 1988. as stock-in-trade.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 
and subsequent years.
Clauses 18,19 and 20 seek to amend sections 56, 57 and 58 of the Income-tax Act falling under the head "Income from other 
sources" so as to make provision for taxing of income, at present covered by the head "Interest on securities", under the head-i. 
"Profits and gains of business or profession" or under the head "Income from other sources". '
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
90


Clause 21 seeks to omit clause (b) of section 79 of the income-tax Act relating to carry fwward and set off of losses in the ease 
of certain companies.
Under the existing provision, in the case of a closely held company where a change in the share-holding has taken place in a 
previous year, no loss incurred in any year prior to the previous year shall be carried forward and set off against the income of the 
previous year unless the conditions mentioned in that section are satisfied and the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that the change in 
the share-holding was not effected with a view to avoiding or reducing any tax liability. By the proposed amendment, the 
provision relating to satisfaction of the Income-tax Officer is sought to be omitted.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 22 seeks to amend section 80CC of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction*in respect of investment in certain new 
shares.
The proposed amendment seeks to extend the benefit of deduction to investment in the units of any Mutual Fund specified under 
clause (23D) of section 10 of the Act provided that such Fund subscribes only to eligible issue of capital.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 23 seeks to substitute a new section for section 80CCA of the Income-tax Act. Under the new section it is proposed to 
increase the deduction to hundred per cent, in respect of —
(i) deposits in the National Savings Scheme, and
(ii) amounts paid to effect or to-keep in force any contract for a deferred annuity plan of the Life Insurance Corporation of 
India,
upto a maximum of twenty thousand rupees in the assessment year commencing on 1st April, 1988, and will be increased to thirty 
thousand rupees in the assessment year commencing on 1st April, 1989 and subsequent years.
Thi$ amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 
and subsequent years.
Clause 24 seeks to amend section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of profits retained for export 
business.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of the section by new sub-sections (1) and (1 A ).
Under the existing provisions of sub-section (1), an assessee, being an Indian company or a person (other than a company) who, 
being resident in India, exports out of India during the previous year any goods or merchandise to which the section applies, is 
allowed a deduction of an amount equal to the aggregate of 4% of the net foreign exchange realisation and 50% of the balance 
profit.
The proposed new sub-section (1) seeks to provide that the deduction will be allowed on the whole of the income derived from 
exports of such goods or merchandise by the assessee. The proviso to this sub-section seeks to provide that if the assessee being a 
holder of an Export House Certificate or a Trading House Certificate certifies in the prescribed form that in respect of the amount of 
export turnover specified therein, the deduction under the sub-section is to be allowed to a supporting manufacturer, then the 
amount of deduction available to the Export House or the Trading House shall be reduced by such amount which is calculated 
proportionately.
The new sub-section (lA) provides for deduction in relation to a supporting manufacturer. Under the new sub-section, if an 
assessee being a supporting manufacturer has sold goods or merchandise to any Export House or Trading House, in computing his 
income chargeable to tax, he will be allowed a deduction of the whol^of the income earned on the sale of goods or merchandise to 
the Export House or the Trading House in respect of which a certificate has been issued under the proviso to sub-section (1).
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new sub-section (3A) in the section specifying the basis for computation of the profits derived 
from the sale of goods or merchandise in the case of a supporting manufacturer. The new sub-section provides that in a case where 
the business of the supporting manufacturer consists exclusively of sale of goods or merchandise to one or more Export Houses or 
Trading Houses, the whole of the profit of the business of such manufacturer shall be the profits derived from the sale of goods or 
merchandise in respect of which the deduction is allowed. In a case where the business carried on by the supporting manufacturer 
does not consist exclusively of sale of goods or merchandise to one or more Export Houses or Trading Houses, the amount of 
profit eligible for deduction shall be determined on the proportionate basis.
9 1


Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert a new sub-section (4A) laying down conditions for the admissibility of deduction under sub-section 
(lA) in the case of a supporting manufacturer. The new sub-section provides that the deduction shall not be allowed to a 
supporting manufacturer unless he furnishes in the prescribed form along with the return of income,-
(i) a report of the accountant certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed on the basis of the income of the
supporting manufacturer in respect of his sale of goods or merchandise to the Export House or the Trading House, and
(ii) a certificate from the Export House or the Trading House certifying that in respect of the export turnover mentioned in the
certificate, the Export House or Trading House has not claimed the deduction under the provisions of this section.
Sub-clause (d) seeks to insert two new clauses in the Explanation below this section to define the terms "Export House 
Certificate" or "Trading House Certificate" and "supporting manufacturer". For the purposes of this section, "Export House 
Certificate" or "Trading House Certificate" shall mean a valid Export House Certificate or a Trading House Certificate issued by 
the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports of the Government of India.
"Supporting manufacturer" shall mean a person being an Indian company or a person (other than a company), resident in India 
manufacturing goods or merchandise and selling such goods or merchandise to an Export House or a Trading House, for the 
purpose of export.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, applj in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
^  and subsequent years.
Clause 25 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 80L of the Income-tax Act which provides for deductions in respect of 
interest on certain securities, dividends, etc.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new clause (iiia) so as to allow deduction within the ceiling of Rs.7,000 interest on deposits 
under the Post Office (Monthly Income Account) Rules, 1987.
Sub-clause (b) (i) of this clause seeks to omit the reference to 'a public company formed and registered in India with the main 
object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential 
purposes’  from clause (vii). Sub-clause (b) (ii) makes a consequential amendment to omit the approval being obtained in respect of 
such public company.
Sub-clause (c) of this clause seeks to insert a new clause (x) in this sub-section. Clause (x) deals with interest on deposits with, 
or dividend from, any public company formed and registered in India with the main object of carrying on the business of providing 
long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes and for the time being approved by the 
Central Government for the purposes of clause (viii) of sub-section (1) of section 36.
Sub-clause (d) seeks to substitute the existing two provisos at the end of this sub-section to provide that —
(i) where the gross total income of the assessee includes any income of the nature referred to in clauses (iia), (v), (va) or (x) of 
that sub-section, there shall be allowed in compting the total income of the assessee, a further deduction of an amount 
equal to so much of such income as has not been allowed by way of deduction under the provisions of the said sub-section. 
However, the amount of such further deduction shall not exceed three thousand rupees; and
(ii) where any income of the nature referred to in clauses (iia) and (iv) remains unallowed after the deduction under the 
provisions of sub-section (1), an additional deduction of an amount equal to so much of such income as has remained 
unallowed shall be allowed upto a maximum of three thousand rupees.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 26 seeks to amend section 80-0 of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of royalties, etc., received from 
foreign Governments or foreign enterprises.
Under the existing provisions, where the income of an assessee, being an Indian company includes any sum received as royalty, 
commission, fees or any similar payment from the Government of a foreign State or a foreign enterprise, under an agreement 
approved by the Board in this behalf, a deduction of an amount equal to fifty per cent, of the income so received in convertible 
foreign exchange in India is allowed.
The amendment proposed vide sub-clause (a) (i) seeks to provide that the Chief Commissioner or the Director General will give 
approval to the agreement.
92


This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
The amendment proposed vide sub-clause (a)(ii) seeks to provide that the deduction under this section will be allowed even in 
respect of income which has been received in convertible foreign exchange outside India, or having been converted into convertible 
foreign exchange outside India, is brought into India in accordance with any law for the time being in force for regulating payments 
and dealings in foreign exchange.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 
and subsequent years.
The amendment proposed vide sub-clause (b) seeks to provide that the application for the approval of the agreement shall be 
submitted in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner. However, in respect of agreements already approved by the 
Central Government prior to 1st April, 1972 or by the Board prior to 1st April, 1989, no fresh approval of the Chief 
Commissioner or the Director General is required. Also, every application pending for approval under this section with the Board 
immediately before 1st April, 1989 shall stand transferred to the concerned Chief Commissioner or the Director General for 
disposal.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 27 seeks to amend clause (0 of sub-section (2) of section SO P of the Income-tax Act so as to omit the reference to 
section 18 which is being omitted vide clause 10.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 28 seeks to omit section 86A of the Income-tax Act which provides for a rebate on interest on tax-free Government 
securities as the system of working out: the rebate has been found to be quite cumbersome.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 29 seeks to omit sub-section (2) of section 89 of the Income-tax Act relating to relief when salary or income from 
interest on securities is paid in arrears or in advance in view of the omission of the head "Interest on securities”.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 30 seeks to omit section 112A of the Income-tax Act which relates to tax on interest on National Savings Certificates
(First Issue) as it is no longer in vogue.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 31 seeks to amend section 115B of the Income-tax Act relating to tax on profits and gains of life insurance business.
Under the existing provisions, where the total income of an assessee includes any profits and gains from life insurance business, 
income-tax is calculated on such profit and gains at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent.
The clause seeks to renumber the existing section as sub-section (1) thereof and insert a new sub-section (2). The new sub­
section provides that the assessee shall, in addition to the tax computed under sub-section (1), deposit during the previous year 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989, an amount equal to thirty-three and one-third per cent, 
of income-tax computed under clause (i) of sub-section (1) in such social security fund as may be notified by the Cenu-ai 
Government.
The proviso to new sub-section (2) makes a provision to enable the assessee to deposit during such previous year an amount not 
less than two and one-half per cent, of the profits and gains of life insurance business in such security fund, whereupon the amount 
of income-tax payable by the assessee under the said clause (i) shall be reduced by an amount equal to two and one-half per cent, of 
such profits and gains. In such a case the deposit of thirty-three and one-third per cent, required to be made under sub-section (1) 
shall also be calculated on the income-tax as so reduced.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90.
Clause 32 seeks to amend section 115F of the Income-tax Act.
Under the existing provisions, any amount of capital gains arising to a non-resident Indian from the transfer of a foreign 
exchange asset is exempt from tax, if the amount of the net consideration received on the transfer is invested or deposited in any 
specified asset or savings certificates or, as the case may be, deposited in a Non-resident (External) Account within a period of six 
months from the date of such transfer.
93


The proposed amendment seeks to exclude deposit in a Non-resident (External) Account as a ground for claiming exemption 
from capital gains under section 115F.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 33 seeks to amend section 131 of the Income-tax Act relating to vesting of certain powers of a civil court on various 
income-tax authorities.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-section (lA) to vest such powers also on the Director General, Director, Deputy Director,
Assistant Director and an authorised officer referred to in sub-section (1) of section 132 of the Act.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (3) to provide that an Assistant Director can retain the 
impounded books of account for a period beyond fifteen days withlhe prior approval of the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner 
or Director General or Director, as the case may be.
These amendments will take effect from 1st J&n^l988.
Clause 34 seeks to amend section 132 of the Income-tax Act relating to search and seizure.
Under the existing provisions of sub-section (1) of this section, the authorised officer, who is conducting the search, may seize 
the books of account, documents, money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable articles or things found during the search, if the 
same are unaccounted for. Sub-section (3) empowers the authorised officer to issue a prohibitory order on a person in control of 
such documents, valuable articles etc., directing him not to remove, part with or otherwise deal with them without his permission 
if he finds it not practicable to seize them.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a second proviso to sub-section (1) to empower the authorised officer to take constructive 
possession of any valuable article or thing where it is not possible or practicable to seize it by taking its physical possession due 
to its volume, weight or other physical characteristics or due to its being of a dangerous character, by serving an order on the 
person who is in immediate possession or control thereof, not to remove, part with, or otherwise deal with it without the
permission of the authorised officer. Such action shall be deemed to be seizure of such valuable article or thing.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to make an amendment of a consequential nature in sub-section (3).
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 35 seeks to amend section 139 of the Income-tax Act relating to the return of income.
Under the existing provisions of sub-section (6A) of section 139, in the case of an assessee engaged in any business or 
profession, he is required to furnish along with the return of income certain particulars.
Sub-clause (a) of the clause seeks to amend that sub-section to provide that the assessee engaged in any business or profession 
will also have to file the report of audit obtained under section 44 AB along with his return of income.
Under the Explanation below sub-section (9), a return of income shall be regarded as defective unless the conditions mentioned 
therein are fulfilled.
Sub-clause (b) of the clause seeks to amend the Explanation to indicate that a return of income shall also be regarded as 
defective if the report of the audit of accounts obtained under section 44AB is not furnished with the return of income.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 36 seeks to omit section 181 of the Income-tax Act which relates to interest on tax-free securities of a State Government 
since no State Government has issued any such security for some time now.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 37 seeks to amend section 193 of the Incomc-tax Act.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute the words ’ chargeable under the head "Interest on securities" ’  by the words "by way of interest 
on securities".
Sub-clause (b) seeks to omit clause (ii) of the proviso consequent upon the omission of section 112A of the Income-tax Act, 
vide clause 30.
94


This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 38 seeks to amend section 194C of the Income-tax Act to insert an Explanation which seeks to secure that for the 
purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2) of that section, any sum credited to a "Suspense account" or any other account as credits to the 
account of the payee shall be deemed to be a credit for the purpose of deduction of tax at source.
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 39 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 195 of the Income-tax Act, relating to deduction of tax at source on certain 
payments to non-residents so as to provide that the Income-tax Officer may determine by a general or special order the proportion 
of sum chargeable to tax.
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st March, 1988.
Clause 40 seeks to insert a new sub-heading "BB-Collection at source" and a new section 206C after section 206B of the 
Income-tax Act
The new section provides that every person, being a seller referred to in section 44AC, shall, at the time of debiting of the 
amount payable by the buyer referred to in that section to the account of the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from 
the buyer, collect from him a sum equal to twenty per cent, of such amount as income-tax on income comprised therein.
Sub-section (2) provides that thp power to recover income-tax by collection will be without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovery.
Sub-sections (3) and (4) provide that the income-tax collected by the seller shall be paid within seven days of the amount so 
collected to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs. The tax so paid to the credit of the Central Government 
shall be treated as tax paid on behalf of the person from whom the amount has been collected and credit shall be given for such 
amount in the assessment made under this Act on production of a certificate.
Sub-section (5) provides that the seller shall within ten days from the time of debit or receipt of the sum furnish to the buyer a 
certificate to the effect that tax has been collected.
Sub-section (6) provides that any person responsible for collecting the tax who fails to collect it shall, notwithstanding such 
failure, be liable to pay the tax to the credit of the Central Government.
Sub-section (7) provides that if a seller does not collect, or after collecting fails to pay the tax, he will be required to pay simple
interest at the rate of two per cent, per month or part thereof on the amount of such tax.
Sub-section (8) provides that if the tax collected is not paid to the credit of the Central Government, the amount of tax together
with the amount of simple interest shall be a charge upon all the assets of the seller.
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 41 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 230A of the Income-tax Act relating to the issue of a certificate by the 
Assessing Officer for registration of transfer of immovable property.
Under the existing provisions, such a certificate is required for properties valued at more than rupees fifty thousand. The 
proposed amendment seeks to liberalise the provision and the production of such a certificate will now be required in respect of 
properties valued at more than rupees two lakhs.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 42 seeks to insert a new section 245DD in the Income-tax Act.
Under the new section, the Setdement Commission has been given the power of provisional attachment on the lines of section 
28IB of the Act. The new section also provides that where a provisional attachment under section 28IB is pending immediately 
before the application for settlement, the Settlement Commission may continue the provisional attachment upto the date upto 
which the provisional attachment would be in force under section 28IB and thereafter any order made by the Settlement 
Commission will have the same force as an original order made by it and the provisions of that section will apply accordingly.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
95


Clause 43 sedcs to amend section 246 of the Income-tax Act relating to appeals to be filed before the first appellate authorities.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-clause (iva) of clause (o) of sub-section (1) to provide for an appeal against an order of penalty 
made undo* section 272BB of the Income-tu Act
This amendment is proposed to be made retrospectively from the 1st June, 1987, the date when this section was brought into 
force.
Under sub-clause (b), clause (a) of sub-section (2) of this section is being amended to include an order made under section 104 of 
the Income-tax Act as it stood before the 1st April, 1988 in respect of any assessment for the assessment year commencing on the 
1st April, 1987 or any earlier assessment years.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 44 seeks to amend section 263 of the Income-tax Act relating \o revision by Commissioner of orders prejudicial to 
revenue. It seeks to substitute the existing Explanation by a new Explanation.
Sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of the Explanation clarify that the Commissioner can also revise any assessment order 
passed by the Deputy Commissiono- or any ordC T  passed by the Assistant Commissioner ot the Income-tax Officer on the basis of 
directions issued by the Deputy Commissioner under section 144A of the Act
Clause (b) of the Explanation clarifies that the Commissioner may revise any order passed by the Assessing Officer after 
examining all the material available with the Assessing O ffiC C T , even if such material has been collected after passing of such order, 
provided such an order is erroneous and prejudicial to the revenue.
Clause (c) of the new Explanation clarifies that whwe any order passed by the Assessing Officer has merged with the order of 
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal, the Commissioner can revise that part of the order which has not been 
considered and pronounced upon by the appellate authority.
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 45 seeks to amend section 27IB of the Income-tax Act relating to penalty on failure to get the accounts audited.
Under the existing provisions, if any person fails to get his accounts audited in respect of any year or obtain a report of such 
audit as required under section 44AB, the Income-tax Officer may impose a,penalty equal to one-half per cent, of the total sales, 
turnover or gross receipts in business or profession, in the relevant year, subject to a maximum of Rs.l lakh.
Under the proposed amendment, such penalty will also be levied in the case of failure on the part of the assessee to furnish the 
report of such audit along with the return of income filed under sub-section (1) of section 139, or along with the return of income 
filed in response to a notice undo* clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 142, of the Act.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 46 seeks to insert a new section 276BB in the Income-tax Act.
The new section provides for prosecution of a person who fails to pay to the credit of the Central Government, the tax collected 
by him as required under the provisions of section 206C, and punishment for a term which shall not be less than three months but 
which may extend to seven years and with fine.
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 47 seeks to amend section 279 of the Income-tax Act relating to the powers of the Commissioner for prosecuting any 
perscm for certain offences and for compounding of any such offence.
Under the existing provisions of sub-section (1), the prosecution in respect of the offences mentioned in the sub-section is to be 
launched at the "instance of the Commissioner".
Sub-clause (a) seeks to substiuite a new sub-section (1) for Ae existing Mib-tection so as to -
(i) omit references to section 276AA (omitted by the Finance Act, 1986), sections 276DD and 276E [omitted by the Direct 
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] and section 278A (which is not an offence by itselO:
96


(ii) insert references to section 276 [inserted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] and section 276BB (proposed to 
be inserted by this Bill);
(iii) provide that the prosecution shall be launched with the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner or Director General or 
Commissioner;
(iv) provide that if the prosecution is at the instance of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the appropriate authority referred to in 
section 269UA, the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner will not be 
necessary.
Under the existing provisions of sub-section (2), the Commissioner may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, 
compound any offence, as is specified in sub-section (1) of the section.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute a new sub-section (2) with a view to provide for the compounding—
(i) of all the offences under Chapter XXII instead of only the offences specified in the existing sub-section (1);
(ii) by the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Director General authorised by the Board in this behalf, in a case where the 
prosecution would lie at the instance of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the appropriate authority, and by the Chief 
Commissioner or Director General or Commissioner in any other case.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 48 seeks to omit Chapter XXIIA of the Income-tax Act (containing sections 280A to 280X) relating to Annuity 
Deposits.
The annuity deposit scheme which came into existence from the assessment year 1964-65 has been discontinued with effect from 
1st April, 1969. Under the scheme, the repayment of the deposits with interest was made in ten equal instalments and the last of 
which fell due in 1979. Thereafter, this Chapter ceased to be operative and it is no longer necessar>^ to be retained in the Act
This amendment will xake effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 49 seeks to amend section 28IB of the Income-tax Act relating to provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain 
cases.
Sub-clause (a) specifies that any proceedings under sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act shall be deemed to be 
proceedings pending for the assessment of any income or for the assessment or re-assessment of any income which has escaped 
assessment for the purposes of this section.
Sub-clause (b) specifies that where an application under section 245C is made to the Settlement Commission when a 
provisional attachment under section 28IB is pending, the time taken by the Settlement Commission in making an order under 
sub-section (1) of section 245D would be excluded from the period of operation of the provisional attachment under sub-section (2) 
of this section.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 50 seeks to omit section 285A of the Income-tax Act which requires contractors to furnish information relating to 
contracts exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
With the insertion of section 194C in the Act under which one to two per cent, of the sums paid to contractors are deducted 
towards income-tax, section 285A is no longer necessary.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 51 seeks to amend section 293 of the Income-tax Act.
Under the existing provisions, it has been provided that no suit shall lie in any civil court to set aside or modify any order made 
under the Act. The proposed amendment seeks to clarify that no suit shall lie in any civil court to set aside or modify any 
proceeding taken or order made under the Act
This amendment will lake effect retrospectively from 1st March, 1988.
Clause 52 seeks to amend rule 5 of the First Schedule to the Income-tax Act relating to the computation of profits and gains of 
insurance business other than life insurance business. Under the existing provisions, in computing the profits and gains of any 
business of insurance, other than the life insurance business, certain adjustments including the adjustment of any amount written 
off or reserved in the account to meet depreciation of or loss on the realisation of investment is to be allowed as a deduction and 
any sum taken to the credit of the account on account of appreciation of or gains on the realisation of investment shall be treated as 
a part of the profits and gains subject to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer regarding the reasonableness of the amount 
written off or reserved in the accounts, as the case may be, to meet depreciation of or loss on the realisation of investments.
97


The proposed amendment seeks lo omit clause (b) and the proviso thereunder so as to exempt profits and gains on investments 
made by the General Insurance Corporation of India and the four companies formed under section 16 of the General Insurance 
Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972.
This amendment will take effect on 1st April, 1989, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 and 
subsequent years.
Clause 53 seeks to amend the Eleventh Schedule to the Income-tax Act relating to the list of non-priority articles and things.
Under item 9 of the Eleventh Schedule, cinematograph films and projectors are included among the non-priority items or things 
to which section 32AB and other sections of the Act would not be applicable in certain cases.
The proposed amendment seeks to exclude cinematograph films from the non-priority list of articles or things from the 
Schedule.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1989-90 
and subsequent years.
Clause 54 seeks to make certain amendments of a consequential nature in different provisions of the Income-tax Act.
Clause 55 seeks to amend section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act.
Sub-clause (a)(i) seeks to insert a new clause (xvif) in sub-section (1) so as to provide that the investments made by an 
individual or a Hindu undivided family in such Relief Bonds as may be notified by the Central Government shall be exempt from 
wealth-tax without any monetary limits.
Sub-clause (a)(ii) seeks to substitute clause (xxxa) of sub-section (1) of section 5.
Under clause (xxxa), value of a building which is used solely for the purpose of residence of the assessee's employees working in 
a plantation or an industrial undertaking is exempt from wealth-tax provided each such employee earns annual salary up to 
Rs. 10,000. In order to make the provision more rational, the reference to income limit will be removed and the exemption will 
now be available to one or more dwelling units each having a plinth area of eighty square metres or less.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (lA) of section 5 in order to provide that the exemption available to an assessee on 
his investment in debentures, etc., issued by a public sector company shall be restricted to the exemption limit of Rs. 5 lakhs 
along with other assets mentioned in that sub-section.
The amendments vide sub-clause (a)(ii) and sub-clause (b) will lake effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1989-90 and subsequent assessment years.
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 5 so as to provide that the Relief Bonds referred to in clause (xviO of 
sub-section (1) of that section should also satisfy the conditions relating to ownership from the date on which the said Bonds wore 
subscribed to by the assessee or for a period of at least six months ending with the relevant valuation date, whichever is shorter, as 
are applicable in the case of Capital Investment Bonds.
The amendments vide sub-clause(a)(i) and sub-clause (c) will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1988-89 and subsequent years.
Clause 56 seeks to insert a new section 22DD in the Wealth-tax Act.
Under the new section, the Setdement Commission has been given the power of provisional attachment on the lines of section 
34C of the Act. The new section also provides that where a provisional attachment under section 34C is pending immediately 
before the application for settlement, the Settlement Commission may continue the provisional attachment upto the date upio 
which the provisional attachment would be in force under section 34C and thereafter any order made by the Settlement 
Commission will have the same force as an original order made by it and the provisions of that section will apply accordingly.
This amendment will lake effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 57 seeks to amend section 25 of the Wealth-tax Act relating to the powers of Commissioner to revise orders of sub­
ordinate authorities. It seeks to amend sub-section (2) of this section so as to broadly bring it on the lines of section 263 of the 
Income-tax Act.
This amendment will lake effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 58 seeks to amend section 34AB of the Wealth-tax Act to provide that the Register of Valuers shall be maintained by ihc 
Chief Commissioner or Director General instead of ihe Board as at present.
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
98


Clause 59 seeks to make a consequential amendment in section 34ACC of the Wealth-lax Act so as to provide that the 
intimation as specified in the section will now be sent to the Chief Commissioner or Director General instead of to the Board.
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 60 seeks to amend section 34AD of the Wealth-tax Act which provides for removal from the Register of the names of 
valuers and restoration of names therein.
Sub-clauses (a) and (b) seek to change the reference to the word "Board" by the words "Chief Commissioner" or "Director 
General" in sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section.
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert new sub-sections (3) and (4).
Under the proposed sub-section (3), the Chief Commissioner or Director General is being given the power to review the 
performance of registered valuers once in three years and to remove any person from the Register of Valuers if his performance is 
such that his name should not be retained in the Register of Valuers.
Under the proposed sub-section (4), it is being provided that the Chief Commissioner or Director General may himself conduct 
an inquiry referred to in sub-section (1) or the new sub-section (3) of section 34AD or he may appoint an Inquiry Officer not below 
the rank of a Commissioner for conducting such inquiry. The Chief Commissioner or Director General and the Inquiry Officer so 
appointed shall have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when trying a suit for 
discovery and inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person and issuing commissions.
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 61 seeks to insert a new section 34AE in Chapter VIIB of the Wealth-tax Act. The new section requires all the existing 
registered valuers to make an application to the Chief Commission^' or Director General for fresh registration as valuers and the 
provisions of Chapter VIIB relating to registration of valuers and other matters sM l be tqjplicable to all the applications. It has 
also been provided that all the pending applications on the commencement of this new section shall be deemed to be new 
applications for the purposes of this section.
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 62 seeks to amend section 34C of the Wealth-tax Act relating to provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain 
cases.
Sub-clause (a) specifies that any proceedings under sub-section (5) of section 37A of the Wealth-tax Act shall be deemed to be 
proceedings pending for the assessment of any net wealth or (or the assessment or reassessment of any net wealth which has 
escaped assessment for the purposes of this section.
Sub-clause (b) specifies that where an application under section 22C is made to the Settlement Commission when a provisional 
attachment under section 34C is pending, the time taken by the Settlement Commission for making an order under sub-section (1) 
of section 22D would be excluded from the period of operation of the provisional attachment under sub-section (2) of this section.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 63 seeks to substitute a new section 35-1 of the Wealth-tax Act relating to prosecution of offences under that Act and 
the compounding of such offences (on the lines of the amendment proposed to section 279 of the Income-tax Act) to provide that 
where the prosecution is at the instance of the Commissioner (Appeals), the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner or 
Director General or Commissioner will not be necessary. The new section further provides for the compounding of offences by the 
Board or a Chief Commissioner or Director General as may be authorised by the Board in that behalf in cases where the 
prosecution would lie at the instance of the Commissioner (Appeals) and by the Chief Commissioner or Director General or 
Commissioner in any other case.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 64 seeks to amend section 37 of the Wealth-tax Act relating to vesting of certain powers of a civil court on wealth-tax 
authorities.
I  Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new sub-section (lA) to vest the said powers on the Director General, Director, Deputy Director 
f and Assistant Director on the lines of similar provisions in sub-section (lA) of section 131 of the Income-tax Act.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (3) to provide that an Assistant Director can retain the 
impounded books of account for a period beyond fifteen days with the prior approval of the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner 
j or Director General or Director, as the case may be.
99


These amendments will take effect firom 1st June, 1988.
Clause 65 seeks to amend section 43 of the Wealth-tax Act.
Under the existing provisions, it has been provided that no suit shall lie in any civil court to set aside or modify any order made 
under the Act. The proposed amendment seeks to clarify that no suit shall lie in any civil court to set aside or modify any 
proceeding taken or order made under the Act
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st March, 1988.
Clause 66 seeks to amend Schedule I relating to the rates of wealth-tax.
The proposed amendment s e ^  to provide that in relation to the assessment year commencing on 1st April, 1988, the wealth- 
tax payable undo* Part I of the Schedule shall be increased by a surcharge calculat^ at the rate of ten per cent Gi such wealth-tax.
This amendment will apply in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 only.
Clause 67 sedcs to amend sub-section (1) of section 5 •of the Gift-tax Act by inserting a new clause (iiid).
The new clause seeks to provide that gifts made by an individual or a Hindu undivided family, being the initial subsciber of 
such Relief Bonds as may be notiHed in this behalf by the Central Government, up to a maximum of rupees five lakhs in value in 
the aggregate in one or more previous years, shall be exempt firom  gift-tax.
This amendment will take effect firom  1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 
and subsequent years.
Clause 68 s e ^  to amend section 24 of the Gift-tax Act relating to the powers of Commissiona- to revise orders of subordinate 
authorities. It seeks to substitute the Explanation below sub-section (2) of this section so as to broadly bring it on the lines of 
section 263 of the Income-tax Act.
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 69 seeks to amend section 35 of the Gift-tax Act relating to prosecution for the offences specified in that section and the 
compounding of such offences on the lines of the amendment proposed in section 279 of the Income-tax Act so as to provide that 
if the prosecution is at the instance of the Commissioner (Appeals), the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner or Director 
General or Commissioner will not be necessary. It fiirther provides for the compunding of such offences by the Board or a Director 
General or Chief Commissioner as may be authorised by the Board in that behalf, in cases where the prosecution would lie at the 
instance of the Commissioner (Appeals) and by the Chief Commissioner o t Director Genoal or Commissioner in any other case.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1989.
Clause 70 seeks to amend section 36 of the Gift-tax Act relating to vesting of certain powers of a civil court on various gift-tax 
authorities by inserting a new sub-section (lA) which provides for vesting of the said powers on the Director General, Director, 
Deputy Director and Assistant Director on the lines of similar provisions in sub-section (lA) of section 131 of the Income-tax Act.
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 71 seeks to amend section 42 of the Gift-tax Act.
Under the existing provisions, it has been provided that no suit shall lie in any civil court to set aside or modify any order made 
under the Act. The proposed amendment seeks to clarify that no suit shall lie in any civil court to set aside or modify any 
proceeding taken or order made under the Act
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st March, 1988.
Clause 72 seeks to substitute new authorities in the Expenditure-tax Act, 1987 consequent upon the redesignation of those 
authorities in section 116 of the Income-tax Act.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 73 seeks to amend section 6 of the Expenditure-tax Act
100


Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Act by a new sub-section which seeks to insert new 
authorities and redesignate some of the existing authorities in order to bring the designations, powers and functions of the tax 
authorities under the Expenditure-tax Act in line with the designations, powers and functions of the tax authorities under the 
Income-tax Act
Sab-clause (b) of this clause makes an amendment in sub-section (3) of this section to substitute the references to some of the 
authoi^Jes by their new designations.
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 74 seeks to amend section 13 of the Expenditure-tax Act to give effect to the changed designati(Mis of cotain authorities 
specified therein.
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Clause 75 seeks to amend section 24 of the Expenditure-tax Act relating to application of the provisions of the Income-tax Act 
to the Expenditure-tax Act consequent upon the amendment of certain provisions and deletion of some other provisions of the 
Income-tax Act by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987.
This amendment will take effect frx)m  1st April, 1988.
Clause 76 read with the Second Schedule seeks to amend the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 to-
(a) raise the basic customs duty rates on-
(1) palm nuts and kernels;
(2) compound alcoholic preparations of a kind used for the manufacture of beverages;
(3) inorganic chemicals;
(4) organic chemicals and
(5) miscellaneous chemical products;
(b) restructure the basic customs duty rates in respect of the following goods on specific-cum-ad valorem basis-
(1) certain dried fruits;
(2) self adhesive plates, sheets, etc., of plastics;
(c) introduce a new Chi^to' Note in Chapter 89 so as to provide a definition for "Light Displacement Tonnage".
Clause 77 seeks to levy up to the 31st March, 1989 auxiliary duties of customs on all imported goods at the rate of 50 per cent, 
of their value.
Clause 78 seeks to amend section 27 of the Customs Act, 1962, so as to insot a new sub-section (5) which provides that the 
time limit for refunds under the section shall also apply to a claim for refund made on the ground that the goods were not 
chargeable to the duty of customs collected. The sub-section also provides that no court shall have jurisdiction in respect of such 
claim.
Clause 79 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 115 of the Customs Act, 1962, relating to confiscation of conveyances used 
as a means of transport in the smuggling of any goods or in the carriage of any smuggled goods so as to make it self-containcd.
Clause 80 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 156 of the Customs Act, 1962, as a consequential amendment to section 
115.
Clause 81 read with the Third Schedule sedcs to amend the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 tt>-
(a) raise the basic excise duty on-
(1) package tea;
C 2 ) extracts and essences of coffee and tea;
(3) aerated waters;
(4) antibiotics;
{5) explosives;
(6) photographic and cinematographic films;
(7) A.D.V. tyres;
®  glass fibres;
^  trailers;
(10) Panmasala;
1 01


(b) restructure the excise duty on specific basis on preparations of animal or vagetable fats;
(c) change the tariff description and restructure the duty rates in respect of—
(1) medicament^;;
(2) cotton yam and fabrics;
(3) petroleum products;
(4) plastics;
(5) magnetic tapes, cassettes and records;
( d D  change the Section Notes, Chapter Notes and the tariff descriptions in respect of Chapters 26, 48, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76,
78, 79, 80, 81, 82 and 83, so as to align these Chapters with \ht  First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and
restructure the duty rates in respect of—
(1) ores, slag and ash;
(2) paper and paperboard and articles thereof;
(3) iron and steel;
(4) articles of iron and steel;
(5) copper and articles thereof;
(6) nickel and articles thereof;
(7) aluminium and articles thereof;
(8) lead and articles thereof;
(9) zinc and articles thereof;
(10) tin and articles thereof;
(11) other base metals; cermets; and articles thereof;
(12) tool, implements etc. of base metals;
(13) miscellaneous articles of base metal;
(e) change Chapter Notes in respect of—
(1) Chapter 27, so as to make a minor correction;
(2) Chapter 30, so as to omit Note 6 as a consequence of restructuring the tariff description;
(3) Chapter 52, so as to omit Notes 5 and 6 as a consequence of restructuring of tariff description;
(4) Chapter 70, so as to make a minor correction;
(5) Chapter 89, so as to introduce a new Chapter Note to provide a definition for "Light Displacement Tonnage";
(6) Insert a new sub-heading No. 8908.00 regarding ships for breaking up.
Clause 82 seeks to levy up to 31st March, 1989, special duties of excise on all excisable goods at the rate of 5 per cent, of the 
duty leviable under the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985.
Clause 83 read with the Fourth Schedule seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special 
Importance) Act, 1957, so as to change the tariff description and restructure the duty rates in respect of cotton fabrics.
Clause 84 seeks to make the withdrawal of exemption from additional duties of excise under the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, for certain varieties of sugar, retrospectively applicable from the 10th September, 1986.
Clause 85 seeks to amend section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, so as to align th^ descriptions of certain goods 
mentioned therein with the descriptions in the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985.
Clause 86 seeks to insert a new section 35A in the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972. The new section 
seeks to secure that no deduction of tax will be made at source under section 193 or section 194 of the Income-tax Act in respect of 
any interest or dividend payable to the General Insurance Corporation of India or to any of the companies referred to in the section.
This section will take effect from 1st June, 1988.
Clause 87 seeks to amend section 40 of the Finance Act, 1983, relating to levy of wealth-tax on certain assets held by closely- 
held companies.
Sub-clause (i) of the clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) by inserting a proviso.
Sub-section (1) of section 40 provides that wealth-tax under the Wealth-tax Act, at the rate of two per cent, shall be charged on 
the net wealth of closely held companies.
The proposed proviso seeks to provide that for the assessment year commencing on the 1st April, 1988, the amount of wealth- 
tax computed under sub-section (1) shall be increased by a surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per cent, of such wealth-tax.
102


This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988.
Sub-clause (ii) of the clause seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 40 in relation to the assets on which the wealth-tax is 
levied.
Item (a) of sub-clause (ii) seeks to amend clause (i) of sub-section (3) to provide that where any precious metal or alloy is held 
for use as a raw-material in industrial production, such asset shall not be treated as part of the net wealth for the purposes of levy 
of wealth-tax.
Item (b) seeks to amend clause (v) of sub-section (3) which specifies land other than agricultural land as one of the assets for the 
purposes of levy of wealth-tax. The proposed amendment seeks to provide that in a case where any unused land is held by the 
assessee for industrial purposes, the said land shall not be taken to be part of the asset for purposes of levy of wealth-tax for a 
period of two years from the date of its acquisition.
Item (c) seeks to substitute clause (vi) of sub-section (3) which specifies the building or land appurtenant thereto, other than 
building or part thereof used by the assessee as factory, godown, warehouse, hotel or office for the purposes of its business or as 
residential accommodation for its employees or as a hospital, creche, school, canteen, library, recreational centre, shelter, rest-room 
or lunch room mainly used for the welfare of its employees and the land appurtenant to such building or part, as one of the assets 
for purposes of levy of wealth-tax.
The proposed amendment seeks to exclude the building or part thereof and land appurtenant thereto used by the assessee as 
cinema house also, from the scope of clause (vi).
It further seeks to provide that building or part thereof used for residential accommodation specified in the newly inserted clauses 
(via) and (vib) shall form part of the asset, included in net wealth.
New clauses (via) and (vib) in sub-section (3) specify that any building used as residential accommodation in the nature of guest 
house or any building used as residential accommodation by any director, manager, secretary or any other employee of the 
company, such employee holding not less than one per cent of the equity share of the company or by any relative of any person 
who holds not less than one per cent, of such equity share as assets for the purposes of levy of wealth-tax. The Explanation to 
clause (vib) seeks to provide that for the purposes of the clause the term 'relative' will have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
clause (b) of Explanation 1 of section 80F of the Income-tax Act
Item (d) seeks to insert a new proviso to sub-section (3) so as to provide that where any item referred to in clause (i), (ii), (iii),
(iv), (v) or (vi) is held by the assessee as stock-in-trade in a business carried on by it, or in the case of motor-cars held by it as 
stock-in-trade, or registered as taxies and used as such in the business of running motor-cars on hire carried on by the assessee, such 
asset shall not form part of the net wealth of the assessee for purposes of levy of wealth-tax.
The item also seeks to insert an Explanation to provide that in respect of any gold, silver, platinum or any other precious 
metal or alloy containing one or more of such precious metals, precious or semi-precious stones, ornaments made of gold, silver, 
platinum or any other precious metal, utensils made of gold, silver, platinum or any other precious metal or alloy, the question 
whether such assets are held by the assessee as stock-in-trade of the business carried on by it will be decided in accordance with 
such directions which the Board may by general or special order issue for the ^idance of the Assessing Officers, having regard to 
the ratio which the yearly turnover of business bears to the average stock of such assets held by the assessee.
The proposed amendments by sub-clause (ii) will take effect from 1st April, 1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the 
assessment year 1989-90 and subsequent years.
Clause 88 seeks to make amendments of a consequential nature in sections 36, 37. 38, 92, 128, 153, 154, 155. 158, 162 and 
182 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act. 1987 so as to bring the amendments, other than the omission of clause (xvii) of 
section 2 of the Gift-tax Act, made by those sections into force with effect from 1st April, 1988.
1 03


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clauses (d) and (i) of clause 4, clause 6, clause 15, clause 23, clause 24, clause 
26, clause 39, clause 40, clause 47, clause 55, clause 58, clause 59, clause 60, clause 61, 
clause 63, clause 67, clause 69 and clause 87 of the Bill seek to amend certain provisions of, 
or insert new provisions in, the Income-tax Act, the Wealth-tax Act, the Gift-tax Act and the 
Finance Act, 1983. The said provisions are new sub-clause (iic) of clause (15) of section 10, 
clause (31) of section 10, clause (i) of the Explanation to new section lOB, clause (b) of, 
and the proviso to, sub-section (1) of new section 44AC, clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-section 
(1) of new section 80CCA, clauses (a) and (b) of new sub-section (4A) of section 80HHC, 
the first proviso to section 80-0, sub-section (2) of section 195, sub-sections (3) and (5) of 
new section 206C and sub-section (2) of section 279, of the Income-tax Act; new clause 
(xvif) of sub-section (1) of section 5, sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 34AB, section 
34ACC, section 34AD, section 34AE and sub-section (2) of section 35-1, of the Wealth-tax 
Act; new clause (iiid) of sub-section (1) of section 5 and sub-section (4) of section 35 of the 
Gift-tax Act; and the Explanation to sub-section (3) of section 40 of the Finance Act, 1983.
The said provisions of the Income-tax Act, the Wealth-tax Act, the Gift-tax Act and 
the Finance Act, 1983 empower the Central Government to issue notifications, specify 
schemes or, as the case may be, make rules for the purposes specified in the relevant 
provisions. The matters in respect of which notifications may be issued or the schemes may 
be specified or the rules may be made in accordance with the aforesaid provisions are matters 
of procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.
104


LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1988-89.
(Shri Narayan Dan Tiwari, 
Minister of Finance.)
