The Ftnance Blll, 1978 
(Bill No. 15 of 1978) 
CORRIGENDA 
Page 21, In line 45, for "order of the" read "order of'; 
Page 23, In line 28, for "or being a transfer" read "or a transfer"; 
Page 74. In lines 5 and 4 from bottom, for "amen-ment" 
read uamendment". 

BIU No. 15 of 1978 
THE FINAN(JE BILL, 1D78 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

THE FINANCE BILL, 1978 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAVSES 
CHAPTER I 
PUUMIJI(AaY 
1. Short title uad oommeocem8llt. 
CHAPTER II 
RATES OF IIfCOMIio-TAX 
2. Income-tax 
CHAPTER m 
DraCT TAlU 
Incollle-teu 
3. AmeDdment of section 6. 
4. Amendment of section 23. 
5. Amendment of section 32. 
6. Amendment of 8ection 35B. 
7. Insertion of new aectlon 35CCA. 
8. AmeDdment of 8ection 37. 
9. AmeDdment of section 52. 
10. Amendment of section 54. 
11. Amendment of section MB. 
12. Amendment of section MD. 
13. Amendment of section 54E. 
14. AmeDdment of section 72A. 
15. Amendm8Dt of section 80A. 
18. Amendment of 8ectlon 80C. 
17. Insertion of new 8ectlon 80CC. 
18. Amendment of section 80P. 
18. AmeDdment of 88Otlon 155. 
20. Am8Ddmeat of 88CtJon '193. 
21. lD8erUon of new 8ectJon 194BB. 
(1) 

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
22. Amendment of section 208. 
23. Ameadmeat of section 209-
24. Insertion of new section 209A. 
25. Amendment of section 211. 
26. Amendment of section 212. 
27. Amendment of section 215. 
28. Amendmeat of section 216. 
29. Amendmeat of section 217. 
30. Substitution of new section for section 218. 
31. AmeDdment of section 273. 
32. Consequentlal amendments to oertaJn sections. 
33. Amendment of Act 45 of 19'14. 
CHAPTER IV 
INOIUCT TAlIS 
34. Amendment of Act 51 of 1975. 
35. Auxiliary dutle8 of onstams. 
36. Amendment of Act 1 of 1944. 
37. Special duties d. exol8e. 
38. DlaoontLnuanoe of salt duty. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLAlUOVS 
39. Amendment of Act 6 of 1898. 
40. Amendment of Act 38 of 19'14. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

5 
10 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON 28TH FEBRUARY, 1978. 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1978 
BILL 
to Bive effect to the fiftlll'lCitd propostds of the Centrtd GOllemJlltnt 
for the fbumeitd yefll'1978'79. 
BE It 8D8Cted by Parl1ameDt In the Tw8llty-nm1h Year 
of the Republic of IDd1a as follow.:-
CHAPTER I 
PIlELIMINAJlY 
I. (1) This Act may be called the Ftnanoe Act, 1978. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided In thls Act, s8Ctiou 
Bill No. IS of 1978. 
2 to 33 and section 40 shall be deemed. to have come Into force 
on the 1st day of Aprn, 1918. 
CHAPTER D 
RATES OFINCOM~TAX 
z. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-aeotlou (2) aDd (3), 
for the assessment year commenciog on the 1st day of Aprn, 
1978, Inoome-tu shall be charged at the rates specified In 
Part I of the Schedule aad shall be moreased,-
15 (ca) In the C8888 to which Paragraphs A, B, C aDd D of 
that Part apply, by 8 surcharp for purposes of the UnJon; aDd 
(b) In the case8 to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, 
by a surcharge, 
calculated In each oase In the m8lll1er provBied therein. 

2 
(2) In the cases to wJrlch Sub-Paragraph lor &lb-
Paragraph II of Paragraph A of Part ! of the Schedule applieS, 
where the assessee bas, in the previous year, any net 
agrloultural income, In addition to totallDoome, and the 
total Income exceeds ten thousand rupees, then, - 6 
(4) the net agricultural Income shall be taken into 
account, In the manner provided In clause (b) (that is to say, 
aa If the net agricultural Income were comprised 1D the 
total Income after the first eight thousand rupees of the 
total income but wlthout belDg liable to tax), only for the 10 
purpose of charging1Dcome-tax 1D respect of the total 
income; and 
(b) the income-tax chargeable shall be calculated as 
follows:-
(i) the total lDcome and the net agricultural income 16 
shall be aggregated and the amount of inoome-tax shall 
be determined in respect of the aggregate Income at the 
rates spec If ted In Sub-Paragraph lor, as the cue may 
be, Sub-Paragraph II of the said Paragraph A, as if 
such aggrepte bloome were the total inoome: 20 
Provided that for the purposes of determlniDg the 
amount of Income-tax In acoordance wlth thts sub-clause, 
the provisioll8 of clause (ii) of the proviso below &lb-
Paragraph lor, aa the case may be, &lb-Paragraph II 
of the said Paragraph A aDd the provisions relatlag to 25 
surcharge on income-tax in the said. &lb-Paragraphs 
shall DOt apply; 
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be Increased 
by a sum of eight thousand rupees and the amount of 
income-tax shall be determined 1D respect of the net 30 
agricultural Income as 80 inoreased at the rates specified 
tn Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, &lb-
Paragraph II of the said Paragraph A, as If the net 
agrioulturallncome as so increased were the totaltnoome: 
Provided that for the purposes of determlnUtg the 35 
amount of income-tax In accordance with this sub-clause, 
the proviaioll8 of clause (i) and clause (ii) of the proviso 
below Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, Sub-
Paragraph II of the said. Paragraph A and the provisions 
relatJDg to surcharge on Income-tax tn the said Sub- 40 
Paragraphs shall not apply; 

5 
10 
3 
(iii) the amoun, of IDoome-tax determined In 
acoordaDce with sub-clauae (t) .ball be reduced by the 
amouut of income-tax determined In acoordance with 
aub-olause (ii): 
Provtded that where the sum 80 arrived at exceeds 
seventy per oent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds teD thou88Dd rupees, the exoe8S shall 
bed18regarded; 
(itl) the amount of iDoome-tax determined .In 
acoordaDce with aub-olauae (iii) aha11 be iDoreased by 
a surcharge for PJ,rpo8e8 of the UlliDn calmlJated at the 
rate of fJfteell per cent. of auch income-tu aDd the sum 
80 arrived at shall be thelDoome-tax In respect of the 
totallnoome. 
15 (3) III C8888 to whleb the pl'Ov18lons of Chapter XU or 
43 of 1961. HCtIon 184 of the IDoome-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referrild 
to 88 the lIloome-tax Act) apply, the tu chargeable shall be 
determined 88 provided In that Chapter or that section. ~ 
with reference to the rate8 imposed by sub-section (1) or the 
20 rates 88 specified in that Chapter or section, 88 the cue 
may be. 
(4) III C88es in which tax has to be'deduoted UDder 
MOtions 193, 194, 194A, 1~, 194BB, 194» aDd 196 of the 
Inoome-tax Act at the rates in force, the deduction shall be 
25 made at the rates 8pecifled in Part U of the Schedule. 
(5) &lbject to the prov181oDs of BUb-section (6), In cues 
In which Inoome-tax h88 to be calculated UDder the fir8t provtao 
to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Inooble-tax Act or 
oharged UDder sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of 
30 section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 
of the said Act or deducted UDder section 192 of the said Act 
from IDoome chargeable UDder the head ''Salaries'' or deducted 
UDder sub-seotJon (9) of section 80B of the said Act from aa,y 
payment referred to In the said 8U.b-seoUon (9) or In which the 
35 lIadvllDOe tax" payable uDder Chapter XVU-C of the said Act 
has to be oomputed, at the rate or rate. in force, such IDoome-
tax or, 88 the C88e may be, "advaDce tax" shall be 80 caloula-
ted. charged, deducted or computed at til;"; rate or rates 
specified in ll~rt m of the Sobedule: 
40 ProvJded that In C88es to which the pl'OV iBions of 
Chapter XU or section 164 of the IDcome-tax Act apply, 
"advaace tu" shall be oomPJ,ted with refereuce to the rates 
impolled by tb18 sub-section or the rates as specified in that 
Chapter or section, 88 the cue may be. 

4 
(6) In the cases to whlch S~Paragraph I or Sub-Paragraph 
n of Paragraph A of Part ill of the Schedule applies. where 
the assessee has. in the previous year or. If by virtue of any 
provision of the Income-tax Act, iDcome-tax is to be charged 
m respect of the mcome of a period other than the previous 5 
year. in such other period. any net agrlcultural income, in 
addition to total income. and the total income exceeds ten 
thousand rupees, . then, in calculating income-tax UDder the 
first proviso to sub-section (5) of secUon 132 of the Income-
tax Act or m charglDg income-tax under sub-section (2) of 10 
section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 of 
the said Act or in computing the "advance tax" payable under 
Chapter XVU-C of the said Act,at the rate or rates in force,-
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken Into 
account, in the manner provided in clause (b) (that is to 15 
say, as If the net agricultural fDcome were comprised 
in the total Income after the first eight thousand rupees 
of the total inoome but without being liable flo tax). only 
for the purpose of calculattDg, cbarg1Dg or comp.utfDg such 
income-tax or. as the case may be. "advance tax" in 20 
respect of the total iDcome; &lid 
(b) such income-tu or, as the case may be, "advance 
tax" shall be 80 calculated. charged or comp.lted as follows:-
(il the totallncome 8nd the net agrJcultural mcome 
Bha1l be aggregated aDd the amount of tnoome-tax or 25 
"advance tax" shall be determined in respect of the 
saregate income at the rates specified in Bub-Paragraph I 
or. as the case may be. &lb-Paragraph n of the said 
Paragraph A. as if such aggregate income were the total 
income: 30 
Provided that for the p.lrpoaes of determining the 
amount of income-tax or "advance tax" in accordance 
with this sub-clause, the provisions of clause (ii) of 
the proviso below Sub- Paragraph I or. as the case may 
be, Sub-Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A and the 35 
proviSions re1atlDg to surcharge on income-tax in the 
said 8ub-Paragrapha ahall not apply; 
(ii) the net agrlculturallnoome shall be increased 
by a sum of eight tbousaDd nlpees and the amount of 
IDcome-tax or "advance tax" shall be determined in 40 
respect of the net agricu1tural income as 80 mcreased 
at the rates. specified III lab-Paragraph I or, as the 
case may be, Sub-Paragraph D of the said Paragraph A, 
u if the Det apicultura! fDcome U 80 IDcreued 
were the toW IDoome: 46 

5 
Provided that for the purposes at. determining the 
amount of income-tax or "advance tax" In accordance 
with this sub-clause. the provisions of clause (t) 
aDd clause (ii) of the proviso below Sub-Paragraph I 
5 or. as the case may be. Bub-Paragrapb n of the said 
Paragraph A and the provisions relating to surcharge 
on inoome-tax in the said Sub-Paragraphs shall not 
apply; 
(iii) the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" 
10 determined In accordance with sub-clause (i) shall be 
reducEtd by the amOllllt of Income-tax or. as the case 
may be. "advance ux" determined In accordance with 
sub-clause (ii) : 
ProvJded that where the sum so arrived at exceeds 
15 seventy per cent. of the amount by which the total . 
income exceeds ten thousSDd rupees. the excess shall 
be disregarded; 
(iv) the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" 
determined in accordance with sub-clause (iii) shall 
20 be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such inoome-
tax or. as the case may be. "advance tax" and the sum 
80 arrived at shall be the income-tax or. as the case 
may be. "advance tax" in respect of the total income. 
25 (7) For the purposes of this section and the SchecUle.-
(a) "company in which the public are substanttally 
interested" means a company which is such a company as Is 
1"8ferred to In section 108 of the Inoome-tax Act; 
(b) "domestic company" means an IDd1an oompany. or any 
30 other company which. In respect of its income liable to 
Income-tax UDder tile IDcome-tu Act for the .. eessment 
year commencJDg on the 1st day of April, 1978, baa made 
the prescribed arraaaements for the declaration and payment 
within India of the dlvtdeads (including dlvldeDda on 
35 prefereace aharea) payable out of such income In accordance 
with the provisions of section 194 of that Act; 
(e) "1ndu8trIal company" means a company which Is 
mainly eagapd in the business of generation or 
distribution of electricity or any other form of power or 
In the construction of ships or in the manufacture or 
processing of goods or in m1DJng. 

6 
EIplaJl4tion • - For the purpolJes of this clau8e, a 
company shall be deemed to be mainly engaged in the 
bU8iness of generation or distribution of electricity 
or any 9ther form of power or in the construction of 
ships or in the manufacture or proc8sslDg of goods or 6 
in mining, if the income attributable to anyone or more 
of the aforesaid activities Included in its total Income of 
the previous year (as oompgted before maldDg any 
deduotion under Chapter VIA of the Income-tax Act) Is 
not less than flfty-one per cent. of suoh total income; 10 
(d) "insurance oonvnisslon" means any remuneration 
or reward, whether by way of commission or otherwise, 
for 80UCJtlDg or proourlDg insurance business (iDoludlDg 
business relating to the coDtmuBDCe, renewal or revival 
of policies of tnsuranoe); 16 
(t) "net qrlcultural1noome", in relation to a 
person, means the total amount of agricultural Income, 
from whatever source derived, of that person compgted 
In accordance wJth the rules coDtaiDed in Part IV of the 
Sc~e; 20 
(f) "tax-free security" means IlDy security of the 
Central Government issued or declared to be iDcome-tax 
free, or any security ot a State Governmeat Jasued 
Income-tax free, the income-tax whereon Ja payable by the 
State Government; 25 
(8) all other words &lid apreastou used in this 
aeotion or In the Sohedul;e bat not defined In this sub-
aeotJon aDd. defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the 
meaniDp, respect1vely, ass1ped to them In that Act. 
CHAPTER m 
DIUCT TAUS 
InCDm~w 
L In section 6 of the lDoome-tax Act, in clause (1), the 
following EIplanatjOK ahall be inserted at the end with effeot 
from the 1st day of April, 1979, namely:-
'EIplanaUon • - In the case of an IDdlvJdual, being a 
cWzen of India, who is renderlDg service outside India and 
wIlD 18 or bas been in India on leave or vacatiDD in the 
previous year, the Provlalons of sub-clauses (b) and (c) 
80 
.hall apply in relation to that year as If for the words 40 

5 
10 
15 
20 
26 
30 
36 
40 
7 
"thirty days" and "sixty days". respectively occurring In the 
said sub-clauses. the words "ninety days" had been 
substituted: 
Provided that such service outside lDdia has been 
sponsored by the Central Government or the terms and 
conditions of such service have bean approved by the 
Central Government or the presoribed authority.'. 
•• In section 23 of the Income-tax Act, in the second 
proviso to sub-section (1), with effect from the 1st day of 
Aprll, 1979, -
(a) In olause (b). for the words, fliores and letters 
"completed after ihe 318t day of March, 1970", the wordst 
figures aDd letters "completed after the 31st day of March, 
1970 but before the 1st day of Aprn, 1978" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words, braokets uu:lletters "so, however, that 
the income in respect of any residential unit referred to in 
clause (a) or clause (b) is In DO case a loss. ", the following 
shall be substituted. namely:-
~'(c) in the case of a bundlng oomprisingone or more 
resJdeDtial units, the erection of which is completed 
after the 31st day of March, 1978, for a period of five 
years from the date of completion of the buadlng, be 
t'educed by a sum equal to the aggregate of -
(i) in respect of any residential unit whose BDDUal 
value as 80 determlDed does not exceed two thousand 
four bundred rupees, the amount of such amwal value; 
(ti) in respect of any resldeDtial unit whose annual 
value as so determined exceeds two thousand four 
bundred rupees. an amount of two tbouaand four bmdred 
rupees, 
80, however. that the Income in respect of any residential 
unit referred to In olause (A) or clause (b) or olause (e) is 
in DO case a 108s. ". 
I. In section 32 of the IDoome-tax Act, In IAlb-seotlon (1), 
In olause (iv), for the words "twenty per cent. ", the words 
"forty per oent." shall be substituted with effect from the 1st 
day of Aprn. 1979. 
•• In section 36B of the Inoome-tax Act, in sub-section (1), 
in clause (a). -
(a) after the words. figures aDd letters "after the 
Amendment of 
section 23-
Allead .... llt of 
.action 32. 
Amendmeat of 
aectioa 35B. 

8 
29th day of February, 1868", the .:orda, ftaures &lid letten 
''but before the 1st dq of April, 1978" shall be lDserted; 
(b) In the proviso, after the words, figures aDd letter8 
"after the 28th c:IaJ of February, 1973", the words, figures 
aDd letter8 ''but before the 1st c:IaJ of AprB, 1978" 8ball be 5 
Inserted. 
IaMrtioft of Dew 1. In the 1Dc0me-tax Act, after sectiOD 3SCC, the following 
aectloe 35CCA. 8ectlon shall be lDserted with effect from the 1st day of June. 
1978, namely:-
Dpeadiblle by 
".,ofp.,....t 
to uaoclati .. a 
IIDcI lPtltlltloaa 
for CIIIIJUl& oat 
raal dev.lop-
meat .. p._. 
AM.d ••• of 
aectl.37. 
'35CCA. (1) Where an assessee lDcurs any expeudlture by 
way of PI.fDleat of aDY sum, to an association or lDBtltutlon 
to which this SectiOD applles. to be used for carrying out any 
programme of rural development approved by the pre8crlbed 
authority, the asse8Bee 8hall be allowed a deduction of the 
amount 01. such expeDdlture iDcurred during the previous year. 
(2) This sectiOD applies to any associatlon or lDstitutlOD-
(a) which baa as its abject the uDdertakIDg of any pro-
gramme of nlral developmeDt; and 
(b) which ls for the time belDg approved 10 this behalf 
10 
15 
by the prescribed authority: 20 
Provided that the pre8cribed authority shall DOt grant 
8uch approval for more thaD three years at a time. 
EzplflllCltiOli. - For the purpose. of thls sectloD, ''pro-
gramme 01 rural development" shall have the meanlng 
asslped to It lD the E.tpl4lllaUon to sub-8ectlon (1) of sectlOD 25 
36CC. 
(3) Where a de&lctlon UDder this SectlOD ls claimed aDd 
allowed for any as8es8ment year lD respect 01. any exp8Ddlture 
referred to 10 sub- sectloD ( 1), deduction shall DOt be allowed 
ID· respect of such expenditure uDder sectlon 36C or sectioD 3&CC 30 
or sectlaD lOG or any other provls Ion of this Act for the same 
or any other as.essment year. '. 
L In I8OtlOD 37 of the Income-tax Act. 
after nb-sectlOll (3), the followlDl nb-aecUClIUI 

6 
10 
16 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
9 
sball be lDBerted wl til effect from the 1st day of 
April. 1979, lUUDely:-
'(JA) Notwtth8taDdlDg anything oontained In sub-section 
(1) but without prejudice to the provlslons of 8ub-sectlon 
(3) where the 81gregate expenditure lDcurred by aD 
as8essee on advertisement, publlolty aDd8ale8 promotion 
In India exoeeds tweDty thou.aDd rupees, 80 muoh of suoh 
aggregate expenditure as is equal to aD amount oaloulated 
as provided hereunder shall not be allowed as a deduotlon, 
namelys-
(t) where such aarep.te up8n-
dlture does not exceed i per cent. 
of the turnover or, as the case 
may be. grOS8 recelpt8 of the 
bU8lness or profe8slon 
(if) where such aggregate expen-
diture exceeds i per cent. but 
doel not exceed I per cent. of the 
turnover or, as the case may be. 
gross recelpt8 of the busines8 
or profe881on 
Oil) where such aggregate 
expenditure exceeds I per cent. 
of the turnover or. as the case 
may be, gross receipts of the 
business or profession 
10 per cent. 
of the adjusted 
expenditure; 
121 per cent. of 
the adju8ted 
expenditure, 
15 per oent. 
of the adjusted 
expenditure. 
£%I'IIIIAt'OII. - For the purpo8es of this sub-sectlon.-
(a) "adjusted expenditure" means the aggregate 
expeDdlture 'lDcurred by the assessee on advertlsement, 
publloity aDd sales promotion in India as reclloed by so 
much of such expenditure as is not allowed under sub-
8ection (1) and as further reduced by so much of such 
expenditure a8 Is not allowed under 8Ub-Section (Jh 
(b) ''turnover'' aDd "gross receipts" mean turnover 
or gross receipts. as the case may be, as reduced 
by any discount or rebate allowed by the assessee. 
(3D) In a case where aD asses8ee has set up aD 
lndustrlal undertaking for the manufacture or produotlon 
of any articles, nothing in sub-section (3A) lhallapply 
in respect at any expenditure on advenllement, publicity 
or sales promotion Incurred by the asSe8see, lor the 

Amendment of 
section 52. 
Amendment of 
SectiClll 54. 
10 
purposes of the business of sucb' undertaking, in the previous 
year in which such undertaking begins to manufacture or 
produce such articles and each of the two previous years 
Immediat'=!ly succeeding that previous year. '. 
t. In section 52 of the Income-tax: Act, in sub-sectlon(2) , 
in clause (b) of the proviso, the words "and the adequacy of the 
full value of the conSideration so determined or approved is 
not questioned by the assessee" shall be omitted and shall be 
dtJemed always to have been omitted. 
111. Section 54 of the Income-tax Act shall be renumbered and 
shall be deemed to have been renumbered with effect from the 
1st day of AprU, 1974, as sub-section (1) thereof and,-
(a) In sub-section (1) as so renumbered,-
(i ) after the words ''for the purposes of his own or 
5 
10 
the parent's own residence", the brackets and words 15 
"(hereafter in this section referred to a8 the origlnal 
&sset)" shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have 
been Inserted with effect from the 1st day of AprU, 1974; 
(ii ~ In clause (i), for the words "18 greater than 
the cost of the new asset", the words and brackets "Is 20 
greater than the cost of the house property so purchased 
or constructed (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
new asset)" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to 
have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of 
AprU, 1974; 25 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the followiDg 
sub- section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been 
inserted with effect from the 1st day of AprU, 1974, namely:-
'(2) Where the transfer of the ortginal asset 18 by way 
of compulsory acqulsitioo under any law and the compensa- 30 
tion awarded for such acquisition is enhanced by any court, 
tribunal or other authority, then, 
(a) so much of the capital gain, computed under 
section 48 by taking the compensation as 80 enhanced 
as the full value of the consideration received or 35 
accruing as a result of such transfer, as is not excluded 
under sub- section (1) from being oharged to tax under 
section 45, or 
(b) the capital gain attributable to the enhancement 
of the compensation, 40 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
11 
whichever 18 les8 (that wbic'h Is lesl belDg hereafter lD this 
sub-section referred to as the unadJulted capital gatn), shall, 
if the aS8essee has within a period of one year before or after 
the date of receipt of the additional compensation purchased, 
or has within a period of two years after that date constructed, 
a house property for the purposes of his own residence (hereafter 
In this sub-section referred to as the relevant asset), be dealt 
with in the following manner, that is to say, -
(i) if the amount of the unadjusted CaPital gain is 
gr_ter than the cost of the relevant asset, the difference 
between the amount of the unadjusted capital gain and 
'the cost of the relevant asset lhall be charged under 
section 45 as the income of the previOUS year in which 
the transfer took place; and for the purpose of comput-
ing in respect of the relevant alset any capital gain 
arising from its transfer within a period of three 
years of its purchase or construction, as the case may 
be, the cost shall be nil; or 
(ii) if the amount of the unadjulted capital gain is 
equal to or less than the cost of the relevant asset I 
the unadjusted capital ga1D shall not be charged under 
section 45; and for the purpose of oomputlng In respect 
of the relevant asaetany capital gain arising from its 
transfer wltblD a period of three years of its purchase 
or construction, as the case may be, the OOlt lhall be 
reduced by the amount of the unadjusted capital gain. 
EJplGllGtiott. - For the'purposes of this sub-section, 
sub-section (2) of section 54B aDd sub-section (2) of 
section 640,-
30 (1) "additional compensation", in relation to the 
transfer of any capital asset by way of compulsory 
acquisition under any la\\lmeana the difference between 
the compensation for the acquisition of such asset as 
enhanced by any court, .tribunal or other authority and the 
36 compensation which would have been payable If such 
enhancement had not been made. 
(2) the capital gain attributable to the enhancement 
by any court, tribunal or other authority of the compen-
sation for the compulsory acquisition of any capital 
4{) asset shall be -
(a) where the computation of the capltal galn under section 
48 by taking the compensatlon which would have been payable 
If such enhancement had not been made as the full value of the 
consideration received or accrul~ as a result of the transfer 
results in a loss or does not result In any proflts or gains charge-

, 
• 
12 
able to iDcClme-tax UDder the head "Capltal galDs", the 
capital gain computed under section 48 by taking the 
compensation as so enhaDced as the full value of the 
consideratlon received or acorulng as a result of the 
trlDSfer; and 5 
(b) lD any other oa88, the difference between-
(i) the capital gain computed UDder section 48 by 
taking the oompensation as so enhanced as the full 
value of the consideration so received or accruing, 
and 10 
(ii) the capital °galD oomputed under aeotion 48 by 
taking the compensation which would have been pay-
able if such enhancement had DOt been made as the 
full value of the consideration eoo-recelved or accruing. '. 
11. Section 54B of the I:ncome- tax Act shall be renumbered 
and shall be deemed to have been renumbered with effect from 
the 1st day of AprU, 1974, as sub-section (1) thereof and.-
(ca) in sub-section (1) as so renumbered. after the words 
''used by the assessee or a parent of his for agricultural 
15 
purposes". the braokets and worde "(heretnafter referred 20 
to as the original asset)" shall be inserted aDd shall be deemed 
to have been lnserted with effect from the 1st day of AprU, 
1974; 
(b) after 8ub-section (1) as so renumbered. the follow\.Dg 
sub- section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have 25 
been inserted with effect from the 1st day of AprU, 1974, 
namely:-
"( 2) Where the transfer of the original asset is by way 
of compulsory acquisition lDlder any law and the compen-
sation awarded for such acquisition is enhanced by any 30 
court, trlblDlal or other authority, then, 
(a) so much of the capital gain, computed under 
sectiQn 48 by taking the compensation as so enhanced 
as the full value of the consideration received or 
accruing as a result of such transfer, as is DOt excluded 35 
under sub- section (1) from being charged to tax under 
section 45, or 
(b) the capital gain attributable to the enhancement 
of the compensation, 
whichever Is less (that wblch Is les8 being 40 
hereinafter referred to 88 the unadjusted capital gain), shall 

13 
tf the &IIsessee has within a period of two years after the 
date of receipt of the additional compensation purchased any 
land for belDg used for agricultural purposes (hereinafter 
referred to as the relevant asset), be dealt with In the following 
6 manner, that is to SIlY, -
(I) tf the amount of the unadjusted capital gain is 
greater than the cost of the relevant asset, the difference 
between the amount of the unadjusted capital gain and the 
cost of the relevant asset shall be charged under section 45 
10 as the Income of the prevlous year In which the transfer 
took place; and for the purpose of computing in respect 
of the' relevant asset any capital gain' arising from its 
transfer within a period of three years of its purchase, 
the cost shall be Kil; or 
15 iii) If the amount of the unadjusted capital gain is equal 
to or less than the cost of the relevant asset, the UD-
adjusted capital gain shall not be charged under section 
45; and for the purpose of computing In respect of the 
relevant a88et any capital gain arising from Its 
20 transfer within a period of three years of Its purchase, 
the cost shall be reduced by the amount of the un-
adJusted capital galn. tI. 
IZ. Sectlon 54D of the Income-tax Act shall be renumbered 
and shall be deemed to have been renumbered with effect from 
25 the 1st day of April, 1974, as sub-sectlon (1) thereof and,-
(a) In sub- section (1) as so renumbered, after the words 
''for the purposes of the business of the sald undertaking", 
the brackets and words "(hereafter In this section referred 
to as the original asset)" shall be inserted and shall be 
30 deemed to have been inserted with eft'ect from the 1st day 
of Aprll, 1974; 
(b) after sub- section (1) as so renumbered, the following 
sub- section shall be Inserted and shall be deemed to have 
been Inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1974, 
35 namely:-
tI (2)Wbere the compensation awarded for the compulsory 
acquisition of the origtnal asset is enhanoed by any court. 
tribunal or other authority, then, 
(a) so much of the capital gain, computed under 
40 section 48 by taking the compensation as so enhanced as 
the full value of the consideration received or accruing 
as a result of such transfer, as is not excluded uDder 
sub-section (1) from beiDi charged to tax under section 
45, or 

14 
(b) the capital gain attributable to the enhaDcemen~ 
of the compensation, 
whichever ia less (that which i8 leaa belDg hereafter in this 
BUb-Section referred to as the unadjusted capital galn), shall, 
If the use8see has within a period of three yeara after the 5 
date of receipt of the additional compeD8ation purchased 
any land or buUding or any right lD any land or buUding or 
coutructed any buUding for the purposes of shifting or 
re-establlshlDg the undertaking referred to in sub- section (1) 
or setting up another industrial undertaking (such land, 10 
building or right being hereafter in this sub- section refel"red 
to as the Nlevant asset), be dealt with in the following manner, 
that is to say. -
(I) if the amount of the UDadJusted capital gain is greater 
than the cost of the relevant asset, the difference between 15 
the amount 01. the unad,usted capital gaiD and the C08t of 
the relevant asset shall be charged under 8ection 45 as 
the 1Dcome of the previoua year iD which the transfer 
took place; and for the purpose of computing lD respect 
of the relevant asset any capital gaiD arising from its 20 
transfer within a period of three years of its purchase 
or COD8tnlctlon, as the case may be, the cost shall be 
nil; or 
(if) if the amount of the UDadJusted capital gaiD is 
equal to or les8 than the cost of the relevant asset. the 
unadjusted capital gaiD shall not be charged under 
section 46; and for the purpose of computing lD respect 
of the relevant asset any capital gaiD arislDg from its 
transfer within a period of three years of its purchase 
or construction, as the case may be, the cost shall be 
recUced by the amOUDt of the unadjusted capital galD. ". 
11. In secttcm 54E is directed to be lDeerted by sectlon 13 of 
the FlDaDce (No.2) Act, 197'0 of tbe lDCome-tax Act.,-
(a) tn sub- .ectlon (1),-
(I) in Explanation I., -
(1) iD the opeDlBg portion, after the words "For 
the purposes of this sub-section", the words, brackets 
and figure "and sub-section(3) " shall be Inserted; 
25 
30 
35 
(1) iD clause (V), the words, figures and letters 
".where the investment in such shares is made before 40 
the 1st day of March, 1978" shall be inserted at the 
end; 
29011977. 

15 
(3) after clause (V), ·the following clause sball be 
Inserted, namely:-
" (11(1) equity shares forming part of any eUgthle issue 
of cBPital~wbere the Investment lD such shares Is made 
5 after the 28th day of February, 1878,,~ 
(4) in clause (vi), the words, figures and letters' 
", wbere such deposits are made before the 18t day of 
March, 1978" shall be Inserted at the end, 
(it) E.rplcmation 2. shall be renumbered a8 E.cplGtlGtiMt 4 
10 aDd before the ErplCIIIGtion as 80 relUmbered, tbe following 
E.rp14l14tions shall be tDserted,namely:-
, ExplGHation 2. - "Ellgtble Issue of capital" shall have 
the meaning assigned to It In sub-section (3) of section 
8OCC. 
15 Explanation 3. - An assessee shall not be deemed to 
have Invested the full value of the oonslderation or any 
part thereof In any equity shares referred to In clause 
(va) of Explanation 1. unless the assessee has subscribed 
to or purchased the shares In the manner specified In 
20 sUb-section (4) of section 80CC. '; 
(b) after sub- section ( 2). the followlng sub- sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
'(3) Where the transfer of the origlnal asset is by way of 
compulsory acqulsition wider any law or where the full value 
25 of the cODBlderation for the transfer of the capital asset Is 
determined or approved by the Central Government or the 
Reserve Bank of India, and the compensaUDill awarded for 
~ 
such acquisition or, as the case may be, the full value of 
the consideration so determined or approved is enhanced 
30 by any court, tribunal or other authority, then, so much of 
the capital gain, computed under section 48 by taking the 
compensation or consideration as so enhanced as the full 
value of the conslderation received or accruing as a result 
of such transfer, as is attributable to the enhancement of 
35 the oompensation or consideration (hereafter In thla sub-
section referred to as the unadjusted capital galn) shall, 
tf the assessee has, within a period of six months after 
the date of receiPt of the additional compensation or, as 
the case may be, the additional conslderation, Invested 
40 or deposited the whole or any part of such additional 
compensation or consideration in any specified 8.8set 
(hereafter In this section referred to as the relevant 

..... 
16 
a ... t). be dealt with In the following manner. that is 
to say. 
(a) If the cost of the relevant asset is not less than 
the additional compensation or consideration. the whole 
of the unadjusted capltal gain shall not be charged 5 
under section 45; 
(b) If the cost of the relevant asset is les8 than the 
additlonal compensation or consideration, so much of 
the unadjusted capital gain as bears to the whole of the 
unadjusted capital gain the same proportion as the cost 10 
of acquisition of the relevant asset bears to the additional 
compensation or consideration shall not be charged under 
section 45. 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-section.-
(i) "additional compensation" shall have the meaning 15 
assigned to It in clause (1) of the Explanation to sub-
section (2) of section 54; 
(if) "additional consideration". in relation to the 
transfer of any capital asset the consideration for 
which was determined or approved by the Central Govern- 20 
mant or the Reserve Bank of India. means the difference 
between the amount of consideration for such transfer as 
enhanced by any court. tribunal or other authority and 
the amount of consideration which would have been payable 
If such enhancement had not been made; 25 
(iii) "cost'~ in relation to any relevant asset. being a 
deposit referred to in clause (vi) of Explanation 1 below 
sub-section (1). means the amount of such deposit; 
(Iv) the capital gain attributable to the enhancement 
by any court, tribunal or other authortty of the com- 30 
pensation for the compulsory acquisltlon of any capital 
alset or of the consideration for the transfer of any capital 
asset as determined or approved by the Central Govern-
ment or the Reserve Bank of India shall be deemed to 
be so much of the capital gain arising from the transfer 35 
of the capital asset as bears to the whole of the capital 
gain as computed under section 48 by taking the com-
pensation or consideration as so enhanced as the full 
value of the consideration received or accruing as a 
result of the transfer, the same proportion as the amount 40 
of additional compensatlon or consideration bears to the 
compensation or consideration as 80 enhanced. 
(4) Where the relevant asset is transferred, or comerted 
(otherwise than by transfer) into money, within a period of 

29 of 1977· 
17 
three years from the date of its acquisition, the amount of 
capital gain arising from the transfer of the orlglnal asset 
not charged under section 45 on the basis of the cost of such 
relevant asset as provided in clause (a) or. as the case may 
5 be, clause (b) , of sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be 
income ohargeable under the head "Capital gains" relating to 
capital assets other than short-term capital assets of the 
previous year in which the relevant asset is transferred or 
converted (otherwise than by transfer) into money • 
10 . (5) Where the cost of the equity shares referred to in 
clause (va) of Explanation 1 is taken into account for the 
purposes of clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (I) or 
olause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (3), a deduction 
with reference to such cost shall not be allowed under 
15 section aocc.'. 
U. ID section 72A(as directed to be inserted by section 15 of 
the Finance (NO.2) Act, 197'!Jof the Income-tax Act, after sub-
section (2) and before the Explanation, the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
20 "(3)Where a company owning an Industrial underta.ldDc or 
a ship proposes to amalgamate witJa any other company aad 
such other company submits the proposed scheme of .. alp-
matton to the specified authority and that authority is 
satisfied, after examinlDg the scheme and taking Into account 
25 all relevant facts, that the conditions referred to in sub-
section (1) would be fulfilled If such amalgamation Is effected 
in accor~e with sueR scheme or, as the case may be. In 
accordance with suoh scheme as modified In such muaer as 
that authority may specify, it shall lntlmate such otller 
30 compauy that, after the amalgamation is effected lntlMOrdance 
with such scheme or, as the case may be, such sch ... a •• 0 
modified, it would make (unless there is any material chance In 
the relevant facts) a recommendation to the Central Gevern-
meat under Sub-sectiOD(I). It. 
35 11. In section 80A of the Income-tax Act, sub-section (4) .hall 
be omltted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1979. 
II •. In aecti<l1 8tc of ihe Income-tax: Act, with effect from 
the 1st day of April, 1979.-
(4) for sub-sectiOll (1), the follOWing sub-secU •• lIall he 
40 substituted, namely:-
"( 1) III computing the total income of an asses.ee, titer. 
shall be deducted, ill acoordmce with and subject to the 
Am.deent of 
section 7J.A. 
A •• II_nt of 
aecti_ IIA. 
A .. ead.eat of 
aecti~ IOC. 

18 
provtsims of this section, an amount calculated, with 
reference to the aggregate of the sums specified in sub-
IleCUGIl (2), at the following rates, namely:-
(a) wbere nell aggregate 
does not exceed Rs. 6, 000 
(b) wbere auch agrepte 
exoeeds R .. 6, 000 bat does 
not exoeed Its. 10,000 
The wbole of such 
aggregate; 
Rs. 5,000 plus 50 per 
oent. of the amoWlt by 
which suoh aggrega12 
exceeds Rs. 5,000: 
6 
(c) wilen suoh aaregate 
exceeds Rs.I0,OOO 
Rs. 7,500 plus 40 per 10 
cent. of the amount by 
which such aggregate 
exceeds RB. 10,000. ": 
(b) in sub-aect1on(4), in clauses (ii) and (i&l), for the 
words ''twenty thousand rupees", the words ''thirty thousaud 15 
rupees" shall be substituted. 
iDaertion f4 new 11o, In the Income-tax Act, after section SOC, the follOWing 
aection IOCC. section shall be inserted, namely:-
Deduction ill 
le8pKtof 
laV_tment. 
c:ertaill new 
sh_. 
'socc. (1) Where an assessee, being-
( CI) an individual, or 
(b) a Hindu undi~ded family, or 
cel an usooiatim of persODs or a body of individual. 
con8iattng only of husband and wife govemed by the system 
of community of pr~ert'Y in force in the Union territories 
20 
of Dadra and Nagar Havell and Goa, Daman and Diu, 25 
hu purchased In the previous year (being a previous year 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day 
of April, 1979 or any subsequent assessment year), out 
of his inoome ohargeable to tax, equity shares formJng 
part OrGY eUgible issue of oapital, he shall, in accordance 30 
with and subject to the prOvisions of this section, be allowed 
• a deductlm in the oomputation of his total income of an 
amount equal to fifty per cent. of the cost of such shares 
to him. 
(2) Where the aggregate cost to the a8seSS88 of the 36 
shares referred to in sub-section (1) which are purcba8ed 
by him to the previous year exceeds ten thousand rupees, 
the deduction under that nb-•• ctiOD shall be allowed oaly 

10f 1956· 
1 cll956-
19 
with reference to such of those shares (being shares the 
aggregate oost whereof to the assessee does not exceed 
ten thousand rupees) as are specified by him in this 
behalf. 
6 (3) For the purposes of this section, "eligible issue of 
capital" means an IS8ue of equity shares which satisfies the 
following conditims, namely:-
(a) the Issue is made by a public company formed aDd 
registered in India with the main object of carrying m 
10 the business of construcUm, manufacture or production 
of any article or thing, not being an article or thing 
specified in the list in the Eleventh Schedule; 
(b) the issue is an issue of capital made by the 
company for the first time; 
15 (c) the shares forming part of the issue are offered 
for subscription to the pUblic; 
(d) such.other cooditiOils as may be prescribed: 
Provided that in the oase of a company which had orlgtnally 
been incorporated as a private company but has become a 
20 public company under the provisions of the Companies Act, 
1956, an issue of equity shares made by It for tbe first time 
after it has become a public company shall not be regarded 
as an eUgible issue of capital, if-
(i) such company had declared, distributed or paid 
26 any dividend when it was a private company; or 
(ii) any of the shares forming part of such issue is 
offered for subscription at a premium. 
Explanation 1. - If any questioo arises as to whether any 
Issue of equity shares would constitute an eligible issue of 
30 capital for the purposes of tbls section, the questim shall 
be referred to the Central Government whose decislOl1 there-
on shall be final. 
Explanation 2.- In this sub-sect101l and sub-sectlon (4), 
''publio oompany tI shall have the mean1nc assigned to it in 
86 section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
(4) The deduction under sub-sect101l (1) shall not be allowed 
UDl8S8 the assessee bas -
(i) subscribed to the shares in pursuance of an offer for 
subscriptiOll to the public made by the publio COIDPaI\V or 

A meDdment of 
sec:tioa lOP. 
20 
in pur8uance of a reservation or an option in his favour by 
reason of hi8 being a promoter of the company; or 
(ii) purchased the shares from a person who is 
specified as an underwriter in respect of the issue of 
such shares in pursuance of clause 11 of Part I of 
Schedule n to the Companies Act, 1956 and who has 
acquired such shares by virtue of his obligation 
as such underwriter. 
(5) If any equity shares, with reference to the cost of 
5 
which a deduction is allowed under sub-section (1), are 10 
sold or othenrise transferred by the assessee to any 
person at any time within a period of five years from the 
date of their purchase, an amount equal to fifty per cent. 
of the cost to the usessee of the shares so sold or otherwise 
transferred shall be deemed to be the income of the as_ssee 15 
of the previous year in which· the shares are so sold or 
transferred and shall be chargeable to tax accordingly. 
Explanation. - A person shall be treated as having 
purchased any shares on the date on which his name is 
entered in relation to those shares in the register of 20 
members of the company. 
(6) Where a deduction i8 claimed and allowed lDlder sub-
section (1) with reference to the cost of any equity shares, 
the cost of such shares shall not be taken into account for 
tbe purposes of section ME. '. 25 
11. In section SOP of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), 
for clause (t.). the following clause sha1l be substituted with 
effect from tbe 1st day of April, 1979, namely:-
" (b) In the cue of a.co-operati ve society. being a primary 
society engaged in supplying milk raised by ita members to - 30 
(i) a federal milk co-operative society; or 
(ii) the Government or a local authority; or 
(iii) a Govenunent company as defined in section 617 of 
1 of 1956. 
the Companies Act, 1956 or a corporation establlshed by 1 Of 1956. 
or Wlder a Central, state or Provillcial Act (being a company 35 
or corporation engaged in supplying mUk to the publio), 
the whole of the amOlDlt of profits and gains of such business;". 
U. III aeotion 155 of tbe IDcome-tax Act,-
(.) .tter nb-sectlon (7),tIIe foilowml8U~ctlca sball 

21 
be inserted and shall be ~emed to have been inserted with 
effect from the 1st day of AprU, 1974, namely:-
"(7A) Where, in the assessment for any year, the capital 
gain arlslng from the transfer of a capital asset, being a 
5 transfer by way of compulsory acquisition under' any law, or 
a transfer the consideration for which was determined or 
approved by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank 
of India, is computed under section 48 and the compensation 
for such acquisition or the consideration for such transfer 
10 Is enhanced or further enhanced by any court, tribunal or 
other authority, the computation or, as the case may be, 
computations made earlier shall be deemed to have been 
wrongly made and the Income-tax Offloer shall, notwith-
standing anything contained in this Act, recompute in 
15 accordance with section .8 the capltal gain arising 
from such transfer by taking the oompensation or 
the consideration as enhanoed or further enhanced, as the 
case may be, to be the full value of the consideration received 
or aooruing as a result of such transfer and shall make the 
20 necessary amendment: and the provlsions of seotion 154 
shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, the period of four 
years specified in sub-section (7) of that section being 
reckoned from the end of the previous year in which the 
additional compensation or consideration was received by 
25 the assessee. ": 
(b) In su~sect1on(8), for the words and figures ''under 
the provisions of section 54 ", the words, brackets and 
figures "under the provisions of sub-sectim( 1) of section 
54" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to bave been 
30 substltuted with effect from the 1st day of April, 197.; 
35 
.0 
46 
(c) after sub-section (8), the following sub ..... ctim shall 
be inserted and shall be deemed to have bee inserted with 
effect from the 1st day of Aprll, 1974, namely:-
"(8A) Where in the assessment for any year, a capital 
gain arising from the transfer by way of oompulsory 
acquisition under any law of any such oapital &88et as is 
refelTed to in seoticn 54 is cha.rged to tax and if ibe 
compensation for such acquisition 1s enhanced or 
further enhanced, as the case may be, by any oourt, 
trlb1Dlal or other authority. and the assessee 
purobaBes, within a pertod of one year after the date 
of reoeipt of the addlt1mal oompensation, or construota, 
within a pertod of two years after that date, a house 
property for tbe purposes of his own residence, the 
Jnoome-tax <>.t!loer aha1l ammd the order of the assess-
ment so as to exclude tbe amount of capital pm not 
, 

22 
chargeable to tax: UDder the provisions of aub-secttoo (2) 
01 aectioG Mi and the provis1oDa of seetl_1M ahall. so 
far as ml\Y be, apply thereto, the period of four years 
speolfied in sub-sect1CD (7) of that seotion being 
reeDed from tbe end of 1he previous year in wbJch the 
addtUonal oompenaatlClD was received by the .... 8888. n; 
(d) in 8ub-sectlon (9), for the words, fipres aDd letter 
''uDder the provisiClD8 of section 54B", the words, brackets, 
Bearea and letter ''under the proviaiGDS of IlUb-8eotlon (1) of 
section 54B" 8hall be IJ!lbstitu1lad and ahall be deemed to have 10 
been subsUtuted with effect from the 1st dBJ of April, 197"; 
(e) after sub-sect:lm (9). the following aub-oHctlcD abalJ. be 
inserted and shaD be deemed to bave been lnaer1ed With effect 
from the 1st day of AprU, 19'7", name1y:-
"(gA) Where In the asse8sment for any year, a capital 15 
gain arising from the transfer by way of compulsory 
acquisition under any law of any such capital aseet as is 
referred to in section 54B is charged to tax: and if the 
compensation for such acquisition 18 enhanced or further 
enhaDced,as the case may be,by any court, trlbunal or 20 
other authority, and within a perlod of two years after 
the receipt of the additional compensation, the asse8see 
purchases any land for being used for agricultural 
purposes, the Income-tax Officer shall amend the order 
of asSeBsment so as to exclude thet-.amount of capital 25 
gain not chargeable toO tax under the provision8 of sub-
section (2) of section 54B; and the provisions of section 
154 shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, the period of 
four years specified in sub- section (7) of that section 
being reckoned from the end of the previOUS year in which 30 
the additlcmal compensation was received by the assessee. ". 
(f) in sub-sectfon (10), for the words, figures aDd letter 
''under the provisions of sectl.on 54D". the words, brackets, 
, figures and letter ''under the provisions of sub-secUOIl (1) 
of section 54D" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to 36 
have been substituted wIth effect from the 1st da,y of Aprn, 
1974; 
(8) subo-seotim (10) shall be renumbered and shall be 
deemed to have been renumbered with effect from 1he 181 
day d. AprU. 1974 as clause (I) of tbat sub-aecUCIIl and 40 
after claue (,,) as 80 renumbered, the followm, olauae shall 
be blaerted and shall be deemed to have beeD inserted with 
.Heet from that date, namely:-
,,( b) Where in the assessment for lIlY year. a capital 
pin artamc from the traufer by W88 of compulsory 

·29 of 1977· 
23 
acquislUon of any sUch capital uset u Is referred to in 
section 64D 18 oharged. to tax and If the oompeD8&tiOll for 
such acqulsltlon II eDhaDced or further eDhaDced, u the 
oaae may be, by any court, tribunal orotber authorlty, 
and within a perlod of three years after the date of receipt 
rI. the addltlcmal compensatlon, the .. selBee purchues 
any land or buUdlng or any rllbt In any laDd or buUdlUl 
or constructs any buUdlag for the porpoee of shlfttng or 
re-8stabU8hlng the undertaking referred to In 8ub-sectlon 
10 (1) 01. that 8ectlon or setting up any other Industrlal under-
taking, the Income-tax OMcer 8hall amend the order of 
.. sessment 80 .. to exclude the amount of capital pin 
not chargeable to tax under the provl810D8 of Sub1ectlClll 
(2) of sectlon 641>; and the provtslons of sectlon 164 shall, 
16 80 far as may be, apply thereto, the perlod of four years 
speclfted In sub-sectlon (7) of that sectlon belog reckoned 
from the end of the prevlou8 year In whloh the addltloaal 
oompeD8atlon was received by the aaaessee. "; 
20 
(h) In sub-section (lOA), (as directed to be inserted' 
by 8eotim 23 of the FtDaDoe (No.2) Act, 1977J for the words, 
figures and letter ' .... der the provislms of sectlm 64E", 
the wordS, brackets, figures and letter ''under the provl81ms 
of sub-secUon (1) rI. secUCIIl ME" aball be 81lbst1tuted; 
(i) after the aaid sub-eecttm (loA), tile follmrtng 8Ub-
25 sectiorl sball be Inserted,namely:-
"flaB) Where in the 888e8lP1leDt for lIlY year, a olllital 
pin artslng from the traufer. bamg a transfer by wq of 
oompul80ry acquIsitlal or being a transfer the oOD8ideraUon 
for which w .. determined or approved by the Central Go1"8rn-
30 meDt or the Reserve Buk rI. India, rI. any capltal uset, not 
belog a 8hort-term oapltal asset, Is charged to tax and If the 
oompensatlon or ... the oa88 may be, oonslderatlClll for such 
transfer Is enbanced or further enbanced, as the case may be, 
by any court, tribunal or other authorlijy, and within a period 
36 of 8lx montha after the receipt of the addItlonal compensaUon 
or consideration, the assessee lmreeta or depoBlts the whole 
or Iq" part of the addltloDal oompenaatloo or oOludderatlon 
In any spectfted aBset referred to in Exptarl4tiDn 1. of 
sub-seotion (1) of sectlOll 6'E, tile Income-tax Ofrloer 
40 sball amead the order of 88ses.m_t so as to exclude 
the &m01Dlt of oapltal gain Dot chargeable to tax 1Dlder· 
the provtsloo.8 of sub-eeottOll (3) of section 54E; .d the 
provlslon8 of 8ection 154 sball. 80 far as may be, apply 
thereto, the period of four years spec1fted in sub-aeotim 
'6 (7) of that seotim being reok<Ded from the end of tile 
previous year In whloh the addlU(lIl8.l comp_saUon or 
ocaalderatlon 9188 reoelved by the 88se8188. ft. 

A .......... tof 
MCti08 198. 
IDlI8IUaa of aew 
MCUaalt4BB. 
24 
(j) the followiDa Eql4lllGtion IIha11 be ID8erlllld at. the 
eJId ad sllall be deemed to have been so meerted .lih 
eJreot bom the let ., of April, 1"4. namely:-
• Ezp'IIIIGtl"",, - For the purpoees 01 tbls 8eotia:a,-
(~ "addftfa:aal ocmpenatloD" sball have the meanfDg & 
usfaDed to It in olaII8e (1) of the E%p'4IIUJt'''fI to sub-
MCtIo.D (2) of _dtOll Mi 
.,. tdil'lMkUt1ou1 OODtideratlOll'~ 1Q relata to the 
.~~ of lIlY capital UMt the o0ll8ideraUon far 
'. whloh wu determtDed or approved by the Central 10 
Govemment or the Be8erve Bat of 1Ddia, melDS the 
dUfereaoe betweell the amoUDt of 0CID81dei'at:l0ll Ifor 
aaoh transfer as en),anced by 8IJ1 court, tr1buDal ar 
otber author1ty aDd tbe amount <i OOIla1deratlOil 
which would have been payable If such eDbaDcemeDt 1& 
bad DOt been made. '. 
•• In .. at101l 183 of the 1I100me-tax Act, ID the proviso, 
after cl8lUle (iCl)~ follDwfDc olaaae 8ball be iuerW, nameiy:-
rt(i b) ally IDtereat Plfable OD. Nattooal Development 
Balds; or". 20 
II. After eect10D 194:B of the Income-tax Act, the follmrlDg 
eectiClll shall be Ineerted,' namely:-
''lMBB. Ally perBOIl, bem, a bookmaker or a persOll to 
wbolD a 1l08ll08 baa been p'mted by the Gogel'lllllmt under any 
taW for the Um.e belD, ill force for horae raoin,in lIlY race 2& 
0GU'88 or lor U'I'8IlIIDI far ... riD, or betUDg in 1lIIY race 
CCIIlr_. w1lo 18 re8POlUdble for p.,mg to any perSOD any 
iDcome by .If of wiludDp from IIDY hor_ race in aD amCMmt 
uceed tn, two thOuaad five bImdrec:I rupees shall. at the 
time of PlI1IDent thereof, dedAlct iIloome-tax tbel'eOll at the 30 
rUe8 1D force: 
Prcmde4 tbat DO de6IctlOil 8_11 be made UDder tlds aectta:a 
from IIV paymeIIt IIUIde before 1:be 1st da¥ <i June, 1978. fl. 
AaMIIICIa_ 01 .11. III 1IeCtI0il Joe d. the lIloome-tu Act, ill aub-Beotla1 (1l, 
MCtiaa _ m 018l1li8 (b). for the worda, brackets ad flpres ''sub-eeotla:a 3& 
(3) 01. IJeOUc:IIlI12n, the word, ftpres IIUIletter "aeotlaD 
209A" slWl be aubetltated with effect from the 1at d., 01. J1Ule, 
1978. 
~ fJl II. In section 209 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from 
MCtioD.. the lit day of June, 1978,-

• 
II 
(.) in aub-seotion (1), for clause (e), the following cl .... 
_hall be substituted, namely:-
"(e) in cases where an estimate (including a revised 
estimate) is sent by the assessee under section 20ftA or 
section 212, the tota1inoome so estimated shall, for the 
purposes of calculation of tax under this BeCtion, be 
substituted for the total income referred to in clause f');"; 
(b) in sub-section (2),-
(I) ill clause (a>, tn the opening portion, after the words 
10 "in c ... s", the wol*ds, brackets, figures and letter "where 
the assessee sends a statement mder sub-section (1) of 
aection 209A or" shall be inserted; 
(ti) in clause (b), for the words, brackets, figures and 
letter "in cases where an estimate is sent by the assessee 
15 under sub-section (1) or sw>-section (2) or sub-section (3) 
or sub-section (lA) of section 212", the wO,rds, brackets, 
figures and letter "in cases where an estimate (Including 
a revised estimate) is sent by the assessee mder 
section 209A or section 212" shall be substituted. 
IaMltl. 01 new 20 IQ. In the Income-tax Act, after sectlC1l 209, the followmg 
MCtkIa 2Q9A. section shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of 
June, 1978, namely :-
CoIIpatatiOD .tel 
, pay_tof 
..... ce ta by 
........ 
'209A. (1) Every perlIOIl shall, in each financial year, 
25 before the date on which the first instalment of advance tax 
Is due in his case under sub-aecUon (1) of sectlm 211, if his 
current income is like 1y to exceed the amolDlt specified in 
sub-section (2) of section 208, lend to the Income-tax 
Officer -
30 (I) where he has been previously asse88ed by way of 
regul.u: asseSlment under this Act, a statement of adYance 
tax payable by him computed in the manner laid down in 
clause (I) or, .. the case may be, sub-clause (I) of 
clause (d) of s.m-lectlOli (1) of seotlCll 209, or 
(b) where be haa not previously been auelllHd by way 
of reple.r uaeasment UDder till. Ad, III estimate 0'-
(i) tile current Income, and 
40 (ii) the adYance tu payable by him on the oone. . 
mcc:ae caloulated III the manner laid doWD ill HCtiOllI09, 

28 
. 
aad .ball pay such amomt of advance tax as accords with the 
aatement or, as the case may be, estimate in equalinBtal-
menta on the date. applicable in his cue under section 211. 
(2) Where an IL8seuee who i8 required to send a statement 
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) estimates at any time before 5 
the date on wbiob the first inatalment of advance tax is due in 
his case under SW,-&eotiOD (I) of seotioo 211 that, by reason 
'of his current income being likely to be less than the incOlDe 
on which advauce tax i. payable by him QDder sub-.eotion (1) 
or for any other reason, tbe amount of advanee tax ocmputed 10 
in the manner laid down in section 209 on the current iDcome 
would be less than the amolDlt of advance tax payable by blm 
UDder sub-section (1), he may send to the lucome-tax Offtcer, 
in l1eu of such statement, an estimate of-
(i) the current income, and 15 
(il) the advuce'tax payable by him on the current 
income calculated m the manner laid down in section 209, 
and shall pay such amoUDt of advance tax as accords with his 
estimate in equal inStalments on the dates applicable in biB 
case mder aection 211. 20 
(3) Where an assessee who has sent-a statement under 
clause (a) cl sub-section (1) estimates at any time before the 
last instalment of advance tax is due in his case that, by 
reason of his current income being likely to be less than the 
income on wblch advance tax is payable by him under 25 
sub-section (1) or for lUI)' other reason, the amount of 
advance tax computed in the manner laid down in 8ection 209 
on the current Inoome would be less than the amoUDt of 
advance tax payable by him under sub-section (I),be may, at 
his option,send to the Income-tax Offtcer an estimate of- 30 
(i) the current 1Doome, and 
(U) the advance tax'payable by him on the current Inoome 
calculated in the maDDer laid down in section 209, 
and shall pay such amount of advance tax as accords with his 
estimate in equal inStalments on such of the dates applicable 36 
in his case tmder _ction 211 as have not expired, or in ODe 
sum 11 only the last of such dates has not expired. 

5 
10 
27 
(4) In the oue of any 88se •• ee who 18 Uable to pay advance 
tax under sam-Motion (1) or 8ub-aect1m (2) or, 88 the case 
may be. sub-section (3), if. by reason of the current Income 
being ISkely to be greater than tbe¥'iDoome on whicb the 
advance tax 80 payable by him baa beeD oomputed or for any 
~er reason, the amount of advance tax computed In the 
maDDer laid down in aection 209 on the ourrent Income (wbicb 
shall ~ esttm,.d by the aBsesBee) exceeda tbe amOUDt of 
advance tax BO payable by b1m by more thm 33-1/3 per cent. 
of the latter amount, be shall, at any time before the date em 
whlcb tbe lut IIllltalment of adraaoe tax 18 payable by him, 
aend to the Income-tu Ofttcer an ellt1mate of-
(f)tbe cv.~ent 1ncome, and 
(if) the advance tax payable by him em the current 
11 income calculated in the m8DDer lald down In section 209, 
20 
25 
30 
35 
md _11 pay sucb amount of advance tax as accords With bis 
estimate on sucb of the dates applicable In his case UDder 
Bection 211 as bave not expired, by instalments wbicb may be 
revised accordlng to sub-section (5): 
Provided tbat in a case where the Commissioner is satis-
fied that. having regard to the nature of the t;m8iness oarried 
on by the assessee and the date of expiry of th~ previous year 
In respect of such business. it wUl be difficult for the assessee 
to furnish the estimate required to be furnished by him in 
accordanoe With the provisions of this sub-section before the 
date OIl whicb the last Instalment of advance tax 111 due In his 
cue, he may, if the assessee pays the advance tax which he 
.is liable to pay UDder sm,-section (1) or sub-sectiCll (2) or, 
as the case may be, sub-section (3) before such date. extend 
the date for furnishing such estimate up to a period of thirty 
days immediately follOWing the last date of the previous year 
in respect ofthat business and, where the date is so extended, 
the assessee shall par, on or before the date as so extended, 
the amount by which the advance tax already paid by him 
falls short of the advance tax payable in accordance with his 
estimate. 
(S) The assessee may send a revised estimate of the 
advance tax payable by him before anyone of the dates speci-

A""", of 
MCtioa 211. 
28 
Bed in section 211 and adjlBt any exbess or de'Dciency in 
respect of 8.IIY instalment already paid in a subsequent 
tnstalment or in s.msequent instalments. 
(6) Every statement or estimate under this section shall 
be sent in the prescribed form and verified In the prescribed 6 
manner. 
ExplGllatiDll."'" For the purposes of this section and 
section 212, "current income", in relation to the advance 
tax payable by an assessee during flDy financial year, means 
the total income of the assessee ["exclusive of capital gains 10 
and income referred to in sub-clause (ir) of clause (24) of 
section 2. if any10f the period which would be the previous 
year for the assessment year immediately following, that 
ftftancial year. ' • 
.. In section 211 ofthe Income-tax Ac'" in sub-section (1). 15 
with effect from the let day of June, 1978,-
(a) in the opening portion, for the words and figures ''Sub-
ject to the proviSions of this section and of section 212 ", the 
words, figures and letter ''Subject to the provisioos of this 
section and of sections 209A and 212" shall be substlttUd; 20 
(b) for the E%plGllati~ the fol1ClWing EqlanflUoll shall be 
substituted, name 1y :-
'Ezplcmat'Dn.:- In this sub-sectiOD, ''total income" 
means,-
(a) in a cue where the advance tax is paid by the 26 
useS8M in accordance with the statement sent by him 
UDder BUb-section (1) of sectioa 209A or in accordance 
wUh aD order 01. the lucome-tax Offteer under section 210, 
the total incODle with reference to which the advance tax. 
payable has been calculated in such statement or order; 30 
(b) in a cue where the advance tax is paid in aecor-
daDoe With an estimate (including a rftised estimate) 
made by tbB ... Nee under sectiOD 209A or sectlOD 212, 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
29 
the total income with reference to which the advance -
tax 18 80 estimated, 
u reduced, in either cue, by the amount of capital pin 
and inoome referred to in sub-qlause (ix) of clause (24) of 
secti0ll2. 11 any. included therein. I. 
a. In 8ection 212 of the lacome-tax Act, with effect from the 
1st day of June, 1978.-
(~ in sub-section (ll.l for the words, brackets and fipres 
''by reason of his totalinccme fexclusive of oapital gains and 
income referred to in sub-olause (iI) c:l clause (24) of sectiQll 2, 
U myJ of the period which would be the previous year for the 
immediately followmg use8smeat year (suoh total income 
belng, hereafter In this section, referred to as curreIt 
inccme)", the words ''by reuon of his current income" shall 
be 8ubstituted; 
(b) 8ub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
ft. In section 215 of the Income-tax Act, In" sub-section (1), 
for the words and figures "advauce tax UQder section 212 on the 
basis of his own e.tlmate", the wprds, figures. letter and 
bracket8 "advance tax under section 209A or sectiem 212 em the 
basts of his own estimate (includlng revised estimate)" 8hall be 
substituted with effect from the 1st day of JUDe, 1978. 
a. In aection 216 of the lDcome-tax Act, in clause (4). for 
the words. brackets, figures ad letter ''under 8Ub-seOtion (1) 
or sub-section (2) or 8ub-section (3) or sub-section (JA) of 
section 212", the words. figures and letter "under section 209A 
or section 212" shall be 8ubsUtuteld with effect free the 1st day 
of June. 1978. 
.. In secti0l1217 ofthe Inoome-tax Act, with effect from 
the 1st day of June. 19'18.-
(.) in 8ub-se~toD(l).-
(I) for the port1oD. be"nntng with the WOrd8 ''the lDoome-
tax Oftloer ftnda th.t my .uoh person" aDd eudin& with tile 
A ....... tof 
eectiOII 2Ut 
A ...... tof 
HCtiOll 215. 
A •• ulmeat of 
MCtiOll 216. 
A .. d.eat rI. 
eectlca 217. 

30 
words "twelve per ceot. per "Dum", the followlDg sball 
be sab8tituted, namely:-
"the Inoome-tax Officer ftnda-
Co) that any sucb per801l as ia...r4tferred to in 
clause (G) of sub-sectiOll (1) of.alton 209A h .. not 6 
aent the statement referred to in that clauee or tile 
e8t1mate in Ueu of such statement referred to in 
sub-section (2) of that seot101l; or 
(b) that any such persOll .. 11 referred to in 
claue (b) ofsub-sectiOll (1) of section 209A bas DOt 10 
seat the estimate referred to in that claU8e, 
81mpe interest at the rUe of twelve per cent. per 
Bnaum"; 
(ii) for the words ''the ,aid 8ub-seotion", tbe worda, 
brackets and figures ''the sald sub-section (1) or s"'- 16 
section (2)" shall be 8ubstituted; 
(b) in BUb-section (lA),-
(L) after the words ''the lDOome-tuOfflcer finds that", 
the words, brackets, figures and letter "lIlY penCll1flio ... 
required to ~ an eatlmate UDder'sub-8ection (4) 01 20 
sectlon 209A Qr" 8hall be lD8erted; 
(it) for the words "the 8aid sub-_etlon", the warda, 
br.:kets, flpres and letter ''the sald aub-8ectiClll(4) or, 
as the oue may be. sub-section ()A) " shall be sub8tltated. 
~tatloa of .. For section 218 of the Income-tu Act, the foilowlDi 
.- MCtioa for section shall be substituted with effect frem the 1st day of 
NCtiaa 218- June. 19'18, namely:-
....... eee ''218. (1) If any asse8see has eent.-
....... tobe 
ta"ult. (/I) under 8ub-eect1an (1) of sectiOD 20tA, a statemeat, or 
(b) uDder aecttoo 209A or seotion 212. an est1mate- or a JO 
revised estimate, 
of the advance tax payable by hJm, but does DOt pay any tutal-
mea.t In acoon:luce therewith 011 tbe date or datea 8pecifled III 
HCtIon 211, be shall be deemed to be an UMaMe in default 
in respect of 8Ilch Jutalment or tutalmeots. II 
(2) If any u.uee does DOt pay on the specified date any 
tutalment of aAiYlDOe tax that be is required to pay UDder 

31 
.etion 210 and does not: before the date OIl which any such 
instalment U is not paid becomes due, sud under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) or section 212 an estimate or a 
revised estimate or the advance tax payable by him, be shall 
• be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect or such 
instalment or instalments. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sectiClll (1) or 
sub-section (2). an usessee shall not be deemed to be in 
default in reapect of any amount of which the payment is 
10 deferred under section 213 lDltU after the date communicated 
by him to the Income-tax Officer under that section. ". 
11. In the Income-tax Act. with effect from the 1st day of 
June, 1978, section 273 shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) 
thereof and -
15 ( 1) before sub-section (2) as 80 renumbered, the following 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- ' 
"( 1) If the Income-tax Officer, in the course of any 
proceedings in connection with the regular assessment for 
any assessment year, is satisfied that any assesaee-
(41) has furnished under clause (II) of sub-section (1) 
of section 209A a statement of the advance tax payable 
by him which he knew or had reuon to believe to be 
untrue, or 
(b) has without reasonable cause fatled to furnish a 
statement of the advance tax payable by him in accor-
dance with the proviSions of clause (II) of sub-section (1) 
of section 209A, 
be may direct that such person shall, in addition to the 
amount oftax, if any, payable by him, pay by way of 
penalty a sum-
(i) which, in the case referred to in clause (a)lshall 
not be less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one 
and a half time a the amolDlt by which the tax actually 
paid during the ftnaDcW year immediately preceding 
the assesameat year under the provisions of 
Chapter XVU-C falls abort of-
(1) seventy-five per cent. of the assessed tax as 
defined in sub-section (5) of section 215, or 
(2) the amount which would have been payable by 
way of advllDOe tax if the usesaee had furnished a 
Amendment' of 
nctlan 2730 

12 
oorreot 'aDd complete atatemeat 111' ~e With 
the provtslalla of c18l1lle (4 of BUb-aeotiOll (1) of 
.ection 2 09A. 
whichever is less; 
(ii) which. in the cue referred to In o1a_ C'). shall 5 
DOt be less than ten .. r cent. but sball not·eaeed me 
ad a half times of sneaty-fift per ceat. of the asseued 
tax as defined 1n sub-section (5) of aectton 215. "; 
(2) in 8ub-section (2) as so renumbered.-
(1'4 for clause (ea). the foilowlDl clause aUlI be ."-1- 10 
tuted. namely :-
"(0) has furnished UDder sd»-aeot1oa (1) or nb-
eectlm (2) or sub-Hctioa (3) or aub-HGtlGD (5) of 
section 209A. or under aub-aectlOil (1) or aub-_otis (2) 
of section 212. an estimate of the _UII08 tu parable 16 
by him. which he kDew or bad reaaoa to beUne to be 
UDtrue. or"; 
(b) in clause (.ca), der the words ''Us furatllaed", the 
words. brackets. fisur" ad letter ''uDder aab--.GtlClll (4) 
of aeetion 209A or" IIha1l be 1Daerted; 
(e) in olause fb). for the words. br.,ketB and flprea 
"aWl-section (3) of aectioa 212", the ward8. bracketa, 
letters and figures ''clause (b) of aub- .. ctiOll (1) of 
eection209A" shall be substituted; 
(i) in clause (e). for the worda, bnoketa, ftprea 8Dd 25 
letter "sub-section (lA) of sectlm 212", the worda, 
brackets. fipres 8Ild lettera "..,_ .. oUoo (4) clHOtion209A 
or sub-section (lA) of eeotlon 212" shall be a1lbaWated; 
(t) for sam-olause (2) of clauae Ci>. the fonowingsm-
clause shall be substituted. namely :- 30 
"(2)wbere a statement WIlder clauae (.) of s"'-
8eetlon (1) of aeot1oa 209A was fUl'llUbed by the ...... e 
or where a notice GIlder aeatlGD 210 WM lMtad to tile 
........ , the 1Dl000t payable UDder aaoh ........ or, 
88 the case may be, such notice, "; 35 
(f)for cl .... (iii). tile following 01 ... u.n be aatt-
tuted. namely :-
1t1(,U) which. in, the cue referred to In 01 ..... ie). 

10 
88 
. 
_ball Dot be Ie .. tbaD teD per 0811&. but ..... lut _ued 
one IDd a balf ttmee the amouat by wblcb-
(II) wIlere the u ..... e h .. _at a "'IM. UIIder 
clauae (4, or an e.lm .. ader claMe (b), of_. 
section (1) of .. ctlO1l 2OtA, 01' an eattmete 10 ltell of a 
statement UDder sub-HCtioD (l) of that aeattaa., tbe 
tax payable in aooordaDce wtth such ........ or 
estimlde; or 
(b) where the ..... aee .u required to pay adnDoe 
tax 1D aocordaDce with the notice 1.aued to bim aDder 
section 210, the tax payable UDder such DOtice, 
falls lIbort ~ seventy-five per cent. of the .. ee .. ed tax 
.. deftDed til .ub-aecSloa (5) of .. ollon 215. It; 
(,) ill tbeEJp~ for the warde, brackets, ftpre_ 
1& and letter ''provi.o to sd»-aeetlon (]A) of aectlOD 212", the 
words, brackets, ftprea aDd letters ''prorillO to s.m-
eectlO1l (4) of eect101l 209A or, u the aue may be, proriJlo 
to sub-aeotioD (]A) of aectlcm 212" shall be a~. 
• Tbe IDllowlaa ·..,dmeata (beiDa llIIUIlC1meote of a coa.ae--
ao quaatlal utare) 8bal1 be JUde 10 tile lDcome-tu Act, umely :-
(aJ til 8Ub-claue (U) of claue (l1A) of Nat1cll1 a aDd bl 
cat.... (a) of ........ (1) at aeattaD m. ~r tile flcarea 
ad leUer "1MB;', the ftpre. aDd letters "1MB, 1MBB." 
IIbtil be aub8tltuted; 
(b) til .. ctioDe 198, 199. 200, 202. 203, 204 aud 206. for 
the ward. f1aure. aad l .... r "II8ctlOD 1MB, ", tbe words, 
B.....- ud.1ettera "1IeCU0Il 1MB, .. ation 1MBB, " _ball be 
.aututed. 
30 .. In the mterest-ta Act. 19"", bl.d»-aectlOIl (Z) of 
_CltioD 8, far the worda, 8pre. aDd letteH "before tile l8t .., 
01 Aapat. 19"'''. the warda, f1pree _d leUlera ''before the 
18t day of Aqut. 11'74 or after the 2Mb day 01 Febnu7. 11'18" 
1Ib8l1 be _ub8tltuted with effect from the lilt day of April, 11'79. 
Ca. , ,.. • 
............ 
c.-.._u_ 
A. I f ... of 
Act 45 fIl1t740 

Amead .... t of 
Act 51 of 1975. 
34 
CHAPTER IV. 
INOJaECT TAUS 
.. In the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1976 
(hereinafter referred to as the Customs Tariff Act).-
(i) after the existing entry in column (3), &gaut sub-
heading No. (2) of Heading No. 3'1.01/01. the following 
ExplanatiOn shall be inaerted. namely:-
"ExplGftotion • - For the purpose. of this sub-heading, 
where a fUm is designed wtth a view to different vertical 
sections thereof being exposed separately. Ita length shall 10 
be deemed to be the aggregate of the lengths of all such 
sections. "I 
(ti) in Heading No. 51. 01/03, for the entry In column (3), 
the entry "200% plus Rs.30 per kllOl1'8D1" shall be substituted. 
A_iliary dulies •• (1) In the cue of goods mentloned 1ft the Flret Schedule 16 
of catoUla. to the Customs Tariff Aot. or In that Schedule as amended from 
time to time, there shall be levied and collected as u auxUlary 
duty of customs an amount equal to twenty per cent. of the value 
of the goods as determined In accordance With the provisions of 
section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as 20 52 of 1962. 
the Customs Act). 
(2) Sub- section ( I) shall cease to have effect after the 31st 
day of March, 1979. except as respects thlngs done or omitted 
to be done before such cesser; and section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser as If the said 25 10 olll97. 
sub-section had then been repealed by tl Central Act. 
(3) The auxtliary duties of customs referred to In sub- sec-
tion (I) shall be In addttlon to any duties of customs chargeable 
on such goods under the Customs Act, or any other law for the 
time being in force. 30 
(4) The provisions of the Customs Act. and the rules and 
regulatiODS made the1'8UDder. Including those relattuc to refunds 
and exemptiODS from cmtles, shall, as far as may be. apply ID 
relation to the levy aDd collectlon of the auxUlary duties of 
customs levlahle UDder this section in respect of 8DY goods as 35 
they apply in relation to the leYJ and collection of the ciatles of 
CUlJto.ms on such goods under that Aot or those rules and 
regulations, as the case may be. 

35 
•• In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (herelnafter 
referred to as the Central Exclses Act). In the First Schedule.-
(I) In Item No.8, the Eq'tIIUI£iDn shall be numbered as 
EIPianCl£ton I and after the E%planCl£ton as so numbered. the 
5 folfowiiig Explanation shall be lDaerted. namely:-
" FzplllntJtion II. - This Item does DOt lnclude -
(4) base mineral oUs (suitable for use in the manu-
facture of lubricating oils and greases) including mineral 
oUs commonly known as Transformer oU base stock or 
10 Transformer oU feed stock; and 
(b) lubricating oUs lDcludlng spindle oUSt Dushing 
oUs and Jute batchlng oils. "; 
(ii) in Item No. 10. the E,tpltUlGtion shall be numbered as 
ErplCll4£ion I and after the EIPI .... ati on as 10 numbered. tlw 
15 following E%pianGtion shall be inserted, namely:-
"E.rpIClll4tiOft II. - This aem does not include -
(II) base mineral oUs suitable for use in the manu-
facture of lubricating olls and greases; and 
(b) lubricating oUs tncludlng axle oU. "; 
20 (iii) In Item No.llA. sub-item (4) shall be renumbered as 
sub-item (5) and before sub-item (5) as 80 renumbered, the 
followiDg sub-item shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) (4) Base mineral oUs 
(suitable for use in the manu-
25 facture of lubricating oUs and 
greases) lDcludlng mineral oUs 
commonly known as Transformer 
oll base stock or Transformer oU 
feed stock; 
30 (b) Lubricating oUs (including 
splDdle oUSt Dushlng OUB. lute 
batching oUs and axle oU) and 
lubricating greases. 
Three thousand and 
five hundred rupees 
per metric tonne. 
Three thousand and 
five hundred rupees 
per metric toDD8. "; 
A_admeDt of 
Act lof 1944. 

38 
(t"l alta IteDl No. 11C, tile fOU~ ..... aball be 
lD8erted. DaJDi8Iyt-
"llD. COAL (EXCWDING UGNITE), 
AND COD NOT ELSBWIIERE 
SP£CII'I.ID. 
ilL ltLECTlUClTY • 
Tea rupee. per metric. 
toaDe. 
Two palae per 
kUowatt-hour. ttc 
(11) In Item No-18, after sub-item m, the followlDg sub-
item IIha11 be luerted, lWIle1y:-
I 
''IV. NON-CELLULOSIC WASTES, Nine rupees per 10 
ALL SOR'I'B. kUogram. It; 
Enlaucin. - 'nAts Item bIDludee oaly waites arialDg In, 
or lD relation to, tho lDuufMtgn 01 maD-made fibres (other 
thaD mmeral flbrM) aDd DWt-Jilade fIlameDt YarDS. 
(11i) ID Item No. 19 m, for the entry ID the third column, 11 
the Err ''The dDb' fortbe time be_leviable on the .... 
fabrics, if DOt a.1ready paid, plus thirty per cent. ." 11."' .... 
• ball be substituted, 
(vii) lD Item No. 22(3)., for the 8Dtry ID the third columa. 
tile 8Iltry ''1'be _ for the time heiDI leviable OIl &be bue • 
fUrieS, If DOt alreuIJ paid, plas thlrtJ per cem. .. 11_ •• " 
Ud1 be subatltuteda 
{lliil, ID I .. No. DB, for tile eatry III the third oolUlllDe 
the eutry ''ThIrty per ceDt. " II .... '.! Bhall be subatltuted. 
(il) In Item No. M. -
(a) for the word8 ''IIOTOB VEBlCLD AND TBACTOlII- tt• 
the"words "1I0roR VEHICLES AND TBACTOBS, INCLUD-
ING TRAD..ERS-I' shall be substituted; 
(b) after IlUb-ltem n, the followlDa "Ital aJaUl be 
lDserted, aamely:- . 30 
"DI. Tratlera. TwelYe aDd half per 
oeaL .. .,.,.. •• , 
(e) for EJpl ..... 1. tM foIlowbII &pl • .". Mall be 
..-,.ututed, DIIDleiy:-
'EJpl. __ 1 - ''IIotor yehle,,". "Tractor, 1Dclu.d-
l1li apicultural tractor tt ... "Tra4er" shall lDol.ade a 
cbaaaia; I but sball DOt IDDlude a "Iole l"WIIliDI upcm 
fixed raUs. '; 

10 011197. 
5 
" 
(~) for Item No. au; the fol1GwIIc--.u- ..... ted, 
aamely:-
'MA. PARTS AND ACCESIOBlES, NOT 
EUJEWHERE SPECIFIED. OF MOTOa 
VEIUCLES AND TRACTORS. 
INCLUDING TRAILERS. 
ErplG114ltion 1. - The expression "Motor vehlcles" has the 
meaniDg dslgned to It in Item No. M. 
ElpJlUlGtiDft II. - The expression ''Tractors'' shall1Dclude 
10 acrlcultural tractors. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
31 
(It> lD Item No.88, for the eatry III tile tblrd CObllDD, the 
..a-y 'Tlve per cent. tid HloraI." ..... be 8UMUtated. 
ft. (1) III the cue of aoocts c~e wttb • dIIty ~ trKIDlee 
uDder the Central Exclau Act .. sm._dad from time to time, 
read with any notlfication for tile time belPllP force luuedby 
tile CeDtral GoYermneat IP re1at1oJl to tba duty so charpable. 
there sMl1 be levied aDd collected • ..,.,W duty of acl8e eqql 
to five per cent. of the amount so cllarpMle on such pds. 
(2) aab-HCtlon (1) shall cease to bave teeot after .. 31M 
da.Y of March. 1979. except as reepecte tb1Ip doae or amtued 
to be dime before such c ....... aDd MDt_ 8 fIl the 0eDIral 
Claues Act, 1897. shall ~y upaD .cb C8s .. r .. If t.be aald 
sub- section had then been repealed by • CeDtra1 Act. 
(3) The speclal duties of excise referred to iD sub-1I8Ctloa (I) 
shall be in addition to any dutte. of aol8e cbargeable on IlUCb 
goods under the Central Excls .. Act or ~ other law for the 
time belPg in force. 
(4) The provisions of the Central EKe .... Act and the ruIea 
made thereunder. lncludlDc tbOM re1atlnC to refunde .......... 
tiona from duties. shall. as far as m.q be. apply in relattOll to 
the levy and collection of the special dRU •• of uclae levt.ble 
UDder this sectlon in respect of aD1 IDOds as they apply lD 
relatlon to the levy and coUectloll of the duUea of emt. on __ 
JoodI under that Act or those rulea. as .. oue mq be. 
: .... 
.. For the year beliDJllDc on the l8t .,. 01, April, 1971. DO 
draly UDder the Central EmI8e8 Act or till· CUtmDs TartIf Aat 
shall be levied in r88pect of .alt lD&IIIfactu.red iD, or Imparted 
IDto, india. 
.......... 
ttl ...... 
DI- ll. • " ... ..,. 

3' 
CHAPTER V 
.. III the Fir. Schedule to tile IIld1lD Post Office Act, 1898 .. -
(4) for the sub-headlng ''"L,tters'' aDd the entries there-
UDder, the followiDg .ball be substituted, name1y:-
"Lefters 
For a weight not exceeding ten grams 
For every ten grams or fraction 
therecl, exceeding ten grams 
26 palae. 
IS palte. n; 
(b) for the sub-headings" &,,' cards ", ''"BDH. Pattern'" 
S...,I, p"kds 1.1 and "Resistered Nelupapers" and the atriel 
1Dlder those SUb-headings, the following sball be substttuted, 
namely:-
"Post 'ltds (not betns Post cards contClin'ns 
printed co'" "lImi, ation) 
Single 
Reply 
Post 'ltds contAin'ng print" collllllUK;,Gtion 
For a post card 
15 palse. 
30 paise. 
20 palae. 
10 
15 
ElplallGU". • - A post card shall be deemed to ccntam a 20 
printed commUDicat1cll, If any matter (except the name and 
addreu of, and other particulars reJaUng to, the aender and 
the place and date of despatch) is recorded by priDtIDi or by 
cyclostyUng or by any other meobanical proces8, not being 
typewriting, CI1 any part of the post card except the right- 25 
band half of the address-side thereof. 
&ok, Pattern ad SCUllple packets 
For the first fifty grams or 
fraatlClll thereof 
For every addfUOIl8l twenty-five 
grams or fractlClll tbereof,iD exoeas 
of fifty grams 
Resistered Nellispapers 
For a weight not exceedtn, fifty grams 
26 palse. 
30 
16 palH. 
2 palH. 

5 
10 
39 
For a weight exceeding fifty grams 
but not exceeding one hundred grams 
For every additional one hundred grams 
or fraction thereof, exceeding one hundred 
grams 
6 paise. 
10 paise. 
In the case of more than one copy of the same issue of a 
registered newspaper being carrJed in the same packet-
for a weight not exceeding one hundred 
grams 
for every addttiOllal one hundred grams 
or fractim thereot, in excess of one hlDldred 
grams 
5 paise; 
10 paise: 
Provided that such packet shall not be delivered at any 
addressee's residence but sball be given to a recognised 
15 agent at the Post Office. ". 
... In the Compulsory Deposit Scheme (Income-tax Payers) 
Act. 1974.-
( a) in sub-section (1) of section 4. -
(1) in clause (i). the word "and". ocourring at the end. 
20 shall be omitted; 
(2) for clause (ii), the follOWing clauses shall be 
substituted. namely:-
"(ii) for the assessment year oommenoing on the 
1st day of April. 1977 and the assessment year oommen-
25 cing on the 1st day of April, 1978, at the rates specified 
in Paragraph B of the Schedule; and 
(iii) for the assessment year commencing on the 
1st day of April. 1979. at the rates specified in 
Paragraph C of the Schedule. "; 
30 (b) in the Schedule. for the proviso, the following shall 
be substituted. namely:-
(i) where the current income 
exceeds Rs. 15 • 000 but 
35 does not exceed 
Rs.25.000 
4.5 per cent. of the 
current incom e; 
Amendmetlt of Act 38 
of 1974. 

(it, where the ourrent inoome 
exceeds R8.25, 000 but 
does not exceed 
R8.35,Ooo 
(iii) where the ourrent 
income exceeds 
Rs. 35 ,000 but does 
notex~d 
as. 70, 000 
(tv) where the ourrent 
income exceeds 
Rs.70, 000 
Provlded that -
40 
Rs.1,125 plus 11 per oent. 
of the amoWlt by which the 
ourrent inoome exceeds 
Rs.25,000; 
Rs. 2.225 pJus 12.5 per cent. 5 
of the amount by which the 
ourrent inoome exceeds 
Rs.35.000i 
Rs.6,600 pJus.15 per cent. 10 
cf the amount by wblch the 
current income exceeds 
Rs.70,OOO: 
(a) In a cue fallmg under Paragraph A or Paragraph B. 15 
where the current inccme exceeds Rs.15,OOO but does not 
exceed as. 15.620, the oompulsory deposit shall in no case 
exceed the amount by which the current income exceeds 
•• 15,000; 
(b) In a cue falling under PlfN8NPh C. where tbe 20 
current income exceeds Rs.15,OOO but does not exceed 
RI. 15 , 710, the compullory deposit shall in no cue 
exceed the amount by which the current iDocme exceeds 
al.15.0oo; 
(e) where the amount of compullory deposit calculated 15 
in accordaDoe with the foregoing provl81ons 18 leu Iaa 
Ba.100, It shall not be necessary for the taxpayer cOlloern-
ed to make such deposit. ". 
D,er.auoll • .." dI, P"I'i.IOII" Collec:UoIi 
of Tall o4el,1931. ao 
It is hereby declared that it Is expedlent in the publlc 
interest that the prOvllllons of clau .. s 34. 35, 38 and 3'1 of this 
BUl shall have lmmec:llate effect WIder the Provisional Collection 
of Taxes Act. 1931. 11 of 11SL 

6 
THE SCHEDULE 
(Su Hctlon 2) 
PART I 
INCOME-TAll AND SUICHARGE ON INCOME-TAll 
In the case of every lDdlvidual or Bindu undivided famlly or 
unrepstered firm or other aSBOciatlon of persons or body of 
indivlcUals, whether incorporated or not, or every artlflclal 
10 Juridical person referred to in sub-clause (IIif) of clause (31) of 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which 
8ub-Paragraph n of this Pnagraph or any other Paragraph of 
this Part appUes, -
R.ttl .f 'lIUIIIe. 
16 (1) where the total Income Nil; 
10 
25 
30 
does not exceed as. 8, 000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. (5.000 but does not 
exceedRs.16,000 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 16,000 but does not 
exceed Ra.20,OOO 
(4) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not 
exceed Ra. 25, 000 
(5) where the total Income 
exceeds Ra. 25,000 but does not 
exceed Re. 30, 000 
(6) where the total income 
exceeds as. 30,000 but does not 
exceed Re. 50,000 
(7) nen the total lncome 
exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 70.000 
16 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 8,000; 
Rs.1,050 plus 18 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds RB. 16,000; 
Rs. 1,950 plus 26 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20,000; 
Rs. 3,200 plus 30 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 25, 000; 
Rs. 4,700 plus 40 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Re. 30,000; 
Rs. 12.700 plus 50 per cent. of 
the amount by which tbe total 
lncome exceeds a.. $G, 000, 

42 
(8) where tbe total income Ra. 22,700 phu 55 per cent. of 
exceeds Rs. 70,000 but does not the amount by which the total 
exceed Rs. I, 00, 000 income exceeds Bs. 70,000; 
Bs. 39,200 plus 60 per cent. of (9) where the total income 
exceeds Rs.l,OO,OOO the amount by which the total 5 
income exceeds R8. I, 00, 000: 
Provided tbat for the purposes of this Sub-Paragraph,-
(i) no income-tax sball be payable on a total income not 
exceeding Ra. 10,000; 
(ii) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 10 
not exceed Rs. 10, 540, the income-tax payable thereon shall 
not exceed seventy per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Bs.10, 000. 
Surcharge on incOlle-iu 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 15 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the, rate 
of fifteen per cent. of such income-tax. 
S"b-P cuQRraph II 
In the case of every Hindu undivided famlly which at any time 20 
during the previous year bas at least one member whose total 
income of the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1978 exceeds Bs. 10,000,-
Rates ofincome-t1U 
(1) where the total income 
doe8 not exceed Ra. 8, 000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Re. 8,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.15, 000 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Bs. 15,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.20,000 
(4) where the total income 
exceeds Re. 20,000 but does not 
exceed Re. 25,000 
Nil; 
18 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds 
Re. 8, 000; 
25 
Rs. 1,260 phlSI 25 per oent. of 30 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds R8. 16, 000; 
Rs. 2, 510 phu 30 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20,000; 35 

5 
43 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 30,000 
(6) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 50,000 
(7) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not 
exceed Ra. 70,000 
Rs. 4,010 plus. 40 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 25, 000; 
Rs. 6, 010 plus 50 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 30,000; 
Rs. 16,010 plus 55 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
10 (8) where the total income Rs. 27,010 plus 60 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 70,000: 
exceeds Rs. 7(;,000 
Provided that for the purposes of this Sub-Paragraph,-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
15 exceeding Rs. 10,000; 
20 
25 
(ii) where the total in<lome exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 10,690, the income-tax payable thereon shall not 
exceed seventy per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs.lO,OOO. 
The amount of income-tax c,omputed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of thi. Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
fifteen per cent. of such income-tax. 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every co-operative society,-
(1) where the total income 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
15 per cent. of the total 
income; 
30 (2) where the total income Rs. 1,500 plus 25 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
35 
exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 20,000 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs.20,OOO 
Rs. 4, 000 plus 40 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20, 000. 

44 
. 
SUrd_Be on income fu 
The amount of Income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall be Increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
fifteen per cent. of such IDCOme-tax. 5 
SuH' ,.r,."",,1I1 
In the case of every registered firm, not befng a case to 
which Sub-Paragraph n of this Paragraph applies,-
Rates of mcome-fu 
(1) where the total1Dcome Nil; 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
. (2) where the total income 5 per cent. of the ImOUDt by 
exceeds Rs. 10, 000 but does not which the total lDcome 
exceed as. 25,000 ~eeda Rs. 10,000; 
(3) where the total income Rs. 750 plus 7 per cent. of the 
exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not amount by which the total 
exceed Rs. 50,000 1Dcome exceeds Rs. 25, 000; 
(4) wbere the total lDcome Rs. 2, 500 plus 15 per O8nt. of 
eXC4!leds Ra. 50,000 but does not the amount by which the total 
exceed Re. 1,00,000 lncome exceeds Ra. 60,000; 
(6) where the total iDcome Ra. 10,000 plus 24 per cent. 
exceeds Rs.l,OO,OOO of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
SUrcharge 011 income-t41 
The amoun~ of inoome-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be iDcreued 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate.. 
of fifteen per cent. of such income-tax. 
SUb-P arqraph II 
In the cue of every rellatered firm whoM total lDoome 
!Dolude. lDoome derlved from a profe8lllon carrled on by It and 
10 
15 
20 
26 
30 

5 
10 
· the income 80 "Included is not less than flfty-one per cent. of 
such total income, - " 
Rates of i .. colfte-w.r 
(1) where the total tncome 
does not exceed Re. 10,000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Ra. 10,000 but does not 
exceed Ra. 26,000 
(3) where the total lD.come 
exceed. Rs. 25,000 but does not 
exceed Ra. 50,000 
(4) where the total 1Dcome 
exceeds Ra. 50,000 but does not 
exceedRs.l,OO,OOO 
Nfl; 
4 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds 
Rs.I0,000; 
Rs. 800 P'"S 7 per cent. of the 
amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 26, 000; 
R •• 2, 350 ph.. 13 per cent. of the 
amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
15 (5) where the total income Rs. 8.850 plus 22 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs.1, 00, 000. 
exceeds Ra. 1,00, 000 
SurdtarQt on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
20 preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a IUrcbarge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of fifteen per cent. of such income-tax. 
ExplanCltiDn • - For the purposes of this Paragraph, "regis-
tered firm" includes an unregistered firm assessed 8S a regis-
25 tered firm under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. 
30 
P crClflraph D 
In the case of every local autborlty,-
Rate of incolle.o£a 
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent. 
SurcharQe on income-ta 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
apeolfled shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the 
UniOIl calculated at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such iDcome-
tax. 

46 
Paragraph S 
In the case of a company, -
Rilles of income~w 
L In the case of a domestic company,-
(1) where the company is 5 
a company in which the public 
are substantially interested,-
(i) in a case where the 45 per cent. of the total income; 
total incom e does not exceed 
Rs. 1,00,000 10 
(ii) in a case where the 55 per cent. of the total Income; 
total Income exceeds 
Rs.1,00,OOO 
(2) where the company is 
not a company in which tbe 
.public are substantially 
interested, -
(i) in the case of an 
industrial company,_ 
(a) where the total 
income does not exceed 
Rs.2,00,OOO 
(b) wbere the total 
income exceeds 
Rs.2,OO,OOO 
(ii) in any other case 
Provided tbat-
55 per cent. of 'the total income; 
60 per cent. of the total income; 
65 per cent. of the total income: 
(i) . the income-tax payable by a domestic company, being 
a company in which the public are substantially interested, 
15 
20 
25 
the total income of which exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, shall not 30 
exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable by 
the company if its totallnc'.Jme bad been Rs.l,OO,OOO 
(the income of Rs. 1,00,000 for this purpose being com-
puted as if suc!l income included income from various 35 

47 
sources in the same proportion as the total income of 
the company); and 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which its. total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000; 
5 (ii) the income-tax payable by a domestic company, not 
being a company in which the public are substantially 
interested, which is an industrial company and the total 
income of which exceeds Rs. 2,00,000, shall not exceed 
the aggregate of-
10 (a) the income-tax which would have been.payable by 
the company if its total income bad been Rs. 2, 00, 000 
(the income of Rs. 2,00,000 for this purpose being com-
puted as if such income included income from various 
sources in the same proportion as the total income of 
15 the company); and 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which its total 
income exceeds Rs. 2, 00, 000. 
U. In the case of a company other than a domestic company,-
(I) on so much of the total 
20 income as consists of-
(a) royalties received 
from an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement 
made by it with the Indian 
25 concern after the 31st day 
of March, 1961 but before 
the 1st day of April, 1976, 
or 
30 
35 
40 
(b) fees for rendering 
technical services received 
from an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement 
made by it with the Indian 
concern after the 29th day 
of February, 1964 but 
before the 1st day of April, 
1976, 
and where such agreement has, 
in either case, been approved 
by the Central Government 
50 per cent. ; 

48 
('i) on the balance, if any, 
of the total income 
'70 per cent. 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall be increased by a 
8urcbarp calculated at the rate of five per cent. of such 
income-tax. 
PARTD 
RGtes for deduction of teu atsourc:e in certldn ,alts 
6 
III every case In which under the provisions of secUons 193. 10 
184. 194A. 194B. 194BB. UND and 195 of the Inoome-taz Act. 
ta is to be deducted at the rates ill force. deductioll 8hall be 
made from the Income subject to deduction at the following ratea:-
lDoome-tax 
Rate of Rate of 15 
income-tax surcharge 
1. In the case of a persoll 
other than a company-
(a) where the perBOIl is 
resident ill India- 10 
(i) OD Income by way of 10 per cent. Nil; 
Interest other than ''Intere8t 
011 8ecurlties" 
(ii) OD Income by way of 30 per cent. 4.1 per cent.; 
wiDDlDgs from lotteries and 25 
orosaword puzzle8 
(iii) on Inoome by way C\f SO per cent. 4.6 per oem.; 
wlDlllac. from .horae races 
('") OD moome by way of 10 per oeDt. N.l; 
tuurance oommlAioIl SO 
(II) OIl 8111 other IDcome 20 per oeDi. S per oent. ; 
(ao]ndlnl latere. payable 
OIl a tax-free aeourlty) 

(b) where the person fa not 
6 resident In India-
(i) on the whole income 
(excluding Interest pqable 
on a tax-free securtty) 
10 
15 
(ii) on Income by way of 
Interest payable on a tax-
20 free securtty 
2. m the case of a company-
(4) ·where the company fa a 
domestic company-
(i) on Income by way of 
25 Interest other than "Interest 
on securities" 
(U) on any other Income 
(excluding interest payable 
on a tax-free security) 
30 (b) where the company fa not 
a domestic company-
(i) on Income by way of 
dividends payable by any 
domestic company 
49 
lDcome-tax 
Rate of 
lDOome-tax 
Rate of 
surcharge 
Income-tax at 30 per cent. 8Dd. 
surcharge at 4.5 per cent. of the 
amount of the Income. 
or 
Income-tax and surcharge on 
Income-tax In respect of the 
Income at the rates prescribed 
In Sub-Paragraph I of Paragraph 
Aof Part m of this Schedule. 
If such lncom e had been the total 
income, 
whichever is higher; 
15 per cent. 2. 26 per cent. 
20 per cent. , 
1 per cent.; 
22 per cent. 1 per cent.; 
25 per 0_. Nil; 

50 
Income.-tax 
Rate of Rate of 
income-tax surcharge 
(ii) on income by way of 40 per cent. Nil; 
royalty payable by an Indian 5 
concern in pursuance of an 
agreement made by it with 
the Indian concern after the 
31st day of March, 1976, 
where such royalty is in 10 
consideration for the transfer 
of all or any rights (including 
the granting of a licence) in 
respect of copyright in any 
book on a subject referred to 15 
in the proviso to sub-section 
(lA)of section U5A of the 
Income-tax Act, to the Indian 
concern 
(iii) on income by way of 20 
royalty Lnot being royalty 
of the nature referred to in 
sub-ltem (b) (ii)] payable 
by 8.11 Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement 25 
made by it with the Indian 
concern and which has been 
approved by the Central 
Government, -
(A) where the agreement 50 per cem. 2.5 per cent.; 30 
is made after the 318t day 
of March, 1961 but before 
the 1st day of Aprll, 1976 
(8) where the agreement 
is made &£~r the 31st day 35 
of March, 1976-
(1) on 80 much of the 20 per cent., Nil; 
amount of such income as 
consists of lump sum con-
sideratJoD for the traufer 40 

51 
Income-tax 
Rate of Rate of 
lncome-tax surcharge 
outside India of, or the 
5 Imparting of Information 
outside India in respect 
of, any data, documenta-
tion, drawing or specifi-
cation relating to any 
10 patent, invention, model, 
design, secret formula or 
process, or trade mark or 
similar property 
(2) on the balance, if 40 per cent. Nil; 
15 any. of such income 
(iv) on income by way of 
fees for technical services 
payable by an Indian concern 
in pursuance of an agreement 
20 made by It with the Indian 
concern and which has been 
approved by the Central 
Government-
(A) where the agreement 50 per cent. 2.5 per cent.; 
25 is made after the 29th day 
of February. 1964 but 
before the 1st day of 
April, 1976 
(B) where the agreement 40 per cent. Nil; 
30 is made after the 31st day 
of Maroh. 1976 
(V) on incom e by way of 44 per cent. 2.2 per cent. i 
interest payable on a tax-
free security 
35 (vi) on any other incom e 70 per cent. 3.5 per cent. 

52 
• 
PART m 
Raws for cca1cldCltlns or chargins Inc:o.e-tGJ In certain cases, deducUng 
incOllle-taI frolfl income chargeable IUIder the head "Salaries" or Illy 
payllent referred to in sub-section (9) of section 80E and computing 
"advance tar-, 
III cases In which lDcome-tax bas to be calculated UDder the 
first proviso to sub-sectton (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax 
Act or charged under sub-section (4) of secUon 172 or sub-section 
(2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 
5 
of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from 10 
iucome chargeable uDder the head ''Salaries'' or deducted UDder sub-
section (9) of section 80E of the said Act from any payment 
referred to In the said su,b-sectlon (9) or In which the "advance 
tax" payable UDder Chapter xvn-c of the said Act has to be 
computed, at the rate or rates In force. suoh Income-tax or. 
as the case may be. "advance tax" (not belDg "advance tax" In 
respect of any Income chargeable to tax uDder Chapter XU or 
section 164 of the Income-tax Act at the rates as specified In 
that Chapter or section), shall be so calculated. charged. 
deducted or computed at the following rate or rates:-
Parqrqh A 
Sub-P arqraph I 
15 
20 
III the case of every Individual or Hindu undivided fam fiy 
or unregistered firm or other association of peraons or body 
of Individuals. whether Incorporated or not. or every artificial 25 
jur1d1cal peraon referred to In sub-clause (lIii) of clause (31) of 
seot~n 2 of the Income-tax Act. not being a cue to whJch Sub-
Pargraph U of th1s Paragraph or any other Parll1'aph of this 
Part appUes.-
Rates of incolle-tar 30 
(1) where the total Income Ntl; 
does not exceed Rs. 8. 000 
(2) where the total Income 
uceeds Ra. 8. 000 but doea not 
exceed Rs. 16,000 
15 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total income 
exceeds Re. 8.000; 35 

(3) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 15, 000 but does 
DOt exceed Rs. 20, 000 
(4) where the total Income 
53 
5 exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does DOt 
exceed Rs. 25, 000 
10 
15 
(5) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 25, 000 but does 
not exceed RI.30, 000 
(6) where the totallDoome 
exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does 
not aoeed Rs. 50,000 
(7) where the total Income 
exceeds RI. 50,000 but does DOt 
aceed Rs. 70, 000 
Rs. 1,050 plus 18 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs.15, 000; 
Rs. I, 950 phIS !.per CeDt of 
the amount by w~h the total 
Inoome exceeds Re. 20, 000: 
Rs. 3,200 phu 30 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
total Income exceeds 
Rs. 25,000; 
Rs. 4,700 piNS 40 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
totallnoome exceeds Rs.30, 000; 
Rs. 12,700 piNS 50 per ceJ¢. of 
the amount by which the total 
Inoome exceeds RI. 50, 000; 
(8) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 70,000 but does DOt 
aceed Rs. 1,00,000 
Rs. 22,700 piNS 55 per cent. of the 
amOunt by which the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 70, 000; 
20 (9) where the total moome Rs. 39,200 pllts 80 per cellt. of 
the amount by which the total 
Inoome exceeds Rs. 1,00,000: 
exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
Provided that for the purposes of tb18 ~ Parcraph, -
(i) DO IDoome-tax ahall be payable on a total income DOt 
25 exceedJDg Rs. 10, 000; 
so 
(ii) wbere the totallDCome exceeds RB. 10,000 but doee 
DOt exceed RB. 10,540, the Income-tax payable thereon shall 
DOt exceed seventy per oeDt. of the amount by which the total 
iDoome exoeeds RB. 10,000. 
The amount of lDoame-tax oomprteci In acoordaDce with the 
precedtDc provtalou of this Sab-Parap-aph sball be tnoreued by 
a surchage for purposes of the UDiOIl calculated at the rate ~ 
fifteen per cent. of such IDCome-tu. 
.. 

54 
Sub-Paragraph II 
In the case of every Hindu undivided famUy which at any time 
during the prev:lous year has at least one member whose total 
Income of the prev:lous year relevant to the &ssessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of AprU, 1979 exceeds Rs. 10,000, - 5 
Ratts of incomt~t4I 
(1) where the total Income Nil; 
does not exceed Rs. 8,000 
(2) where the total Income 18 per cent. of the amount 
exceeds Ra. 8,000 but does not by which the total income 10 
exceed Rs. 15, 000 exceeds Rs. 8,000: 
(3) where the total Income Rs. 1,260 plus 25 per cent. 
exceeds Rs. 15, 000 but does I10t of the amount by which the 
exoeed Rs. 20,000 total Income exceeds Rs.15, 000: 
(4) where the total Income Rs. 2,510 plus 30 per cent. of 15 
exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not the amount by which the total 
exoeed Rs. 25,000 Income exceeds Rs.20, 000: 
(5) where the total Income Rs. 4,010 plus 40 per cent. 
exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does of the amount by which the 
DOt aceed Rs. 30,000 total income exceeds 20 
Rs. 25,000; 
(6) where the total income Rs. 6,010 plus 50 per cent. 
exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not of the amount by which the 
exoeed Rs. 50,000 total Income exoeeds 
Rs. 30,000: 25 
(1) where the total income Rs. 16,010 plus 55 per cent. 
exceeds Re. 50,000 but does of the amount by which the total 
DOt exceed Rs. 70,000 income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
(8) where the total Income Rs. 27,010 plus 60 per cent. 
exceeds Re. 70,000 of the amount by which the 30 
total income exceeds 
Rs. 70,000: 
Provided that for the purposes of this Sub-Paragraph,-

55 
(i) DO income-tax shall be payable (II a total income not 
exceediDg Rs. 10, 000; 
(ti) where the total Income exoeeds Ra. 10. 000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 10,690, the Income-tax payable thereon shall 
5 not exceed seventy per cent. of the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds Rs. 10, 000. 
Surcharge on incOtne-ta% 
The amount of Income-tax oomputed in accordance with the 
precec:UDg provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be 1acreued 
10 by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of fifteen per cent. of IAlch lncome-tax. 
15 
20 
25 
PGI'qraph B 
In the cue of every co-operative l!IOclety.-
Rite. of inCOllle-f4Lr 
(1) where the total Income 
does not exceed R8. 10.000 
(2) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 10, 000 but does 
DOt exceed Rs. 20. 000 
(3) where the total mcome 
exceeds R8. 20,000 
15 per cent. of the total 
IDoome; 
Rs. 1,500 p!u's 25 per oem. 
of the amoUDt by which the 
totallncome Eatoeed8 
Rs. 10,000; 
R8. 4,000 pillS 40 per cent. 
of the amoUDt by which the 
total income exceeds 
Rs. 20.000. 
Surcharse on incollle-ta 
The amoUDt of tncome-tax computed in acoordance with the 
precediDg provisions of tb18 Parqraph aball be tncreued by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
fifteen per cent. of suCh IDcome-tu. 

66 
P arG8raph C • 
Sub-P",."h I 
III. the cue of every ~ firm, DOt belDl a cue to 
whtch Sub-Parqraph U of th1a Parqnpb. appllea,-
Rates of inco.,"w 
(1) where the total Income Nil; 
doea DOt Gceed Ra. 10,000 
(2) where the total Income 6 per ceDt. of the amount by 
exceeda Ra. 10,000 but doea DOt whJoh the total iDoome aceeda 
_ceed Ra. 25,000 Ra. 10,000; 
(3) where the total IDoome Ra. 750 plus 7 per ceat. of 
aceeda Rs. 25, 000 but does DOt the amount by which the total 
exceed. Ra. 50. 000 mcome exceed.a R8.25,OOO: 
(4) where the total mcome Ra. 2.500 plus 16 per cent. 
aceeda Ra. 50,ooo.but does DOt of the amOUDt by which the 
exceed. Rs. 1.00,000 total iIlcome exceeds 
Ra. 60,000: 
(5) where the total IDoome Ra. 10,000 plus 24 per ceat. 
uoeeda Ra. 1. 00,000 of the amount Of whtch the 
total IDoome exceeds 
Ra. 1.00,000. 
Surehar., on incolI'''IGl' 
The amount of 1Dc0me-tax comPlteci In IICcorclaDoe with the 
prececUDg provlalona of th1a Sub-Par8p'aph shall be JDcreued 
5 
10 
15 
20 
by a 8Ul'Charge for purposes of the Umon calculated at the f&te 25 
of fifteen per cent. of such IDoome-ta ... 
In the cue of every reglaerted firm whose tot81lDoome 
1Dc1udea lucome derived from a profeasion carried on by It 
.' 

5 
57 
aDd the income 80 mcluded 18 DOt less thaD flfty-one per cent. 
of suoh total income,-
(1) where the total 1ncome 
does not exoeed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total Iaoome 
exceeda Rs. 10, 000 but does DOt 
aoeed Rs. 25,000 
Nil; 
.. per oent. of the amoUDt by 
wMch the totallDoome exoeeda 
Ra. 10,000; 
(3) where the total income 
10 '8ltOeeda RB. 25,000 but does 
DOt soeed Rs. 50,000 
Rs. 800 ,Ius 7 per cent. of 
the amoUDt by whJOh the total 
Income exceeds Rs. 26,000; 
15 
20 
(4) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does 
DOt aoeeci RI. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total income 
exoeeda Rs. 1,00,000 
Ra. 2,360 plus 13 per cent. 
of the amouat by which the 
totallDoome exceeds 
Rs. 60,000: 
Rs. 8, 860 pJus 22 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
total Income exceeds 
Rs. 1,00,000. 
Surck4Fse on incom,.tur 
The amount of Income-tax computed In accordance with the 
prececHag prov18Jou of this Sub-Paragraph shall be Increased 
by a suroharp for p,trp088S of the Union calculated at the rate 
of flfteell per oent, of such moome-tu. 
26 EIP' •• "n . -For the purposes of this Paragraph, "reclaered 
30 
firm" iDclude& an unrec18tered firm assessed as a recl8tered firm 
UDderolause (b} of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. 
P"qraph D 
ID the cue of every local authority,-
Rate of inco .. e~ 
OIl the whole of the total inoome 
Surc;hGfse on tncOIll~W 
50 per oeDt. 
The amount of inoome-tax computed at the rate herembefore 
apeo1fied shall be increueci by a surohup for purpoA8 of the 
Unlall oaloulated at tile rate of fifteen per cent. of.uch lDoome-
taK. 

58 
Pcarcagropn E 
In the case of a company t -
Rates of income-tar 
I. In the case of a domestic company,-
(1) where the company ia a 
company in which the public 
are substantially interested, -
(i) in a case where the 
total income does not exceed 
Rs. 1,00,000 
45 per cent. of the totalincomei 
(iil in a case where the total 55 per cent.of the total income; 
income ex~eds Rs. I, DO, 000 
(2) where the company is not 
a company in which the public 
5 
10 
are substantially interested, - 15 
(i) in the case of an 
Industrial company.-
(ca) wbere the total 55 per cent. of the total income; 
income does not exceed 
Rs. 2,00,000 20 
(b) wbere the total 80 per cent. of the total income; 
income exceeds Be. 2,00,000 
(Ii) in any other case 65 per cent. of the total income: 
Provided that -
(i) the income-tax payable by a domestic company t being a 25 
company in which the public are substantially interested, the 
total income of which exceeda Rs.1, 00, OOo,shall not exceed the 
aggregate of -
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been Rs.I, DO, 000 (the income 30 
of Rs. I, 00, 000 for this purpose being computed as if such 
income included income from various sources in the same 
proportion as the total income of the company) i and 

"\.''1, 
': .. '. 
• 
59 
(b) eighty per cent. Of the amount by which its total income 
exceeds Rs. 1,00,000; 
(U) the income-tax payable by a domestic compa..l\Y, not being a 
company in which the public are substantially interested, which 
5 is an industrial company and the total income of which exceeds 
Re. 2,00,000, shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been Rs. 2, 00,000 (the income 
of Rs. 2, 00, 000 for this purpose being computed as if such 
10 income included income from various sources in the same 
proportion as the total income of the company); and 
15 
20 
26 
30 
35 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which its totalinoome 
exceeds Rs. 2, 00,000. 
Do In the case of a company other than a domestic company,-
(i) CD so much of the total 
income as consists of -
(a) royalties received from 
an Indian cc:mcern in pursu-
ance of an agreement made by 
it with the Indian concern 
after the 31st da,y of March. 
1961 but before the 1st day of 
April. 1976, or 
(b) fees for rendering technical 
services received from an Indian 
concern in pursuance of an agree-
ment made by it with the Indian 
concern after the 29th dq of Feb-
ruary. 1964 but before the 1st 
day of April, 1976, 
and where such agreement has, 50 per cent. ; 
in either case, been approved 
by the Central Government 
(ii) on the balance, if any, 70 per cent. 
of the total income 

60 
Surcfuarge Dn inCDme-tar 
The amount of income-tax: computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall be increased by a 
surcharge calculated at the rate of five per cent. of such 
income-tax. 5 
PART IV 
~e section 2(7)(e), 
RULES FOR COMPUTATION OF NET AGRlC1JLTURAL INCOME 
Rule 1. - Agricultural income of the nature referred to in 
sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of sectlon 2 of the Income-tax Act 10 
shall be computed as If it were income chargeable to income-tax 
under that Act under the head ''Income from other sources" and 
the provisions of sections 57 to 59 of that Act shall. so far as may 
be. apply accordingly: 
Provided that sub-section (2) of section 58 shall apply subject 15 
to the modification that the reference to section 40A therein shall 
be construed as not including a reference to sub-sectlons (3) and 
(4) of section 40A. 
Rille 2. - Agricultural income of the nature referred to In 
8ub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of section 2 of the 20 
Income-tax Act [other than income derived from any buUdlng 
required as a dwelling house by the receiver of the rent or revenue 
or the cultivator or the receiver of rent-in-kind referred to in 
the said sub-clause (c,shall be computed as if It were income 
chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head "Profits 25 
and gains of business or profession" and the provisions of 
sections 30,31,32,34,36,37,38,40, 40A (9tber than sub-
sections (3) and (4) thereo~, 41. 43. and 43.A of the Income-tax 
Act shall, so far as may be. apply accordingly. 
Ride 3. - Agricultural income of the nature referr'Jd to in 30 
sub-clause (c) of clause (1) r:4. section 2 of the Income-tax Act. 
being Income derived from any buUdlng required as a dwelling 
house by the receiver of the rent or revenue or the cultivator 
or the receiver of rent-in- kind referred to In the said sub-
clause (c) shall be computed as if it were Income chargeable 35 
to income-tax under that Act uDder the bead "Income from 
house property" and the provisions of sections 23 to 27 of that 
Act shall. so far as may be. apply accordtnglyz 

61 
, 
Provided that sub- section (2) of the said section 23 shall apply 
subject to the modifications that the references to "total income" 
therein shall be construed as references to net agricultural 
income and that the words, figures and letter "and before mak-
5 log any deduction under Chapter VIA" shall be omitted. 
Rule 4. - Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provisions of these rules, in a case where the assessee derives 
income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by him in 
India, such income shall be computed in accordance with rule 
10 8 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962, and slxty per cent. of such 
income shall be regarded as the agricultural Income of the 
assessee. 
Rule 5., - Where the assessee is a partner of a -registered 
firm or an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm 
15 under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act, which 
in the previous year has any agricultural income, or is a 
partner of an unregistered firm which has not been assessed 
as a registered firm under clause (b) of the said section 183 
and which in the previous year has either no income charge-
20 able to tax under the Income-tax Act or has total income not 
exceeding the maximum amount not chargeable to tax in the 
case of an unregistered firm but has any agricultural income, 
then, the agricultural income or loss of the firm shall be 
computed in accordance ~th these rules and his share in the 
25 agricultural1ncome or loss of the firm shall be computed in 
the manner laid down in sub-section (1) , sub-section (2) and 
sub-section (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax Act and the 
s hare so computed shall be regarded as the agricultural income 
or loss of the assessee • 
. 
30 Rule 6. - Where the assessee is a member of an association 
of persons or a body of Individuals (other than a Hindu undivided 
famUy, a company or a firm) which in the previous year has 
either no income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act or 
has total income not exceeding the maximum amount not charge-
35 able to tax in the cue of an association of persons or a body 
of indiViduals (other than a Hindu undivided famUy, a company 
or a firm) but has any agricultural income, then, the agrlcul-
turallncome or loss of the association or body shall be com-
puted in accordance with these rules and the share Of the 
40 assessee In the agricultural income or loss so computed shall 
be regarded as the agricultural income or loss of the 
assessee. 

62 
Rut e 7 •. - Where the result of the cOJDputation for the previous 
year in respect of any source of agricultural Income Is a loss, 
such loss shall be set off against the income of the assessoe, 
if any, for that previous year from any other source of agricul-
tural Income: 
Provided that where the assessee Is a partner of an un-
registered firm which has not been assessed as a registered 
firm under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act 
or is a member of an as soc tatton of persons or a body of 
1nd1v1duals and the share of the assessee in the agricultural 
Income of the firm, association or body, as the case may be, 
is a loss, such loss shall not be sat off against any Income 
of the assessee from any other source of a,grlculturalincome. 
Rut e B. - Any sum payable by the assessee on account of any 
tax levied by the State Government on the agrtcultural1ncome 
shall be deducted in computing the agricultural income. 
Rule 9. - (1) Where the assessee has, in the previous year 
relevant to the assessment year commeDClng on the 1st day of 
April, 1978, any agrtculturallDcome and the net result of the 
computation of the agricultural income of the assessee for any 
one or more Qf the previous years relevant to the assessment 
years commencing on the 1st day of April, 1974 or the 1st day 
of April, 1975 or the 1st day of April, 1976 or the 1st day of 
April, 1977, 1s a 1088, then, for the purposes of sub- section 
f 2) of section 2 of this Act, -
fi> the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1974. to the extent. if any. such loss has not been set off 
against the agricultural income for the previous year relt:vant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1975 or the 1st day of April. 1976 or the 1st day of April. 
1977. 
(ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commenoing on the 1st day of April. 
1975. to the extent. if any. such loss bas not been set off 
against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year comlD8DOiDg ()Il the 1st day of April, 
1976 or the 1st day of April, 1977, 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 

63 
(iii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1976, to the extent, if any, such loss bas not been, set off against 
the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
5 assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1977, 
and 
(tv) the loss so oomputed for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1977, 
10 shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee 
for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commenc-
ing on the 1st day of April, 1978. 
(2) Where the assessee has. in the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1979 
15 or, if by virtue of any provisiCl1 f1 the Income-tax Act. income-tax 
is to be oharged in respect of the income of a period other than 
that previous year. in such other period. any agricultural income 
and the net result of the computation of the agricultural Income 
of t.I1e assessee for anyone or more of the previous years rele-
20 vant to the assessment years commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1974 or the 1st day of April. 1975 or the 1st day of April. 1976 
or the 1st day of April, 1977 or the 1st day of April, 1978, is a 
loss. then, for the purposes of sub-section (6) of seetlon 2 of this 
Aot,-
25 (i) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing 00. the 1st dlt3 of April, 
1974, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off 
against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
30 1975 or the 1st day of April, 1976 or the 1st day of April, 
1977 or the 1st day of April, 1978, 
(it) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1975, to the extent, if any. such loss has not been set off 
35 against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1976 or the 1st day of April, 1977 or the 1st day of April, 
1978. 

64 
. 
(iii) the loss so oomputed for the previOUB year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1976, to the extent, if any, such los8 bas not been Bet off 
against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the lat day of April, 5 
1977 or the 1st day of April, 1978, 
(iv) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the lat day of April, 
1977, to the extent, if any, such loss bas not been set off apinst 
the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 10 
assessment year commenoing on the lat day of April, 1978, 
and 
(v) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the lat day of April, 
1978, 15 
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee 
for the previous year relevant to the a&8eBBment year commencing 
on the lat day of April, 1979 or the period aforesaid. 
(3) Where a change has occurred in the constitution .of a firm, 
nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (1) shall entitle the firm to 20 
set off so much of the 108S proportionate to the share of a 
retired or deoeased partner computed in the manner laid down 
in sub-section(l) , sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of seotion 
67 of the Income-tax Act as exceeds his share of profits, tf any, 
d the previous year in the firm, or entitle any partner to the 25 
benefit of any portion of the said loss (computed. in"the manner 
aforesaid) which Is not apportionable to him. 
(4) Where any person dert vf..ng any agricultural income from 
any souroe has been succeeded in such capacity by another 
persOll, otherwise than by inheritance,. nothing in sub-rule 30 
(1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle any person, other than the person 
incurring the loss, to have it set off under sub-rule (1) or, as 
1I1e oase may be, sub-rule (2). 
35 
20 of 19'14" 
25 of 1975. 
66 of 19'76. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything oontained in this rule, no 1088 
which haa not been determined by the Income-tax Officer under 
the provisions m these rules, or the rules oontained in Part IV 
of tbe First Schedule to the Finance Act, 19'14, or of the First 
Schedule to the Finance Act, 1975, or of the First Schedule to 
the Finance Act, 1976, or of the First Sohedule to the Finanoe 
(No.2) Act, 1977, shall be set off under sub-rule (1) or, as the 
case may be, sub-rule (2). 
40 29 of 1977. 

65 
Ride 10. - Where the net·result of the computation made in 
accordance with these rules is a loss, the loss 80 computed 
shall be ignored and the net agricultural income shall be 
deemed to be nil. 
5 Rule 11. - The provisions of the Income-tax Act relating to 
procedure for assessment (including the provisions of section 
288A relating to rounding off of income) shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply in relation to the computation of the net 
agricultural income of the assessee as they apply in relation to 
10 the assessment of the total income. 
Rule 12. - For the purposes of computing the net agricultural 
income of the assessee, the Income-tax Officer shall have the 
same powers as he has under the Income-tax Act for the purposes 
of assessment of the total income. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the BUlls to give effect to the flnaDClal pro-
posals of the Central Government for the financial year 1978-79. 
The notes em clauses explaln the varlous provtslons contalned In 
the Blll. 
NEW DELHI; H.M. PATEL. 
The 28th February. 1978. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATI~ UNDER ARTICLES 117 
AND 274 OF THE CONSTITUTrctl OF lNDIA 
(Copy of letter No. F.4(1)-B(D)/78 dated the 28th February, 
1978 from Shrl H. M. Patel. Minister of Finance. to the 
Secretary, Ldt Sabha). 
The PreSident. having been lnformed of the subject 
matter of the proposed Bill, recommends under article 
117(1) read with article 274(1) of the Constitution of 
India, the introduction of the Finance Bill, 1978 to the 
Lok Sabha. 
2. The Bill will be introduced in the Lok Sabha immediately 
after the presentation of the Budget on the 28th February, 1978. 
66 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2, read with the Schewle to the Bill. seeks to prescribe the rates at which 
income-tax (including surcharge thereon) is to be levled on income chargeable to tax 
for the assessment year 1978-79. Further, it lays down the rates at which tax is to be 
dewcted at source wring the financial year 1978-79 from incomes subject to such deduc-
tion under the Income-tax Act; and the rates at which "advance tax" is to be paid and tax 
is to be calculated and charged in special cases for the financial year 1978-79. 
Rates of inoome-tax for the assessment year 1978-79. - Part I d. the Schedule to the 
-Bill specifies the rates of income-tax (including surcharge) on incomes liable to tax for 
the assessment year 1978-79. These rates are the same as those specified in Part W 
of the First Schedule to the Finance (No.2) Act. 1977 for the purpose of deduction of tax 
at source from ''Salaries'' and for computation of "advance tax" PIlyable during the 
financial year 1977-78. 
Rates for deduction of tax at source during the financial year 1978-79 from incomes 
other than "Salaries". - Part n of the Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates at which 
income-tax (including surcharge where applicable) is to be dewcted at source during 
the financial year 1978-79 from incomes other than ''Salaries'' and retirement annuities 
under section 80E(9) of the Income-tax Act. The rates specified in this Part for deduc-
tion of tax at source are the same as those specified in Part n of the First Schedule to 
the Finance (No.2) Act.' 1977 for the purposes of deduction of tax at source during the 
financIal year 1977-78. except for the modification tbat whereas hitherto tax was not 
deductible at source from winnings from horae races, the Bill provides that in the case 
of income by way of winnings from horae races payable to a resident recipient (other 
than a company) during the financial year 1978-79. tax will be deductible at the rate of 
34. 5 per cent. (made up of basic income-tax of 30 per cent. and surcharge of 4. 5 per 
cent. ). 
Rates for deduction of tax at source from "Salaries" and retirement annuities. com-
.putation of "advance tax" and charging of income-tax in special cases during the 
financial year 1978-79.- Part ill of the Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates at which 
income-tax (including surcharge) is to be deducted at source from "Salaries" and 
retirement annuities referred to in section 80E(9) of the Income-tax Act. and also 
the rates at which "advance tax" is to be paid and income-tax is to be calculated or 
charged in special cases for the financial year 1978-79. 
These rates a re the same;&s those specified in Part I of the Schedlle to the Bill 
for the assessment of incomes liable to tax for the assessment year 1978-79. 
Clause 3 seeks to insert an Explanation in clause (1) of section 6 of the Income-
tax Act. 
67 

68 
Under su.b-clauses (b) and (c) of the said clause, an individual Is said to be resident 
in India in any previous year if (1) be maintains or causes to be maintained for him a 
dwelling place 1n India for at least 182 days and is in India for at least thirty days in 
that year; or (U) having been in India for at least 365 days during the four preceding 
years he is in India for at lea8t Sixty days in that year. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that where an Indian citizen who is ren-
dering service outside India is or has been in India on leave or vacation in the previous 
year, the period of ''thirty days" and "sixty days" referred to in the aforesaid sub-
clauses shall, in the case of such Indian citizen be extended to ninety days. This 
relaxation will be available only where the service of the Indian citizen outside India haa 
been sponsored by the Central Government or the terms and conditions of such service 
have been approved by the Central Government or the prescribed authority. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1979 and will accordingly apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1979-80 and subsequent years. 
Clause 4 seeks to amend the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 23 of the 
Income-tax Act. Under the proposed amendment, the existing concession in the case 
of let-out residential units constructed after lit April, 1970 (by way of reduction of 
the annual value of each such residential unit by an amount up to Rs. 1,200 fur a period 
of five years) is being enlarged in relation to let-out residential units constructed after 
311t March, 1978. In respect of let-out residential units constrocted after 31st March, 
1978, the annual value will be reduced, in each case, by an amount up to Rs. 2,400 for 
the year, for a period of five years from the date of completion of the building. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of section 32 of the Income-
tax Act. At present. buildings newly erected by the assessee which are solely used 
for the purposes of the residence of such of his employees as have incomes chargeable 
under the head ''Salaries'' of Rs. 10,000 or less or are solely or mainly used for the 
welfare of such employees as a hospital, creche, canteen,etc., are entitled to the grant 
of initial depreciation allowance at the rate of twenty per cent. Under the amendment, 
the rate of initial depreciation allowance is proposed to be increased to forty per cent. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1979 and will accordingly apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1979-80 and subsequent years. 
Clause 6 seeks to amend section 35B of the Income-tax Act relatlngto the export 
markets development allowance. 
Under the existing provisions, domestic companies and other non-corporate reSident 
taxpayers who incur elq)enditure under specified categories for development of export 
markets are entitled to a weighted deduction in the computation of their taxable profits. 
In the case of widely-held companies such deduction is allowed at the rate of one and 
one half times, and in the case of other taxpayers at the rate of one and one third times, the 
qualifying expenditure. The qualifying expenditure includes, inter alia, expenditure 
on advertisement or publicity outside India in respect of goods, services or faci11Ues 
whinh the asselsee deals in or provides in the course of his business, expenditure on 
maintaining outside India a brancb, office or agency. UDder the proposed amendments, 
such weighted demction will be restricted to such expenditure incurred before 1st 
April, 1978. 

69 
These amendments w1ll take effect from 1st April, 1978. 
Clause 7 seeks to insert a new section 35CCA in the Income-tax Act. The new 
section provides for the deduotion, in the computation of the taxable profits. of 
expenditure incurred by an assessee engapd in a business or profession by way of 
payment of any sum, to an assooiation or institution having the object of undertaking 
any programme of rural development, to be used for the purposes of carrying out 
suoh programme. The deduotion will be admissible only in oases where the associa-
tion or institution is one approved by the presoribed authority and the approval of 
the prescribed authority has been obtained by such association or institution in 
respect of BUch programme. 
The amendment will take effect from 1st June. 1978 and will accordingly apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1979-80 and subsequent years. 
Clause 8 seeks to insert two new sub-sections (3A) and (3B) In section 37 of the 
Income-tax Act. New sub-section (SA) seeks to provide that the aggre,ate expenditure 
Incurred by an assessee on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion In india 
shall not be allowed to the extent mentioned below:-
(i) Where such aggregate expenditure does 
not exceed 1/4 per cent. of the turnover 
or the gross receipts of the business or 
profession 
(11) Where such aggregate expenditure exceeds 
1/4 per cent. but does not exceed 1/2 per 
cent. of the turnover or the gross receipts 
of the buSiness or profession 
(iii) Where such aggregate expenditure exceeds 
1/2 per cent. of the turnover or the groSS 
receipts of the business or profeSSion 
10 per cent. of such 
expenditure. 
12i per cent. of such 
expenditure. 
15 per cent. of such 
expenditure. 
The turnover or the gross receipts of the business or profeSSion for this purpose will 
not include any discount or rebate allo\Y8d by the asseSBee. No disallowance under 
new sub-section (3A) will be made in o&ses where the aggregate expenditure on adver-
tisement, etc., does not exceed Rs. 20.000. New sub-aection (3B) seeks to proVide 
that in the case of a new industrial undertaking, no disallowanoe under new sub-
section (3~ will be made for three assessment years commencing from the assessment 
year relevant to the previous year in which the industrial undertaking begins to 
manufacture or produce articles. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st Aprtl, 1979 and will aocordiDlly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1979-80 and subsequent years. 

70 
Clause 9·seeks to amend clause (b) of tbe proviSo to sub-section (2) of section 52 
of the Incomfl-tax Act. Under the existing provisions, the provisions of sub-section 
(2) of section 52 relating to determination of consideration for transfer in cases of 
under-statement are inapplicable to cases where the full value of tbe consideration 
for the transfer of the capital asset is determined or approved by the Central Govern-
ment or the Reserve Bank. of India and the adequacy of the full value of the considera-
tion 80 determined or approved is not questioned by the assessee. Under the proposed 
amendment,the provisions of section 52(2) will be inapplicable to cases where the 
full value of the consideration for the transfer of the oapital asset is 80 determined 
or approved whether or not the assessee questions the adequacy of the full value of the 
consideration. 
This amendment wfil take effect retrospecUvely from 1st Aprll, 1974 and wfil 
accordingly apply in relation to the assessment year 1974-7:> and subsequent years. 
Clause 10 seeks to make certain amendments in section 54 of the InCOD-taX Act. 
Under the existing proVisions, capital gain arising from the transfer of a self-occupied 
bouse property is exempted from tax if the assessee utilises such capital gain for the 
purpose of acquiring another bouse property for the purpose of his residence within the 
time-limit specified in section 54. ~re only a part of the capital gain is 80 
utilised, the proportionate part thereof is exempted from tax. The proposed amend-
ments seek to provide that where any such house property is compulsorily acquired 
under any law and additional compensation is awarded by any court. tribunal or other 
authority. the capital gain attributable to such,additional compensation would be 
exempted from tax if such additional compensation is utilised by the 8 ssessee for the 
purpose of purchase or construction of a house property for his personal residence 
within the specified time-limit. 
These amendments will apply retrospectively from 1st April. 1974 and will 
accordingly apply in relation to the assessment year 1974-75 and subsequent years. 
Clause 11 seeks to make certain. amendments in section 54B of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions, capital gain arising from the transfer of any agricultural 
land is exempted from tax. if the assessee utilises the capital gain for the purchase of 
any other agricultural land within the specified period. Under the proposed amendments. 
where any agricultural land is compulsorily acquired under any law and additional 
compensation is awarded to the assessee by any court. tribunal or other authoritv. the 
caPital gain attributable to such enhanced compensation will be exempted from tax if the 
additional compensation is utilised for the purchase of other agricultural land within 
the specified period. 
These amendments w1ll apply retrospectively from the 1st April. 1974 and will 
accordingly apply in relation to the assessment year 1974-75 and subsequent yeara. 
Clause 12 seeks to make certain amendments in section 54D of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions. capital gain arising on the compul80ry acquisition, 
under any law, of any land or bullding or any rights therein forming part of an 
industrial undertaking belongiDg to the assessee is exempted from tax, if such capital 

71 
gain is utilised within the specified period for the purchase of similar asset. Where 
only a part of such capital gain is so utilised. the proportionate part of the capital gain 
is exempted from tax. 
Under the propoaed amendments. where any additional compensation is awarded to 
the assessee by any court. tribunal or other authOrity. the capital gain attributable 
to sueh additional compensation would be exempted from tax, if such additional com-
pensation Is utilised within the specified period for acquIsition of the asset referred 
to in section 54D. 
These amendments will apply retrospectively from 1st April. 1974 and will 
accordingly apply in relation to the assessment year 1974-75 and subsequent years. 
Clause 13 seeks to make certain amendments in section 54E of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause <a> (i) seeks to make certain modifications in Explanation 1 to sub-
section (1) of section 64E. One of the modifications seeks to secure that Investment 
after the 28th February. 1978 in shares In an Indian company will qualify as invest-
ment in a specified asset only where such shares form part of an initial issue of equity 
capItal made by a public company. Another modification seeks to provide that fixed 
depoSits with banks w1ll cease to be an eligible mode of Investment after 28th 
February. 1978. 
SUb-cl811se (b) seeks to insert three new sub-sections (3). (4) and (6) in 
section 54E. Under the proposed amendment. where a capital asset. not being 
a short-term capital asset. is transferred by way of compulsory acquisition or 
where the consideration for the transfer of the capital asset is determined or 
approved by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India. and subsequently 
any additional compensation is awarded by any cwrt. tribunal or other 8llthority. 
the capital gain attributable to such addit100al compensation would be exempt from 
tax, if such additional compensatioo Is invested or depOSited within the specified 
period in any specified 88set referred to in sectim ME. 
The amendments proposed will take effect from 1st April, 1978 and will 
accordingly apply in relation to the assessment year 1978-79 and subsequent years. 
Clause 14 seeks to insert a new sub-section (3) in section 72A of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions. where a company owning an industrIal undertaking or 
a sblp amalgamates with any other company. the accumulated loss and unabsorbed 
depreciation allowance of the amalgamating company is deemed to be the loss or the 
depreciation allowance of the amalgamated company of the previous year in which the 
amalgamation was effected if. on the recommendation of the specified authority. the 
Central Government is satisfied that the amalgamation was in the public Interest and 
that the other conditions mentioned in this behalf are fulfilled. 
The new sub-section seeks to provide ~hat where a company owning an industrial 
undertaking or a sbip proposes to amalgamate with any other company under a scheme 
of amalgamation. such other company may submit the proposed scheme of amalgamation 

72 
to the specified authority. Where the specified authority. after exam1D1n, the scheme 
and taking into account the relevant facts. is satisfied that the amalpmation if effected 
in accordance with such scheme or with such scheme as modified in suoh manner as 
that authority may sPecify, would satisfy the conditions referred to in 8ub-'section (1). 
the specified authority would send an intimation to such oompany that after the amal-
gamation takes place in accordance with the scheme or with the scheme as modlfied it 
would make. unless there is any material change in the relevant facts. the recommen-
dation to the Central Government under sub-section (1). 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1978 and will accordingly apply in 
relation to the assessment year 197~-79 and subsequent years. 
Clause 16 seeks to omit sub-section (4) of section 80A of the Income -tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions, no deduction is allowed under section 80G or section 
8000 or section 80D or section 80J or section SOL or section 80QQ in the oase of a 
Hindu undivided family which has at least one member whose total income of the previous 
year exceeds the maximum amount not chargeable to tax. The proposed amendment 
seeks to omit this provision. Accordingly, the deduction under section 80G, 8OGG. 
80SH. 8OJ. 80L or 80QQ would also be allowed in the case of such Hindu undivided 
families. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1979 and will accordingly apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1979-80 and subsequent years. 
Clause 16 seeks to amend section SOC of the Income-tax Aot relating to deduction in 
respect of life insurance premia, contribUtions to provident fund, etc. 
Under the amendment proposed in sub-clause (a), the quantum of demction from 
taxable income in respect of long-term savings through life insurance, provident fund. 
etc., will be varied so as to allow a deduction of the whole of the first Rs. 6.000 of the 
qualifying savings plus 60 per cent. of the next Rs. 5.000 plus 40 per cent. of the 
remainder of the qualifying savings. 
Under the amendment proposed in sub-clause (b), the monetary limit of the savings 
qualifying for tax relief in the case of an individual (not being an author, playwright. 
artist, musician or actor) and in the -case J of an association of persons or a body of 
individuals consisting only of husband and wife governed by the system of community 
of property in force in the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Havel1 and Goa. Daman 
and Dlu, will be raised from Rs. 20.000 to Rs. 30.000. 
These amendment. will take effect from 1st April. 1979 and w1ll accordingly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1979-80 and subsequent years. 
Clause 17 seeks to insert a new section 80CC in the Inoome-tax Act. 
The Dew section seeks to provide that where an assessee. being an indiVidual, or a 
Hindu UDCIlvided family, or an association of persons or a body of indlvlduals consist-
ing only of husband and wife governed by the system of community of property in 

73 
force in the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Baveli and Goa, Daman and Diu, 
purchases new equity shares out of his income chargeable to tax. he will be allowed 
a deduction, in the computation of his total iDcome, of an amount equal to fifty per 
cent. of the cost of the shares so purchased. Where such cost exceeeds Rs. 10,000, 
the amount with reference to which the deduction will be allowed will be limited to 
Rs. 10,000. For the purposes of this tax concession, the investment will be required 
to be made in equity shares issued by a public company engaged in the business of 
construction, manufacture or production of any article or thing, not being an article 
or thing specified in the list in the Eleventh Schedule to the Income-tax Act. The 
equity shares should form part of the initial issue of capital of the company, i. e. , an 
issue of capital made by the public company for the first time. In cases \Were the 
public company issuing the share capital was originally incorporated as a· private 
company, an issue of equity shares made for the first time after it has become a 
public company will not be regarded as an eligible issue of capital if the shares are 
offered for subscription at a premium or the company had declared, distributed or 
paid any dividends when it was a private company. The investment in equity shares 
will qualify for the proposed tax concession only if the taxpayer has sub'icribed to the 
shares in pursuance of an offer for public subscription made by the oompany or in 
pursuance of a reservation or an optim in bis favour by reasm d. his being a promoter 
of the company or has acquired them. from a person who is specified as an underwriter 
in pursuance of clause 11 of Part I of Schedule II to the Companies Act, 1956. 
The taxpayer will be required to hold the shares for a period of five years. The 
exemption will be forfeited if the taxpayer transfers the new shares before the end of 
the aforeSaid period. 
Once a deduction is allowed in respect of any equity shares under the new section 
8OCC, investment in those shares will not ap.1n be taken into account for the purposes 
of the tax concession under section SU. 
The deduction under this section will be available in t'elatlon to the previous year 
relevant to the assessment year commenCing on the 1st April, 1979 and sub-
sequent years. 
Clause 18 Beeks to subdUtute clause (b) of sub-secUon (2) of section 80P of the Income. 
tax Act by a new clause. Under the existing proviSions, praflts derived by a primary 
co-operaUve society engaged In supplytng milk raised by Its members to a federal milk 
co-operaUve society are exempt from Income-tax. The proposed amendment seeks to 
exteDd the scope of the existing tax concession to primary co-operative societies which 
ar~ engaged In the supply of mllk raised by their members to the Government or to a 
loop1 authority or to a Government -company or statutory corporation, engaged In supply-
Ing mUk to the publlc. 
Thls ameDdment will take effect from 1st Aprll, 1979 and will accordtngly apply In 
relation to the assessment year 1979-80 and subsequent years. 
Clause 19 seeks to make certain amendments In sectlm 155 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to Insert a new sub-sectlon (7 A) In section 155 « the Income-tax 
Act. The proposed amendment seeks to provlde that where In relation to any assessment 

74 
year a capltal gain arising on the compulsory acqUisition of a capltal asset Is,charged to 
tax and subsequently any additionaii. compensation Is awarded by any court. tribunal or 
other authority, the Income-tax Officer shall amend the order of assessment and re-
compute the capltal gain on the basis of the enhanced compensation. For thls purpose, 
the provisions of secUon 154 of the Income-tax ~ct relatlDg to rectifloation of mistakes 
shall apply and the perloe of four years for amendment of orders specified In sub- section 
(7) of that section shall be reckoned from the end of the previous year In whlch the 
additIonal compensation was received by the assessee. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (8) of section 155. ThIs amendment Is 
consequential to the Insertion of a new sub-sectlon (2) In section 54 of the l'Dcome-tax 
Act under clause 10 of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to Insert a new sub-secUon (8A) In sectlon 155. The proposed 
amendment seeks to provide that where In relatlon to any assessment year a capital 
gain arising on the compulsory acqulsltlon of a self-occupied bouse property Is charged 
to tax and. subsequently on receipt d. any additional compensation awarded by any court, 
tribunal or other authority, the assessee purchases or constructs any other house pro-
perty for the purposes of his residence wlthln the specified time limit. tile Income-tax 
Officer shall amend the Ofder of assessment so as to exclude the amount of cap( tal 
galn not chargeable to tax under new sub-sectlon (2) proposed to be Inserted In sectlon 
54 d. the Income-tax Act under clause 10 of the Bill. For this purpose. the proviSions 
of section 154 relating to rectlftcatioo d. mlstakes shall apply and the period d. four 
years for amendment of orders speclfled.1n sub-section (7) of that sectlon shall be 
reckoned from the end of the previous year In wblch the additional compensatlon was 
received by the assessee. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to amend sub-section (9) of section 155. ThIs amendment Is 
consequenttal to the Insertion d. a new sub-section (2) In sectlon 54B of the Income-
tax Act under clause 11 of the BUl. . 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to Insert a new sub-aecUon (9A) In section 155. The proposed 
amendment seeks to provtde that where In relatIon to any assessment year a capital 
gaIn arising on the compulsory acquiSItion of any agricultural land Is charged to tax 
and subsequently on receipt of any addl tlonal compensatl OIl' awarded by any court, 
tribunal or other authority. the aS8essee purchases any other acrlculturallaDd within 
the specified time limit, the IDCOme-tax OffIcer shall amend the order of assessment 
so as to exclude the amount of capital pin Dot ohargeable to tax under Dew~sub-sectlon 
(2) proposed to be Inseried In aecUon 54B of the Income-tax Act undC?r clause 11 of the 
BilL For this purpose, the provisions of section 164 relating to rectlflcatloD of mis-
takes shall apply and the period of four years for amendment of orders specified In 
sub-section (7) of that section shall be reckoned from the end of the previous year 
In which the additlonal compensation was received by the assessee. 
Sub-clauses (f) and (g) seek to amend sub-section (10) of section 155. The first amen-
ment Is cOIlsequentlal to the Insertion of a Dew sub-sectlm (2) In section 540 of the Income-
tax Act under clause 12 of the B' n. The effect of the second amendment will be that 
where In relatlClll to any assessment year a capltal gain arising on the compulsory acqui-
sltlon of any land or building or any rights therein forming part of an IndustrIal under-

75 
taking belonging to the &8Se88ee Is charged to tax and subsequently on receipt of any addi-
tional compensatton awarded by any oourt, trtb1.Dlal or other authority, the assessee 
acquires a slmllar aS8et within the speCified time limit, the Income-tax Officer shall 
amend the order of asses8ment so as to exclude the amount of capital gain not charge-
able to tax under Bub-section (2) proposed to be Inserted In section 540 of the Income-
tax Act under clause 12 of the Blll. For this purpose, the provisions of section 154 
relating to rectification of mistakes shall apply and the perIod of four years for amend-
ment of orders specified In sub-sectton (7) of that section shall be reckmed from the 
end of the previous year In which the additional compensation was received by the 
assessee. 
Sub-olause (h) seeks to amend sub-section (lOA) of section 155. This amendment 
Is consequential to the Insertion of a new sub-section (2) In section 54E of the Income-
tax Act under clause 13 of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (I) seeks to Insert a new sub-section (lOB) In section 155. The proposed 
amendment seeks to provide that where In relation to any assessment year a capital 
gain arlslng from the transfer. being a transfer by way of compulsory ac quIsltlon or 
being a transfer the consideration for which Is determined or approved by the Central 
Government or the Reserve Bank of India, of any capital asset Is charged to tax and 
subsequently on receipt of any addt tlonal compensatt on awarded by any court. tribunal 
or other authority. the assessee Invests or depoSits the additional compensation In any 
speclfled aSBet referred to In Bectlm 54E within the period specified therein. the 
Income-tax Officer shall amend the order of assessment so as to exclude the amount of 
capital gain not chargeable to tax under new sub-section (3) proposed to be Inserted In 
section 54E of the Income-tax Act under clause 13 of the Bill. For thIs purpose. the 
proviSions of section 154 relating to rectification of mistakes shall apply and the period 
of four years for amendment of orders specified In sub-sectton (7) of that sectIon shall 
be reckoned from the end of the previous year In which the additional compensation was 
received by the assessee. 
The amendments proposed under suo-clauses <a) to (g) will apply retrospectively from 
1st April. 1974 and the amendments proposed under clauses (h) and (I) wul take effect 
from 1st April, 1978. 
Clause 20 seeks to.amend section 193 of the Income-tax Act by adding a new clause 
(Ib) In the existing proviso to that section. The effect of the proposed amendment wlll 
be that no Income-tax will be deductible at source from any Interest payable on National 
Development Bonds. This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1978. 
Clause 21 seeks to Insert a new section 194BB In the Income-tax Act. 
Under the new section 1948B, Income-tax will be deducted at source by bookmakers 
and race clubs from winnings from horse races at the rates In force (1. e., the rates as 
may be prescribed In the Finance Act of the relevant year) where the payment exceeds 
Re. 2. 500. No deduction wlll, however. oe made from any such payment made before • 
1st June. 1978. 

76 
. 
Clause 22 seeks to amend section 208 of the Income-tax Act relating to condition of 
llablllty to pay advance tax. This ameDdment Is consequential to the Insertlon of new 
section 209A In the Income-tax Act 1Dlder clause 24 of the Bill. This amendment will 
take effect from 1st June. 1978. 
Clause 23 seeks to make certain amendments In section 209 of the Income-tax Act 
relattng to computation m advance tax. These amendments are consequentlal to the 
Insertion of new section 209A In the Income-tax Act under clause 24 of the Btll. These 
amendments wlll take effect from 1st June. 1978. 
Clause 24 seeks to Insert a new section 209A In the Income-tax Act. 
Under the exlstlng proviSions of section 210 of the Income-tax Act. a taxpayer, who 
has been previously assessed by way of regular assessment under the provisions of the 
Income-tax Act, I s required to pay advance tax CXl the basis of a notice Issued by the 
Income-tax Officer. Sub-section (1) of the proposed secUon 209A seeks to provlde that 
such assessee, If his current Inccime Is likely to exceed the amount speclfled In sub-
sectlon (2) of section 208 of the Income-tax Act, wUl be required to fUe a statement of 
advanoe tax payable by him. The lDOOme that will form the basis of oomputatlon of 
advance tax for the purposes of furnishing the statement will be the total Income of the 
latest previous year In respect of which he has been assessed by way of regular assess-
ment or. If a return has been filed by him for a later previous year OIl the basis of 
which tax has been pald by way of self-assessment under sectlon 140A of the Income-
tax Act, the total Income whlob forms the basis of such self-assessment. Sub-section 
(2) of the proposed section 209A seeks to provide that In cases where the assessee 
estimates that his current Income of the previous year In respect of wblcb he Is re-
qui red to furnl sh the statement of advance tax would be less than the total Income as 
aforesald, be will have the option to furnish an estimate of sucb current Income lDstead 
of furnishiDg the statement. A taxpayer who hu not previously beeD usessed will 
have to seud, as at present, an estimate of the advance tax pa,yab1e by bim with 
reference to his current Income. The advance tax so computed on the basis of the 
statement or, as the case ma,y be, the estimate, wUl be required to be paid In 
equal instalments OIl the datel appUcable in bls cue under sectiaa. 211. 
&1b-sectiaa. (3) of the proposed sectim 209A seeks to provide that where an assessee 
has furnished a statement as aforesaid, he will have the optim to file an estimate if he 
estimates that his current income is Ukely to be less than the income on the basis. of 
which he is so required to pay advance tax. The elltimate can be furnished at any time 
before the last instalment of advance tax is due in bis cue. 
Sub-sectlClO (4) of the proposed section 209A seeks to provtde that In a case where 
the advance tax payable by a taxpayer on the basts d. hls current Income exceed. the 
tax payable by him on the basis of the statement or estimate furnished by blm by more 
1han 33-1/3 per cent.. he will be required to furnish an estimate d. advance tax pay-
able by him. CXl the basts of his current Income before the date on which the last instal-
ment of such tax Is due from him. The Commtssloner of Income-tax wfi, however, be 
empowered to exteud the tlme-llmlt for furnishing the esUmate of advance tax In tbll 
t;ype of cases up to a period of thirty days Immediately following the accountlng period 
In respect of the taxpayer's bUSiness provlded the taxpayer has pald the advance tax 
payable on the basis d. the statement or estimate furnished by him before the date on 

77 
whlch the last tnat.\ment Is ordlnarlly due. Such extension wlll be permissible only 
In cases where the Commissioner of Income-tax Is satisfied that, havtng regard to 
the nature of the taxpayer's business and the accounting year of the taxpayer, It will 
be difficult for hlm to furnish the estimate of advance tax before the last date fixed 
for the purpose. 
Sub-section (5) seeks to provide that the assessee may send a revised estimate of 
the advance tax payable by hlm before any of the dates speclfied In section 211 and 
adjust any excess or deficiency In respect of an Instalment already pald In a subse-
quent Instalment or any subsequent Instalments. 
Sub-section (6) seeks to provide that every statement or estimate under new section 
209A wlll be sent In the prescrlbed form and verified In the prescribed manner. 
These provisions wlll take effect from 1st June, 1978. 
Clause 25 seeks to make certain amendments In section 211 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to Instalments of "advance tax". These amendments are cOllBeq'.!ential to the 
Insertion of new section 209A In the Income-tax Act under clause 24 01. the Blll. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st June. 1978. 
Clause 26 seeks to amend section 212 of the.lncome-tax Act relating to estimate of 
advance tax by assessee8. These amendments are consequentlal to the Insertlon of new 
section 209A tn the Income-tax Act under clause 24 of the Blll. These amendment/3 wlll 
take effect from 1st June. 1978. 
Clause 27 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 215 of the Income-tax Act. The 
propo8ed amendment seeks to provide that where an assessee has paid advance tax on 
the basis of an estlmate furnished by him under new section 209A proposed to be Inser-
ted In the Income-tax Act under clause 24 of the Bm and the advance tax so paid Is 
le8s than seventy-five per cent. of the asse.sed tax. simple Interest at the rate of 
twelve per cent. per annum from the 1st day of Aprll next following the financial year 
In which the advance tax Is paid up to the date of the regular assessment shall be pay-
able by him upon the amount by which the advance ~ So paid falls short of the assessed 
tax. 
This amendment wlll take effect from 1st June. 1978. 
Clause 28 seeks to amend section 216 of the Income-tax Act relating to the Interest 
payable by the assesseesln cases where the advance tax payable bas been under-esti-
mated. ThIs amendment Is consequential to the Insertion of new section 209A In the 
Income-tax Act under clause 24 of the Blll. 
ThiS amendment wlll take effect from 1st June. 1978. 
Clause 29 seeks to make certain amendments In secticm 217 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to Interest payable by the as8essees In cases where no estimate of advance tax 
Is made. These amendments are consequentlal to the Insertion of new section 209A In 
the Income-tax Act under clause 24 of the Bill and will take effect from 1st June. 1978. 

78 
Clause 30 seeks to substttute a new section In place of existing section 218 of the 
Income-tax Act. The substltuUon of the exlstlng sectlon ls consequential to the lnser-
tlon of new section 209A In the Income-tax Act under clause 24 of the BU!. The effect 
of the substl tutlon will be that If an assessee does not pay any lnstalment of advance 
tax by the due date In accordance with the statement or the estimate furnished under 
the proposed new sectlon 209A,he will be deemed to be an assessee In default. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1978. 
Clause 31 seeks to make certain amendments In sectlm 273 of the Income-tax Act. 
The changes made are consequential to the Insertion of new section 209A In the Income-
tax Act under clause 24 of the Bill. The effect d. the proposed changes will be that. 
default. wlthout reasonable cause. In furnishing the statement or estimate required 
under the proposed new section 209A will attract a penalty under section 273 of the 
Income-tax Act. The penalty for furnishing of a false statement under the proposed new 
section 209A wUl be a minimum or 10 per cent. and a maximum of 150 per oent. of 
the amount by which the advance tax actually paid faUs short of 75 per cent. 
of the assessed tax or the amount wJich would have been payable If the assessee had 
furnlshed the statement In accordance with clause <a) of sub-section (1) of the proposed 
new section 209A. whichever Is less. The penalty for non-furnishing of a statement 
will be a minimum of 10 per cent. and a maximum of 150 per cent. of 75 per cent. of 
the assessed tax. The penalty for non-furnishing of an estimate under sub-section (4) 
of the proposed new section 209A or for furnishing a false est{ mate under the said 
section will be the same a8 for non-furnishing of an estimate under sub-section (3A) 
of sectioll 212 or for furnishing a false estlmate under that sub-section. 
These amendments wlll take effect from 1st June, 1978. 
Clause 32 seeks to make certain amendments of a consequential nature In different 
provisions of the Income-tax Act. These amendments are consequential to the insertion 
of new section 194BB In the Income-tax Act under clause 21 of the Bill. 
Clause 33 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of sectlon 6 of the Interest-tax Act. 1974. 
Under the existing provtslons. the amount of Interest accruing or artsl~ to a scheduled 
bank befo.re the 1st August. 1974 Is no~ taken Into account In computing the chargeable 
Interest for the purposes of Interest-tax. The proposed amendment seeks to provlde 
that the amount of Interest which accrues or arises to a scheduled bank after 28th 
February. 1978 wUl not be taken Into account In computing the chargeable Interest for 
the purposes of the Interest-tax Act. 1974. 
ThIs amendment will take effect from 1st Aprtl. 1979 and will accordingly apply In 
relation to the assessm.ent year 1979-80 and subsequent years. 
Clause 34 seeks -
(1) to Insert an Explanatlon under the customs tarlff entry 37.01/08(2) relating 
to Cinematograph film. not exposed. so as to provide for calculaUoD of Import duty 
on fllms designed for more than one exposure. 
(2) to raise the rate of import duty on yarn of man-made fibres. 

79 
Clause 35 seeks to levy up to 31st March, 1979, auxUiary duties of customs on all 
imported goods at the rate of 20 per cent of their value. 
Clause 36 seeks -
<a) to raise the rate of hulc excise duty m -
(1) Fabrics Impregnated, coated or laminated with preparattmi of cellulose 
dertvatives or of other arttftcfal plastic materials, falling UDder Item Nos. 19 m, 
22(3) and 22B; 
(2) All other goods, DOt elsewhere specified; 
(b) to ohange the tariff descrtptim and/or to restructure the duty rates in the 
Central Excise Tariff in respect of -
(1) Reflnd diesel 011 and vaporising all; 
(2) Fum&ce 011; 
(3) Petroleum products not otherwise spectfled; 
(4) Parts and accessories, not elsewhere specffled, of Motor Vehioles and 
Tractors, Inoluding Trailers. 
J 
(c) to maert specific entries in the Central Excise Tariff for -
(1) non-cellulosio wastes; 
(2) trailers . 
• 
(d) to include new items in the Central Excise Tariff for -
(1) Coal; 
(2) Electricity. 
Clause 37 seeks to levy up to 31st March, 1979, spactal duties of excise on all excisable 
goods at the rate of five per oent. of the duty leviable under the Central Excises Act, read 
with any notl ftoaUm for the Ume being in force issued under the sa1d Act, or the rules 
made thereunder. 
Clause 3~l1ke sectlm 5 of the Finance Act, 197\ provides that salt shall be duty free 
for another year. 
Clause 39 seeks to· amend the First Schedule to the Indian Post Otftce Act, 1898 with 
a view to reviSing tbe postage rates for letters, registered newspapers and book.pattem 
and sample packets and also to f:bdng a separate postage for post cards containing printed 
oommunioat1on. 

80 
Clause 40 seeks to make certain amendments m tJie Compulsory Deposit Sobeme (moome-
tax Payers) Act. 19'14. 
Bub-olau8e (a) seeks to amend sub-section (1) of seotion 4 of the Act. The ameDdment 
in 8ub-clause (8)(2) seeks to seoure that in relation to the aB8888lnent years 1977-71 aDd 
197 8-79, compulsory depo8its are made at the rates speclfled in existing Paragraph B of 
the Schedule and that in relation to the 88seSsment year 1979-80, oompul8ory deposits 
are made at the rates specified In new Paragraph C of the Schedule. 
8ub-clauae (b) seeks to maert a new Paragraph C which lays down the rates at 
which compulsory deposits are required to be made in relation to the a8Se88ment 
year 1979-80 aDd to make suitable modfficatioos m the proviso. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 19'18. 

81 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA nON 
Clause 3 seeks to add IlJl Explanatlm to clause (1) of section 6. 
Under the Explanation, an Indian citizen rendermg service outside India wwld be able to 
stay in India on leave or vacation for a period up to 19 days without acquiring the status 
of a resident, if his service outside India has been lPonsored by the Central Government 
or the terms and conditions of his service outside India have been approved by the 
Central Government or any authority prescribed by rules made UDder section 295 of the 
Income-tax Act. 
Clause 7 seeks to insert a new section 35CCA in the Income-tax Act. The section 
provides for the deduction of expenditure incurred by an asseS8ee engaged in a business 
or profession by way of payment of any sum to an association or institution having the 
object of undertaking any rural development programme, to be used for the purposes of 
carrying out such programme. The deduction will be admissible only in cases where such 
associations or institutions and such programmes of rural development are approved by 
the authority prescribed in that behalf by rules made under section 295 of the Income-tax 
Act. 
Clause 17 seeks to insert a new section 80CC in the Income-tax Act. Under the new 
section, the assessee being any individual' or a Hindu undivided family or an association 
~ persons or a body of individuals consisting only of husband and wife governed by the 
system of community of property in force in the UDtm territories of Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Goa, Daman and Diu w1ll be allowed a deduction in the computatioo of total 
income equal to 50 per cent. of the cost of new equity shares purchased by the assessee if 
such shares form part of an eligible issue of capital as defined in sub-section (3) of the 
section. The said sub-section (3) spella out expressly the main conditions which an 
issue of equity shares should satisfy in order to be regarded as an eligible issue of 
capital. With a view to covering matters of detail and matters which cannot be foreseen, 
the sub-section eIl1powers the Central Board of Direct Taxes to prescribe, by rules made 
under section 295 of the Income-tax Act, the other conditions which an issue of equity 
shares should satisfy in order to qualify as an eligible issue of capital. 
Clause 24 seeks to insert a new section 209A in the Income-tax Act to provide for 
the statements and estimates of advance tax whic'h the assessees will have to send to 
the Income-tax Officers. Sub-section (6) of the section provides that all such state-
ments and estimates shall be in such form and verified in such manner as may be 
prescribed by rules made under section 295 of the Income-tax Act. 
The matters aforesaid are matters of detail or matters which cannot be foreseen 
at this stage. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

LOK SABBA 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central 
Government for the financial year 1978-79. 
(Shri H.M. Patel, 
Minister of Finance.) 