As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
29TH FEBRUARY, 1964. 
" ,~\ ~:vr l ,'" . \ ~" ~ 
(
i'''<''!"''''''' ("" 
" J\; ..,... ,1.0,/. ..... , 
',. )J:.l'(' •. J. 3j.lJb 
I I 
BinNo.15'ofl~_ 
THE COMPANIES (PROFITS) SURTAX BILL, 1904 
A 
Bll..L 
to impose II special ~ tm the profits of certain companies. 
Bit it enacte8 by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- ' 
I.' (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 
1964. 
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(l) "assessee" means a person by whom surtax or any other 
sum of money is payable under this Act and includes every 
person in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act has 
10 been taken for the assessment of his chargeable profits or of the 
amount of refund due to him or of the chargeable profits of any 
other person in respect of which he is assessable or of the amount 
of refund due to such other person; 
(2) "assessment" includes re-assessment; 
15 (3) "assessment year" means the period of twelve months 
commencing on the 1st day of April, every year; 
(4) "Board" means the Central Board of Direct Taxes 
of 1963. constituted under the Central Boardl of Revenue Act, 1963; 
(5) "chargeable profits" means the total income of an 
of 1981. 20 assessee computed under the Income-tax Act, 1961 for any pre-
vious year or years, as the case may be, and adjusted in accord-
ance with the provisions at the First Schedule; 
(6) "Income-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
(7) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
25 Act; 
(8) "statutory deduction" means an amount equal to ten 
per cent. of the capital of the company as computed in accordance 
with the provisions of the Second Schedule, or an amount of 
two hundred thousand rupees, whichever is greater: 
2237 LS-l. 
Short 
title 
and 
extent. 
Deftnlttonl, 

Tax 
authorities. 
Char,e 
of tax. 
Return ot 
chargeable 
profits. 
2 
Provided that where the previous year is longer or shorter 
than a period of twelve months, the aforesaid amount of ten 
per cent. or, as the case may be, of two hundred thousand rupees 
shall be increased or decreased proportionately: 
Provided further that where a company has cillferent previous 5 
, years in respect of its income, profits and gains, the aforesaid 
increase or decrease, as the case may be, shan be calculated with 
reteJ:ellce·to_ the length of the previous year of the longest 
duration; and 
(9) all other words and expressions' used herein but not 10 
defined and defined' in the InOointi-tax Act shan have the mean-
ings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
3. (1) Every Director of Inspectien, Commissioner of Income-tax, 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Income--tax, Inspecting Alaistant 
Commissioner of 'InC011le.tax and Income-tax OfIlcer shall bave the 15 
like powers and perform the like functions, under tllis Act .-s ~ ~., 
and performs under the In~ome-tax Act, and -for the exereiae of hil 
powers and the performance of his functions, his jurisdiction under 
this Act will be the same as that he has under the Income-tax A,ct. 
(2) All officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act 20 
shall observe and follow the orders, iIllJtructions and directions of 
the, Board: 
Provided 'that no such orders, instructions or directions shall be 
given'so as to interfere with the discretiml: of-the Appellate Assistant 
Commiss~9ner in the ex~rcise of his appellate functions. 25 
(3) Every Income-tax Officer, employed ia the exec1Jtion of this 
Act, shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and, directions 
issu~d for his guidance by the Di!ector of Inspection or by the Com-
missioner or by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner' undQr whose 
jwisdiction he performs his functions. ", - 30 
4. Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, there shall be 
charged on every company for every assessment year commencing 
on and from the first day of April, 1964, a tax (in this Act referred 
to as the surtax) in respect of so much of its chargeable profits of the 
previous year or previous years, as the case may be, as exceed the 35 
statutory deductibn, at the rate or rates speci1\ed iJi the Third 
Schedule. 
5. (1) In the case of every company whose chargeable profits 
assessable under this Act exceeded during the previous year tae 
amount of statutory deduction, its principal officer, or where in the 40 
case of 8 non-resident company any person has been treated as its 
agent under section 163 of the Income-tax Act, such person, shall 

3 
furnish a return of the chargeable profits of the company during the 
previous year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed 
manner and setting forth such othier particulars as may be prescribed, 
before the 30th day of September of the assessment year: 
5 Provided that on an application made in this behalf, the Income-
tax Ofticer may, in his discretion, extend the date for the furnishing 
of the return. 
(2) In the case of any company which in the Income-tax Officer's 
opinion is assessable under this Act, the Income-tax Officer may, 
10 before the end of the relevant assessment year, serve a notice upon 
its principal officer, or where in the case of a non-resident company 
any person has been treated as its agent under section 163 of the 
Income-tax Act, upon such person, requiring him to furnish within 
thirty days from the date of service of the notice a return of the 
IS chargeable profits of the company during the previous year in the 
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and settm, 
forth such other particulars as may be pr.escribed : 
.Provided that on an application made 'in this behalf, the Income-
tax Officer may, in his discretion, extend the date for the furnishing 
20 of the return. 
(3) Any assessee who has not furnished a return during the time 
allowed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), or having furnish-
ed a return under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) discovers any 
omission or wrong statement therein, may furnish a return or a 
25 revised return, as the case may be, at any time before the assessment 
is made. 
6. (1) For the purposes·of making an assessment under this Act, 
the Income-tax Officer may serve on any person who has furnished a 
return under sub-section (1) of section 5 or upon whom a potice has 
30 been served under sub-section (2) of section 5 (whether a return 
has been furnished or not) a notice requiring him ona date therein 
to be specifted, to produce or cause to be produced such accounts or 
documents or evidence as the Income-tax Officer may require for 
the purposes of this Act and may from time to time serve further 
35 notices requiring the production of such further accounts or docu-
ments or other evidence as He may require. 
(2) The Income-tax Officer, after considering such accounts, 
documents or evidence, if any, as he has obtained under sub-
section (1) and after taking into account any relevant material which 
-40 he has gathered, shall, by an order in writing, assess the chargeable 
2237(B) LS-2 
AaIe .... 
ment. 

Provist_al 
aileD-
ment. 
profits and the amount of the surtax payable on the basis of such 
assessment. 
7. (1) The Income-tax Officer, before proceeding to make an 
assessment under section 6 (in this section referred to as the regular 
asaessment) may, at any time after the expiry of the period allowed S 
1lD.der sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 5 for the furnish-
ing of the return and whether the return has or has not been 
furnished, proceed to make in a summary manner a provisional 
aaseasment of the chargeable profits and the amount of the surtax 
payable thereon. 10 
(2) Before making such provisional assessment, the Income-tax 
Oftlcer shall give notice in the prescribed form to the person on 
whom the provisional assessment is to be made of his intention to 
do so, and shall with the notice forward a statement of the amount 
of the proposed assessment, and the said person shall be entitled to IS 
deliver to the Income-tax Officer at any time within fourteen days 
of the service of the said notice a statement of his objections, if any, 
to the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(3) On expiry of the said fourteen days from the date of servke 
of the notice referred to in sub-section (2), or earlier, if the assessee 20 
agrees to the proposed provisional assessment, the Income-tax Officer 
may, after taking into account the objections, if any. made under 
sub-section (2). make a provisional assessment, and shall furnish 
a copy of the order of the assessment to the assessee: 
Provided that assent to the amount of the provisional assessment, 2S 
or failure to make obj,ection to it, shall in no way prejudice the 
assessee in relation to the regular assessment. 
(4) There shall be no right of appeal against a provisional 'asses&-
ment made under this section. 
(5) After a regular assessment has been mede. any amount paid 30 
or deemed to have been paid towards the provisional assessment' 
made under this section shall be deemed to have been paid towards 
the regular assessment; end where the amount paid or deemed to 
have been paid towards the provisional assessment exceeds the 
amount payable under the regular assessment, the excess shall be 3' 
refunded to the assessee. 
8. If-
(a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that by 
reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to 
make a return under section 5 for any assessment year or 'to 40 

5 
disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for nis 
assessment for any assessment year, chargeable profits for that 
year have escaped assessment or have been under-assessed. or 
assessed at too Iowa rate or have been made the subject of 
5 excessive relief under this Act, or 
(b) notwithstanding that there has been no omission or 
failure as mentioned in clause (a) on the part of the assessee, 
the Income-tax Officer has in consequence of information in his 
possession reason to believe that chargeable profits assessable for 
10 any assessment year have escaped assessment or have been 
under-assessed or assessed at too low a rate or have been the 
subject of excessive relief under this Act, 
he may, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time, and in cases 
falling under olaUie (b) at any time within four years of the end of 
15 that assessment year, serve on the assessee a notice containing all 
or any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under 
section 5, and may proceed to assess or re-assess the amount charge-
able to surtax, and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may 
be, apply as if the notice were a notice illsued under that section. 
20 9. If the Income-tax Officer, in the course of any proceedings PenalU.. 
under this Act, is satisfied that any person has, without reasonable 
cause, failed to furnish the return required under section 5, or to 
produce or cause to be produced the accounts, documents or other 
evidence required by the Income-tax Officer under sub-section (1) 
2S of section 6, or has concealed the particulars of the chargeable profits 
or has furnished inaccurate particulars of such profits, he may direct 
that such person shall pay, by way of penalty, in addition to the 
amount of surtax payable, a sum not exceeding-
(a) where the person has failed to furnish the return required 
30 under section 5, the amount of surtax payable; 
(b) in any other case, the amount of surtax which would 
have been avoided if the return made had been accepted as 
correct: 
Provided that the Income-tax Officer shall not impose any penalty 
35 under this section without the previous authority of the Inspecting 
Assistant Commissioner. 
10. No order imposing a penalty under section 9 shall be made gr::;-
unless the assessee has been given a reasonable opportunity of being ot beinc 
beard. heud. 

Appeals 
to the 
Appellate 
Assiatant 
CDmrnla-
aI ..... 
Appeals to 
Appellete 
TribW1Bl. 
6 
11. (1) Any person objecting to the amount of surtax for which 
he is liable as assessed by the Income-tax Officer or denying his 
liability to be assessed under this Act, or objecting to any penalty 
or fine imposed by the I~ome-tax Officer, or to the amount allowed 
by the Income-tax Officer by way of any relief under any provisions 5 
of this Act, or to any refusal by the Income-tax Oftlcer to grant relief 
or to an order of rectification or amendment having the effect of 
enhancing the assessment or reducing the tefund, or to an order 
refusing to allow the claim made by the assessee for a rectification 
under section 13 or amendment under section 14 may .appeal to the 10 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner. 
(2) Every appeal shall be in the prescribed form and shall be 
verified in the prescribed manner. 
(3) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the follow-
ing date, that is to say- 15 
(a) where the appeal relates to assessment or penalty or 
fine, the date of service of the notice of demand relating to the 
assessment or penalty or fine, or 
(b) in any other case, the date on which the intimation of 
the order sought to be appealed against is served: 20 
Provided that the Appellate Assistant Commissioner may admit 
an appeal after the expiration of the said period if he is satisfied that 
the appellant had sufficient cause for not presenting it within that 
period. 
(4) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall hear and deter- 25 
lIline the appeal and, subject to the provisions of this Act, pass such 
orders as he thinks tit and such orders may include an order enhaneiDr 
the assessment or penalty: 
Provided that an order enhancing the assessment or penalty thall 
not be made unless the person affected thereby has been given a 30 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement. 
(5) The procedure to be adopted in the hearing and determination 
of the appeals shall, with any necessary modiftcation, be in aecord-
aBCe with the procedure applicable in relation to income-tax. 
12. (1) Any assessee aggrieved by an order passed by a CommiJ.. 35 
sioner under section 16, or an order pused by an Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner· under any provision of this Act, may appeal to the 
Appellate Tribunal 88ainst such order. 

7 
(2) The Commissioner may, if he ebjects to any order passed by 
the Appellate Assistant Commissioner under any provision of this 
Act, direct the Income-tax Officer to appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
against the order. 
S (3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be 
filed within sixty days of the date on which the order sought to be 
appealed against is communicated to the assessee or to the Commis-
sioner, as the case may be. 
(4) The Income-tax Officer or the assessee, as the case may be, 
Il) on r.eceipt of notice that an appeal against the order of the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner has been preferred under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2) by the other party may, notwithstanding that he 
may not have appealed against such order or any part thereof, within 
thirty days of the receipt of the notice, file a memorandum of cross-
15 objections, verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the 
order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, and such memoran-
dum shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were an 
appeal presented within the time specified in sub-section (3). 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit the 
20 filing of a memorandum of cross-objections after the expiry of the 
relevant period referred to in sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), if 
it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it 
within that period. 
(6) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed 
25 form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and, shall, 
except in the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2) or a 
memorandum of cross-objections referred to in sub-section (4), be 
accompanied by a fee of one hundr,ed rupees. 
(7) Subject to the provisions of , this Act, in hearing and making 
30 an order on any appeal under this section, the Appellate Tribunal 
shall exercise the same powers and follow the same procedure as it 
exercises and follows in hearing and making an order on any appeal 
under the Income-tax Act. 
13. (1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the 
35 record, the Commissioner, the Income-tax Officer, the Appellate 
Assistant CommissiQDer and the Appellate Tribunal may, of hiS, or 
its, own motion or on an application by the assessee in this behalf, 
amend any order passed by him or it in any proceeding under this 
Act within four years of the date on which such order was passed. 
Recti. 
fication 
of 
mist,akes 

Other 
amend-
ments. 
Surtax 
deductible 
in 
computin~ 
distribut-
able 
inct:'me 
tmder 
lncome-tax 
Act. 
Revision 
of orders 
prejudicial 
to 
revenue. 
8 
(2) An amendment which has the effect of enhaDdng the asaess-
ment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of 
the assessee shall not be made under this section unlMs the authority 
concerned has given notice to the assessee of its intention 80 to do 
and has anowed the assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 5 
(3) Where an amendment is made under this section, the order 
shall be passed in writing by the authority concerned. 
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, where any such 
atnehdment has the effect of r«lucing the assessment, the Income-tax 
Ofllcer shall make any refund which may be due to such assessee. 10 
(5) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhaneing the 
assessment or reducing the refund already made, the Income-tax 
Oftlcer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed 
form specifying the sum payable. 
14. Where as a result of any order made under section 154 or 15 
section 155 of the Income-tax Act, it is necessary to recompute the 
chargeable profits det9l1Ilined in any 88Ie8B!Ilent under this Act, the 
Income-tax Offtcer may proceed to recompute the chargeable profit&, 
and determine the surtax payable tJr refundable on the basis of such 
recomputation and make the necessary amendment and the provisions 20 
of section 13 shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, the period of 
foUr years specified in sub-section (1) of that section being reckoned 
from the date of the order passed under the af9resaid sections of the 
Income-tax Act. 
15. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause 0) of aeetion 25 
109 of the Income-tax Act, in computing the distributable income 
of a company for the pul'pOlreS of Chapter XI~D of that Act, the 
surtax payable by the company for any assessment year shall be 
deductible frOIn the total income of the company assessable for that 
as!eSsment year. 30 
16. (1) The Commissioner may call for and examine the record 
of any proceeding under this Act, and if he considers that any order 
passed therein by the Income-tax Officer is erroneous in so far as 
it is prejudicial to the interests of the revenue, he may, after giving 
the assessee an opportunity of being heard and after making or 35 
causing to be made such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass such 
order thereon as the circumstances of the case justify, including an 
ornp.r enhancing or modifying the assessment, or cancelling the 
assessment and directing a fresh assessment. 

(2) No erder shall be made under sub-section (1)-
(a) to revise an order of re-aase88l11ent made under section 8, 
or 
(b) after the expiry of two years from the date of the order 
5 sought to be revised. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), an 
order in revision under this section may be passed at any time in 
the cue of an order which has been passed in consequence of, or 
to give effect to, any finding or direction contained in an order of 
10 the Appellate Tribunal, the High Court or the Supreme Court. 
Ezplananon.-In computing the period of limitation for the 
purposes of sub-section (2), any period during which any proceedmg 
under this section is stayed by an order or injunction of any court 
shall be .excluded. 
IS 1'7. (1) The Commissioner may, either of his own motion or on 
an application by the assesaee for revision, call for the record of any 
proceeding under this Act which has been taken by an Income-tax 
Officer or Appellate Assistant Commissioner subordinate to him and 
may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made and, 
20 subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass such order thereon, 
not being an order prejudicial to the assessee, as he thinks fit. 
(2) The Commissioner shall not of his own motion revise any 
order under this section if the order has been made more than one 
year previously. 
(3) In the case of an application for revision under this section 
by tlw U&eiBee, the application shall be made within one year from 
the date on which the order in question was communicated to him 
or the date on which he otherwise came to know of it, whichever 
ia earlier: 
30 Provided that the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied that the 
assessee was prevented by sufficient cause from making the applica-
tion within that period, admit an application made after the expiry 
of that period. 
(4) The Commissioner shall not revise any order under this 
35 HCtiOD. in the foUowini cases-
(a) where an appeal against the order lies to the Appellatl;' 
Assistant Commissioner or to the Appellate Tribunal but has n,,· 
been made and the time within which such appeal may be made 
has not expired, or, in the case of an appeal to the Appellate 
40 Tribunal. the assessee has not waived his right of appeal; or 
2237 LS-.2. 
Revision 
of orders 
by Com-
missioner. 

,Appli-
cation of 
provisions 
of 
Income-tax 
Act. 
Incf'me-tax 
papers 
to be 
available 
for the 
purposes 
ot this 
Act. 
Failure to 
deliver 
returns, 
etc. 
10 
(b) where the order is pending on an appeal before the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner; or 
(c) where the order has been made the subject of an appeal 
to the Appellate Tribunal. 
(5) Every application by an assessee for revision under this S 
section shall be accompanied by a' fee of twenty-five ru~s. 
Explanation 1.-An order by the Commissioner declining to 
inter£.ere shall, for the purposes of this seetion, be deemed not to 
be an order prejudicial to the assessee. 
Explanation 2.-For the purposes of this section, the Appellate 10 
Assistant Commissioner shall be deemed to be an authority sub-
ordinate to the Commissioner. 
18. The provisions of the following sections and Schedules of the 
Income-tax Act and the Income-tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 
1962, as in force from time to time, shall apply with such modifica- IS 
tions, if any, as may be prescribed, as if the said provisions and the 
rules referred to surtax instead of to income-tax and super-tax:-
2 (44), 131 to 136 (both inclusive), 138, 140, 156, 160, 161, 162, 
163, 166, 167, 170, 173, 175,176,178, 179,220 to 229 (both inclusive), 
231,232,233,237 to 242 (both inclusive), 244, 245, 254 to 262 (both 20 
inclusive), 265, 266, 268, 269, 281, 282, 284, 287 to 293 (both 
inclusive), the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule: 
Provided that references in the said provisions and the rules to 
the "assessee" shall be construed as references to an assessee as 
defined in this Act. 2S 
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-t&.-,: 
Act, all information contained in any statement or return made or 
furnished under the provisions of that Act or obtained or collected 
for the purposes of that Act may be used for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) All information contained in any statement or return made 30 
or furnished under the provisions of this Act or obtained or collected 
for the purposes of this Act may be used for the purposes of the 
Income-tax Act. 
20. If any person fails without reasonable cause to furnish in due 
time any return under sub-section (2) of section 5, or to produce, 
or cause to be produced, any accounts or documents required to be 3S 
produced under section 6, he shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, and with a further fine which 
may extend to ten rupees for every day during which the default 
continues. 40 

21. If a person makes in any return furnished under section 5, 
any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes 
to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable 
with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with 
5 fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; 
22. If a person makes or induces in any manner another person 
to make and deliver any account, statement or declaration relating 
to chargeable profits liable to surtax which is false and which he 
either knows to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be 
10 punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
23. (1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence 
under section 20 or section 21 or section 22 or under the Indian Penal 
IS Code except at the instance of the Commissioner. 
(2) The Commissioner may, either before or after the institution 
of proceedings, compound any offence punishable under section 20 
or section 21 or section 22. 
24. If the Central Government considers it necessary or expedient 
20 so to do for avoiding any hardship cir anomaly or removing any 
difficulty that may arise as a result of the application of this Act 
to the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Daman 
and Diu and Pondicherry, the Central Government may, by general 
or special order, make an e~mption, reduction in rate or other 
25 modi1icat~on in respect of surtax in favour of any class of assessees 
or in regard to the whole or any part of the chargeable profits of any 
class of assessees. 
25. (1) .The Board may, subj,ect to the control of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 
30 carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely :-
(a) the form in which returns under section 5 may be 
3S furnished and the manner in which they may be verified; 
(b) the form in which notice for making provisional assess-
ment shall be given; 
. (c) the form in which appeals under section 11 or section 12 
may be filed and the manner in which they shall be verified; 
Falie 
state-
ments. 
Abetment 
ot talse 
returns, 
etc. 
Institution 
ot 
proceed-in,s and 
composi-
tion ot 
offeD,ees. 
Power to 
make 
exemp-
tion, etc., 
in 
relation 
to 
certain 
Union 
territories. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

(d) the procedure to- be fbllowed en applicationa fer recti-
fication of mistakes and applications· for refandsj 
(e) any other matter which by this Act is to be; or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government shan cause every rule made under 5 
this section to be laid as soon as may be after it ismacie before each 
House of Parliament while it is in ession for a total peI':lod of thirty 
days, which may be comprised; in one session 01" ID two moe_hre 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the SeaaioR iR· w~ it is· 80 
laid or the session immediately following, both HoUBell- agne in 10 
making any modification in the rule or both HeuBes agree that- the 
rule should not be made, that rule shall ther.eafter have t«ect cmly 
in such modified form or be of no .effect, as the case may be; 80 
however that any such m<Xiiftcatioa or aumtfmeat &baU'. be without 
prejudice·to the validity ofoything previously. daDe under tUtnde. 15 
26. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any company 
which has no share capital. . 
THB FIRST SCHEDULE 
E.See section ~(S)] 
RULES FOR COMPU'l'ING TIll: CKAJIUA8I&· iIiIOi'l'HJ. 
In computing the chareeable profits of a previous year, the total 
income computed for that. year. under the Income-tax Act shan be 
Idjusted as follows:-
20 
1. Income, profits and gains and other sums falling within 
the following ~lauses shan ~ excluded from Rch tlltallm:ome, 25 
Damely:-
(i) any income chargeable under thelncom&'tu: Act 
under the head "Capital pin,s"; 
(ii) any compensation or other payment •. is: MferNd 
to in clause (ii) of section 28 of the Ibeom..-tax AlIt; 30 
(iii) profits and gains of any bmsines of- Bfe' insurance; 
(iv) any income referred to in sub-section (2) of. section 
41 of the. Income-tn Act; 
(v) the amount of profits and, gains derives from. an 
industrial undertaking or· hotel, on which UDder section 84 35 
of the Income-tax Act incOJMI.tax is, not payable;' 

18 
'("Di)inooD'1e :Chargeable under the Income-t&x Act under 
the hud "lnterest ,on securities" derived from any security 
IfJf ;the-oen.tral Government issued ,or declared to be income-
tax free or from any security of a State Government issued 
5 income-tax free, the income-tax· whereon is payable by the 
:State Govemment; 
trif)HBy'SUDl,ln respect of wl1ich a deduction of income-
.tax is .allowed . under the provisions of section 88 of the 
lMome.tax Act,; 
10 (!Viti) iincome by way' of ,dividends from an Indian 
'C8DlpaDy .. r.a,comp&ny -which has made the .prescribed 
'arl'lIIlJemants for tlhe daalm:athm and payment of dividends 
within lndia; 
(i,x) income by way of royalties received from Govern-
IS )fteIlt or.8 :laaal .authority or an,y Indian concern; 
1(%)'in ttre·oase!of allOD1l'eSicient company which has not 
l'ft84e the prescribed 'arnmgements for the declaration and 
~t of ,dhddends within India, its income by way of 
an,y interest or fees for .rendering technical services received 
20 nom Government or a loca1 authority or any Indian concern; 
(o1Ii) .inthe case .of.a banking company-
(4) Jany sum :which ~g the previous year is 
'tramdi:rltid by ,it 110 :a .reserve fund under sub-section 
,(l-~ l{)f.ection 17 of theBan~Companiel Act, 1949 or 
25 is d~posited by it with the Reserve Bank of India under 
.sub-clause (ii) of clause (0) of sub-section (2) of section 
11 of that Act, not exceeding the amount required under 
.the aforesaid provisions to 'be so transferred or deposited, 
as the case may be, or 
30 !(b) aIlY.awn tl:an&ferred by it durJng the previous 
,eflr ,to any Ie&erves .in India including reserves not 
shown as such in its published balance-sheet in so far 
as the sums transferred to such 'reserves'are attributable 
to income chargeable to tax under the Income--tax Act 
35 and have not been allowed as a deduction in -cumputing 
its total income under that Act and in so far as the aggre-
gate of such sums does not exceed the highest of the 
aggregate of such sums, -if any, BO "transferred 1taring 
any 'one 'Of 'the three years prior to the ~pmvious year, 
40 whichever is higher; 
(zii) .the amount of AD.Y deduction .from the income-tax 
and super-tax chargeable .on the total income allowed under 

14 
the annual Finance Act in connection with export of any 
goods or merchandise out of India or the sale by a manu-
facturer of any artiCles to any person who exports them out 
of India. 
2. The balance of the total income arrived at after making S 
the exclusions mentioned in rule 1 shall be reduced by-
(i) the amount of income-tax and super-tax payable 
by the company in respect of its total income under the 
provisions of the Income-tax Act after making allowance for 
any relief, rebate or deduction in. respect of iJlcome--tax and 10 
super-tax to which the company may be entitled under the 
provisions of the said Act or the annual Finance Act, and 
after. excluding from such amount-
(a) the amount of income-tax and super-tax, if any, 
payable by the company in respect of any income IS 
referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii) or 
clause (viii) of rule 1 included in the total income; 
(b) an amount equal to the amount by which the 
rebate of super-tax admissible to the company under 
the provisions of the annual Finance Act is, under 20 
the provisions of the said Act, reduced with reference 
to any amount of dividends distributed by the company 
during the previous year relevant to the assessment year; 
(ii) in the case of a company which has been charged 
to tax in a country outside India on any portion of its income, 25 
profits and gains included in its total income as computed 
under the Income-tax Act, the tax actually paid in respect 
of such income, profits and gains in the said country in 
accordance with the laws in force in that country after 
. allowance of every relief due under the said laws: 30 
Provided that the aforesaid reduction shall not be 
allowed unless the assessee produces evidence of the fact of 
the payment of the aforesaid tax in that country. 
3. The net amount of income calculated in accordance with 
rule 2 shall be increased by the aggregate of- 3S 
(1) the amount of any interest payable by the company 
in respect of its debentures or moneys referred to in clause 
(v) of rule 1 of the Second Schedule for the previous year 
relevant to the assessment year allowed as a deduction in 
computing its total income; 40 

.u of 1922. 
43 of 1961. 
. 
11 of 1922. 
43 ot 1961. 
15 
(ii) any expenditure incurred on account of commission. 
entertainment and advertisement, to the extent such expen-
diture, in the opinion of the Income-tax Officer, is excessive 
having regard to the circumstances of the case : 
5 Provided that the previous authority of the Inspecting 
Assistant Commissioner is obtained for holding such 
. expenditure to be excessive. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (8) ] 
10 .RU13S FOR COMPUTING '!'HE CAPI'l'AL OF A COMPANY FOR '1'H!: PURPOSES OF 
SURTAX 
15 
20 
1. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Schedule, the 
capital- of a company shall be the aggregate of the amounts, as on the 
first day of the previous year relevant to the assessment year, of-
(i) its paid-up share capital; 
(ii) its reserves, if any,created under the proviso (b) to 
·claUse (vib) of sub-section (2) of section 10 of the Indian Income-
tax Act, 1922 or under sub-section (3) of section 34 of the Income -
tax Act, 1961; 
(iii) its other reserves as reduced by the amounts credited 
to such reserves as have been allowed as a deduction in comput~ 
ing the income of the company for the purposes of the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922 or the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
25 (iv) its debentures, if any; and 
(v) any moneys borrowed by it from the Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India or the Industrial Credit and Investment 
Corporation of India or any other financial institution which the 
Central Government may notify in this behalf in the Official 
Gazette or any moneys borrowed by it from any banking insti-
tution (not being a financial institution notified as aforesaid) 
under an agreement providing for the repayment of such moneys 
during a period of not less than ten years" or any moneys 
borrowed from any person in a country outside India for the 
creation of any capital asset in India. 
35 Explanation.-For t~e removal of ~oubts it is her~by declared 
that any amount standmg to the CredIt ·of any account In the books 
of a company as on the ftrst day of the previoUs year relevant to 
the assessment year which is of the nature of item (5) or item (6) 
or item (~) under the heading "RESERVES AND SURPLUS',' or of 

16 
any item under the heading "CURRENT LIABILITIES AND 
PROVIsIONS" :Ln'the c61umn relating to~"in the "FORM 
OF 13ALANCE-SHEE'l'" given in Part 1 of 'Schedule VI to the Companies 
Act, 1956 shall not be regarded as a reserve for the purposes of com-
putation of the capital ot a company under the provisions of this S 
Schedule. 
2. Where a company owns any 1lssetsthe income 'from Which in 
accordance with clause (iii) or clawie.(vi) or clause (viii) of rule 1 of 
the- First Schedule is required to be excluded irom its total income 
in computing its chargeable profits, the amount of its capital as com- 10 
puted under rule 1 of this Schedule Shall be .diminished by the cost to 
it of the aaiQ assets.as .on ,the tiIst day,of .the prewious.lIe&r .selewmt 
to the assessment year in so far.as ,such cost exceeds the aggregate 
of-
(i) any mone'ys borrowedrotherthan .uch JnODeys as .r.e.J5 
referred to in clause (v) l)f rule:lJ and..remajning outstandi.,g ~ 
on the first day of the said previous year; and 
1 of 18M. 
(ii) the amount of any fund, any surplus aDd any such 
reserve .as is not to be taken into account in computinJ{ the 
capital under rule 1. 20 
Explanation 1.-A paid-up share capital or reservebroqht Jnto 
edatence by creatini or increasmg (by revaluation or otherwise) any 
book .asset is .not capital for computing ihe ,c~ital.of a company for 
tbepurPOses of this Act. 
Explanation e.-Any premi'mn receive8 ineash by the -eompany 2S 
on the issue of its shares standing to the credit of the share ,premium 
account shall be regarded as fonning part of its paid-up share capital. 
,~lafUUion 3.-Where.a company has different .previous years in 
respect of its income, profits and gains, the computation of c~pital 
under rules 1, .2 and 3 shall be made with re1erence to the previous 30 
year which ,commenced first. 
S. Where after theftrst day of the previous llear Irelewllt :to the 
assessment year the capital of '. company as computed 4n :8CCIIIIda:nce 
with the foregoing niles Of this Schedule 18 increased byanymwunt 
during that 1'1"evrous year on account of tncreaseof :paid .. up sare 35 
capital or issue of debentures fJr bonowing ·af :any mODel'S refened 
to in clause . (v~of rule 1 or -is reduced lw .any;amount on .account· of 
reciur:Sion of paid..up share capital or ,redemption of any .debentures 
or repayment of any suehmoneys, such capital sball be .increased .or 
reduced, aathe cue may ,be, ~ a'ium which.beaIw toihat.JUD.ount'4 0 
the .... me .rproporfton '81 ibe -mllDber of tiys of -thepr.evious y.ear 

daring which' the increase or the reduction remained effective bears 
to the total number of days in that previous year. 
4: Where· a part of the income-, profits' and gains of a company is 
not includible in its total ihcome as computed under the Dlcome-tax 
S~ Act, its capital shall be. the sum ascertained in. accordaBce with rules 
I, 2 and 3, diminished by an amount which bears to that sum the 
same proportion as. the amount of the aforesaid income, profits and 
gains bears to the total amount of its income, profits and gains. 
10 
THE THIRD SCHEDULi: 
(See section 4) 
RATI'B OJ' SUltTAX 
1. On the amouat by which the chargeable 
profits exceed the amount of the_ statutory 
deduction- 40 per cent.· 
IS Provided that where the total income of an as&eIIIIee;. being an 
Indian company or any other company which has made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends within 
India, includes any income, profits and gains attributable to the 
business of generation and distribution of electricity or of manu-
20 ae1ure- 011 pr.oduetion, of aay one or more of the articles specified 
in the, li&t. in paHil'aph 2t the assessee shall be entitled teD L rebate 
equ.aJ 10 a sum of ane-1ifth of the amount which be81'S- to the amount 
01 the surtax payable by the asseaee, the same propertion . al the 
amOUllt of. the aferesaid inclulliw -bears to· the amount of the total 
25 iBcome of the· 1lfISeIIee-: 
Provided further that if the Central Government, having regard 
to the stage of development of any industry and other relevant 
factors, considers it necessary or expedient so to do, it may, at any 
time by general or special order withdraw the benefit conferred by 
30 the preceding proviso in respect of the business of generation and 
distribution of electricity or of manufacture or production of any 
article specified in the said list or extend such benefit to any other 
bultiness and such order shall have effect for the purposes of assess-
ment under this Act for any such assessment year (not being the 
35 assessment y.ear commencing on the first day of April, 1964) as may 
be specified in the said order. 
2237 LS-3 . 

18 
.2 .. The ~; of articles referred to in paragraph 1 shall be as 
follows :-
(1) Iron and steel (metal), ferro-alloys and special steels. 
(2) Aluminium, copper, lead and zinc. 
(3) Coal, lignite, iron are and bauxite. 5 
(4) Indu~trial machinery specified under the heading 
"S. Industrial Machinery", sub-heading CIA. Major items of 
specialised 'equipment used in specific industries", of the First 
Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951. 10 85 of 1951 
(5) Boilers and steam generating plants, steam engines and 
turbines and internal combustion engines. 
(6) Equipment for the generatiWl, transmission and distri-
bution of electricity, including transformers. 
(7) Machine tools, precision tools, dies and· jigs. 
(S) Tractors and earth-moving machinery. 
(9) Steel castings and forgings. 
(10) Cement and refractories. 
(11) Fertilisers. 
(12) Paper and pulp. 
(13) Tea, coffee and r.ubber. 
IS 
20 
(14) Component parts of the articles mentioned in· items· 
Nos. (4), (5), (6) and (S), that is to say, such parts as are essential 
for the working of the machinery referred to in items aforesaid 
and have been given for that purpose some special shape or 2.5 
quality which would not be essential for their use for aJiyother 
purpose and are in complete finished fOrin and ready for flttnent ... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to impose a special tax on companies 
(other than those which have no share capital) on their excess 
profits, namely, the amount by which the total income of a company 
as reduced by certain types of income and certain sums and the 
income-tax and super-tax payable by it exceeds a sum of ten per 
cent. of its capital, reserves and certain borrowed moneys or a sum 
of Rs. 2 lakhs, whichev.~r is higher. The Notes on clauses explain 
the wrious provisions of the Bill. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 29th February, 1964. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 3 (16) -B/64, dated the 29th February, 1964 
from Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the Secre-
tary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under article 117(1) end (3) of the 
Constitution of India, the introduction of the Companies (Profits) 
Surtax Bill, 1964 in the Lok Sabha and elso recommends to the Lok 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
• • • • • • 

Nates on c:lCIu,e, 
Clause 2 contains deftnitions of the various terms and expressions 
used in the clauses of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (3) defines "assessment year" as being the period of 
twelve months commencing on the 1st day of April, every year. 
Sub-clctuH (5) defines "chargeable profits" to mean the total 
income of the aasessee for the previous year relevant to the assess-
ment year as computed under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and adjusted 
in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule. 
Sub-clause (8) defines the term "statutory deduction" to mean an 
amount equal to ten per cent. of the capital of the company as 
computed in accordance with the Second Schedule or an amount of 
Rs. 2 lakhs, whichever is greater. The amount of the statutory 
deduction is required to be adjusted in relation to the length of the 
previous year, if such year is longer or shorter than a period of 
12 months. 
Sub-clause (9) provides that all words and expressions used in-
the Bill but not deftned therein and deftned in the InCOlDb-tax Act, 
1961 shall have the same meanings as in that Act. 
Clause 3 seeks to give jurisdiction in respect of surtax to the 
same authorities as have jurisdiction under the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 4 seeks to make a provision for charging a tax named 
"surtax" on every company for the assessment year 1964-65 and 
subsequent assessment years on that amount of its chargeable profits 
durmc the previous year or the years which exceeds the amount of 
statutory deduction admissible to it at the rate or rates specified in 
the Third Schedule. 
Clause 5-
Sub-clause (1) seeks to impose a liability on the principal officer 
of eVoery company, and in the case of a non-resident company, also 
on the person who has been treated as its agent under section 163 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961, to furnish a retUrn of the chargeable 
profits of the company by the 30th day of September of the relevant 
assessment year, if such chargeable profits exceed the amount of the 
statutory deduction. 
20 

• 
Sub .. cl.au9~ (2) seeks to enable the Income-tax Ofticer to issue a 
notice to 8 company requiring it to furnish a return of the chargeable 
profits within thirty days from the date of service of the notice. 
Under both the sub-clauses, the Income-tax Officer has been 
authorised to extend the time for furnishing the return.. 
Sub-ctause (3) seeks to enable an asseslee who hu not furnished 
the return within the time allowed or who having furnished the 
return discovers any omissions therein, to file a return or a revised 
return, as the case may be, at any time before the completion of the 
assessment. 
CIa,," 6 provides that the Income-tax Offtcer may call for 
accounts, documents or other evidence from the assessee for the 
purpose of his assessment, and shall make the assessment after 
considering all the material so obtained by him. 
Clause 7 enables the Income-tax Officer to make a provisional 
assessment of the chargeable profits of an assessee at any time after 
the expiry of the period allowed for filing a return, subject to the 
issue of a 14 days' notice to him inviting his objections, if any, to the 
proposed assessment. It has been provided that there shall be no 
right of appeal against such a provisional assessment and that the 
tax paid on the provisional assessment shall be deemed to have been 
paid towards the regular assessment. 
Clause 8 relates to the assessment or re-assessment of chargeable 
profits which have escaped assessment or have been under-assessed 
etc. It provides that in the case of an omission or failure on the part 
of the assessee to file a return or to disclose fully and truly all the 
materials necessary for his assessment, such proceedings may be 
initiated at any time, and in other cases witJain four, years of the end 
of the relevant assessment year. 
Clause 9 seeks to make a provision for the imposition of a penalty 
on an assessee for his failure, without reasonable cause, to furnish a 
return of his chargeable profits or to produce the accounts, documents 
or evidence required by the Income-tax Officer, and for any conceal-
ment or deliberate furnishing of inaccurate particulars of his charge-
able profits. 
Clause 10 provides that the assessee shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard before any penalty under clause 9 is 
imposed upon him. 
Clause 11 relates to appeals by the assessees to the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner against any order passed by the Income-tax 
Officer. 

Clause 12 relates to appeals to the Appellate Tribunal by assessees 
or by the Income-tax Officer under the directions of the Commissioner 
of Income-tax against any order made by the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner. It has been provided that in disposing of such appeals, 
the Tribunal shall exercise the same powers and follow the same 
procedure as it exercises and follows in disposing of any appeal 
under the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 13 provides for the rectifi(!ation of mistakes apparent from 
the record of any proceedings by the Commissioner of Income-tax, 
the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal, 
suo motu or at the instance of the assessee, within four years of the 
date on which the order sought to be rectified has been passed. 
Clause 14 seeks to enable the Income-tax Officer to recompute the 
chargeable profits of the assessee in consequence of any order of 
rectification or amendment passed under section 154 or section 155 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961, in relation to the relevant income-tax 
assessment of the assessee, within four years from the date of the 
latter order. . 
Clause 15 seeks to provide that the surtax payable by a company 
for a particular assessment year shall be deducted from its total 
income for that assessment year in computing its distributable 
income for the purposes of Chapter XI-D of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 16 enables the Commissioner to revise any orders passed 
by the Income-tax Officer which are prejudicial to revenue, within 
a period of two years from the date of the order sought to be revised . 
. Clause 17 e~bles the Commissioner to give relief to the assessee 
on revision of any orders passed by the Income-tax Officer or the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner subordinate to him, either of his 
own motion or on an application by the assessee. 
Clause 18 seeks to make applicable to the proceedings relating to 
surtax, c.ertain provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 pertaining to 
various matters for which no separate provisions have been made 
in the Bill, e.g., issue and service of notice of demand, recovery of 
arrear tax dues, . assessment pro.eedings in the case of non-resident 
through an agent, liability of directors or private companies in 
liquidation, reference to High Court, appeal to Supreme Court, etc. 
It also seeks to apply the provisions of the Income-tax (Certificate 
Proceedings) Rules, 1962 to the proceedings of recovery of arrears of 
surtax. 

23 
Clame 19 provides that all information contained in any statement 
or returns made by the assessees or furnished in any proceeding 
under the Income·tax Act, 1961, may be used for the purposes of 
proceedings relating to surtax and vice verBa. 
Clouse. 20 to 23 (both incZusive) relate to prosecution for various 
offences by way of failure to deliver returns without any reasonable 
cause, making of false statements, abetment of false returns, and the 
composition of such offences. 
Clause 24 seeks to enable the Central Government to make aD 
~emption, reduction in rate or other modification in respect of surtax 
in favour of any class of assessees or in regard to the whole or any 
part of the chargeable profits of any class of assessees in order to 
remove any difficulty or avoid any hardship that may arise as a 
result -of application of surtax to the Union territories of Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli, Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry. 
Clause 25 seeks to enable the Central Board of Direct Taxes to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this enactment and in 
this behalf, inter alia, to prescribe various forms such as the form 
of return of chargeable profits. 
Clause 26 seeks to exclude companies which have no share capital 
from the purview of surtax. 
The First Schedule lays down rules for the computation of the 
chargeable profits. Under its provisions, -'chargeable proftts' are to 
be computed by excluding from the assessee's total income <as com-
puted UJlder the Income-tax Act) certain items of income aad sums 
which have been exempted from surtax; deducting from the balance 
amount the income-tax and super-tax payable by the company 
(subject t. certain adjustments); and adding to the amount so arrived 
at, any interest payable by th~ assessee in respect of debentures, and 
speCified loans referred to in rule 1 (v) of the Second Schedule, and 
such amount of any expenditure on commission, entertainment and 
advertisement which may be considered by the Income-tax Officer 
(with the approval of the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner) to be 
excessive in the circumstances of the case. 
The Second Schedule contains the rules for the computation of the 
capital of a company for the purpose of determining the amount of 
'statutory deduction' admissible to a company. Under these rules, 
the .apital of a company consists of the amounts, as on the first day 
ef the relevant previous year, of its paid-up capital, reserves (includ-
ina the reterv .. required to be created under the Indian Income-tax 

24 
Act, 1922 and the Income-tax Act, 1961 for entitlement to develop-
ment rebate), debentures and specified loans. If a company possesses 
assets, the income from which is not taken into account in computing 
the chargeable profits under cer~ provisions of the First Schedule, 
such as investments in shares of companies, the cost thereof (subject 
to certain adjustments f'Or borrowed moneys not included in the 
capital of the company) is required to be deducted from the capital 
aforesaid. 
The Third Schedule lays down that surtax shall be charged at the 
rate of 40 per cent. of the amount by which the chargeable profits 
of a company for the relevant previous year exceed the amount of 
the statutory deduction admissible to it. It also provides that an 
Indian company or a company which has made the prescribed arrange· 
ments for the declaration and payment of dividends within India 
shall be entitled to a rebate calculated at 20 per cent. of that part of 
the surtax which is attributable to any profits derived by it from 
the business of the generation and distribution of electricity or of 
the manufacture or production of anyone or more of the articles 
specified in the list contained in the said Schedule. It also provides 
that the Central Government may, by issue of a notification in the 
Official Gazette, exclude any articles from or add any item to the 
said list f01; the purposes of an assessment for any assessmeRt year 
subsequent \0 the assessment year 1964--65. 

FINANCIAL MEMoaANDUM 
The Bill seeks to impose a new tax on all companies other than 
companies having no share capital. This tax will be administered 
by the Income-tax Department but· its proceedings relating to 
assessment, collection and revision and appeals will be separate from 
that of income-tax. However, some incidental expenditure on the 
administration of the Act may be involved, the extent of which 
cannot be foreseen at present. 

M~MORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA'l'ION 
Clause 25 empowers the Board to make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of the Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may 
be made pertain to the form in which returns under section 5 may 
be fUl'Dished, the fonn in which notice for making proviaional ~ 
ment shall be given, the form in which appeals under the Act may 
be filed and the procedure that may be followed on application for 
rectification of mistakes and application for refunds. The matters in 
respect of which rules will be made are matters of procedure, form 
or detail 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
28 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to impose a special tax on the profits of certain companies. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 