8U1 No. If of It56, 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SABRA) 

Bm No. 15 of 1956. 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED·IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government for 
the financial year 1956-57. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1956. Short title. 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) I (4) and Income-tax 
and 8uper-S (5), for the year beginning on the 1st day of April, 1956,- tax. 
(a) income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in 
Part I of the First Schedule, increased in the cases to which Pu-a-
graphs A, Band C of that Part apply, by a surcharge for purposes 
of the Union at the rate specified therein in respect of each such 
10 rate of income-tax; and . 
(b) rates of super-tax shall, for the purposes of section 55 of 
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as the 
II of 1922. Income-tax Act), be those specified in Part II of the First Schedule, 
increased in the cases to w!1ich Paragraphs A, Band C of that Part 
:IOPI L.S. 
IS apply,by a surcharge for purposes of the Union at the ra.te speci-
fied therein in respect of each such rate of super-tax. 
20 
(2) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st day 
of March, 1957, there shall be deducted from the total income of an 
assessee, in respect of the earned income, if any, included therein,-
(a) where such earned income does not exceed twenty-five 
thousand rupees, an amount equal to one-fifth of such earned in-
come but not exceeding in any case four thousand rupees; 
(b) where such earned income exceeds twenty-five thousand 
rupees, the amount, if any, arrived at after dlfducting from four 
thousand rupees one-fifth of such excess. 

2 
(3) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st day 
of March, 1957,-
(a) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
pany includes any income chargeable under the head "salaries" 
as reduced by the deduction for earned income appropriate there- 5 
to, or any income chargeable under the head "Interest on Secu-
rities", or any income from dividends in respect of which by vir-
tue of section 49B of the Income-tax Act he is deemed himself to 
have paid the income-tax imposed under-that Act, the income-tax IS of 19S5. 
payable by the assessee on that part of his total income which 10 
consists of such inclusions shall be an amount bearing to the total 
amoUht of income-tax payable according to the rates applicable 
under the operation of the FiJlance Act, 1955, on his fotal,income 
the same proportion as the amount of such inclusions bear to his 
total income; 15 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
pany, includes any income chargeable under the head "salaries" 
on which super-tax has been or might have been deducted under 
the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 18 of the Income-tax 
Act, the super-ta:x: payable by the assessee on that portion of his 20 
total income which consists of such inclusion shall be an amount 
bearing to the total amount of super-tax payable according to the 
rates applicable under the operation of the Finance Act, 1955, on IS of 19S5. 
his total income the same proportion as the amount of such in-
clus'ion bears to his total income. 25 
(4) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st day 
of March, 1957,-
(a) where the total income of a company includes any profits 
and gains from life insurance business, the super-tax otherwise 
payable by the company on the whole of such total income shall 30 
be reduced by an amount which bears to that super-tax the same 
proportion as the amount of such inclusion bears to its total 
income or by an amount computed at the rate of-
(i) two annas in the rupee in the case of a mutual insur-
ance company as defined in section 95 of the Insurance Act, 35 
1938; and 
(ii) one-and-a-half annas in the rupee in the case of any 
other company; 
on the amount of such inclusion, whichever is less; 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com- 40 
p~ny, includes any profits and gains from life insurance business, 
the income-t~ and sup2r-tax payable by the assessee on that part 
of his total income which consists of such inclusion shaH be an 
amount bearing to the total amount of such taxes payable on his 
4 of 1938. 

3 
total income according to the rates applicable under the opera-
tion of the Indian Finance Act, 1942, increased in respect of each 12 of 1942. 
such r~te by one-twentieth thereof, the same proportion as the 
amount of such inclusion bears to his total income, so however 
5 that the aggregate of the taxes so computed in respect of such 
inclusion shall not in any case exceed the amount of tax payable 
Qn such inclusion at the rate of five annas in 'the rupee. 
(5) In cases to which section 17 of the Income-tax Act applies, 
the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that section, 
10 and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (1), and in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of 
this section, wherever applicable. 
(6) For the purposes of making any deduction of income-tax in 
the year beginning on the 1st day of April, 1956, under sub-section 
IS (2) or sub-section (2B) of section 18 of the Income-tax Act, from 
any earned income chargeable under the head "salaries", the esti-
mated total income of ~he assessee under that head shall, in comput-
ing the income-tax to be deducted, be reduced-
(i) where such earned income does not exceed twenty-five 
20 thousand rupee!;, by an amount equal to one-fifth of such earned 
income but not exceeding in any case four thousand rupees; 
(ii) where such earned income exceeds twenty-five thousand 
rupees, by the amount, if any, arrived at after deducting from 
four thousand rupees one-fifth of such excess; 
25 but no abatement shall be allowed by the person responsible for 
paying the salary in respect of any donations made by the assessee 
to which section 15B of the Income-tax Act is, or may be, applicable. 
(7) For the purposes of this section and of the rates of tax 
imposed thereby, the expression "total income" means total income 
30 as determined for the purposes of income-tax or super-tax, as the 
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act, and the expression "earned income" has the meaning assigned 
to it in clause (6AA) of section 2 of that Act. 
3. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act,- ~cbnent 
.of iec:d.OD 2, 
35 (a) for sub-clause (c) of clause (6A) I the following clause Act22 II of 19 • 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(c) any distribution made to the shareholders of a 
company on its liquidation, to the extent to which the dis-
tribution is attributable to the accumulated profits of the 
company immediately before its liquidation, whethez: 
capitalised Qr not;"; 

Amendment 
of section 4. 
Anaeadaent 
of lCCtion 7. 
4 
(b) in clause (6AA), for the words "treated as registered", 
the word "assessed" shall be substituted. 
4. For clause (xiva) of sub-section (3) of section 4 of the Income-
tax Act, the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(xiva) any income chargeable under the head "salaries" 5 
received by or· due' to any person, not· being a citizen of India, 
during the financial year in which he arrived in India and the 
financial year next following as remuneration for services 
rendered by him as a technician in the employment of Govern-
ment or of a local authority or of any corporation set up under 10 
any special law or in any business carried on in India, in any 
case where such person was not resident therein in any of the 
four financial years immediately preceding the financial year 
in which he arrivecLin India: . 
Provided that where, during the financial year of arrival and IS 
the year next following such person had been in India for a 
period of, or for periods amounting in aJl to, three hundred and 
sixty five days or more, only so much of the income aforesaid as 
is received by or due to him for a period of three hundred and 
,sixty five days in all commencing from the date of his arrival 20 
shall not be included in his total income: 
Provided further that in the case of a person referred to in 
this, clause whose contract of service was approved by the Cen-
tral Government before the commencement of his service this 
clause shall have effect as if for the words "and the financial 25 
year next following", the words "and the two financial years 
next following" had been substituted and as if the proviso 
immediately preceding had been omitted; 
Explanation.-''Technician'' means, and shall always be 
deemed to have meant, a person having specialised knowledge 30 
in industrial arts and sciences and having experience in indus-
trial practice who is employed in India in a capacity in which 
such specialised knowledge and experience are actually 
utilised.". 
5. In section 7 of the Income-tax Act,- 35 
(a) in the first proviso to sub-section (1), for the word 
"one-sixth", the word "one-fifth:' shall be substituted; 
(b) after clause (ii) of sub-section (2), the following shall 
. be inserted;-
"(iia) in respect of any conveyance owned by the 40 
assessee and used by him for the purposes of his employ-
ment, such sum as the Income-tax Ofticer may estimate in 

5 
6 
respect of such use as representing the expenditure incurred 
by the assessee in its maintenance and as representing its 
normal wear and tear: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply in any case 
where the assessee is in receipt of a conveyance allowance, 
whether as such or as part of his salary;". 
6. In section 8 of the Income-tax Act,- Amendment 
10 
(a) in the first proviso, for the words "in respect of any 
reasonable sum deducted by a banker from such interest by 
way of commission or paid to any other person by way of 
remuneration for realizing such interest on behalf of the assessee", 
the following words shall be substituted, namely:-
"in respect of any reasonable sum expended by him for 
the purpose of realizing such interest"; 
IS (b) after the third proviso, the following Explanation shall 
be inserted, namely:-
Explanation.-In the case of a banking company,-
(a) the amount which bears to the aggregate of its 
expenses as are admissible under sub-section (2) of sec-
20 tion 10, other than under clauses (iii), (vi), (via), (vib) , 
(vii), (viii), (xi), (xii), (xiii) and (xiv) thereof, the same 
proportion as the gross receipts from interest on securi-
ties (inclusive of tax deducted at source) chargeable to 
tax under this section bears to the gross receipts from 
25 all sources which are included in the profit and loss 
account of the company, shall be deemed to be the sum 
reasonably expended by it for the purposes of reaHz~ng 
such interest; and the amount for which allowance is 
admissible under sub-section (2) of section 10 shall be 
30 reduced correspondingly; and 
(b) money borrowed shall include moneys received 
by way of deposits; and that amount which bears to the 
amount of interest payable on moneys borrowed the same 
proportion as the gross receipts from interest on securities 
35 (inclusive of tax deducted at source) chargeable to tax 
under this section bears to the gross receipts from all 
sources which are included in the profit and loss account 
of the company, shall be deemed to be interest payable 
on money borrowed for the purpose of investment in the 
secur'ties by the assessee, and the amount of such interest 
for which allowance is due under sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 10 shall be reduced correspondingly. 
of section 8. 

Amendment 
of section 
10. 
6 
7. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in clause (vi) of sub-section (2), after the figures and 
words "31st day of March, 1945", the words and figures "and 
before the 1st day of April, 1956" shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be S 
inserted, namely:-
"(4A) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall, in the c'omputa-
tion of the profits and gains of a company, . be deemed to 
authorise the J1laking of-
(a) any allowance in respect of any expenditure 10 
which results directly or indirectly in the provision of 
any remuneration or benefit or amenity to a director or 
a person who has a substantial interest in the company 
within the meaning of sub-clause (iii}. of clause (6C) of 
section 2, or 15 
(b) any allowance in respect of any assets of the 
company used by any person referred to in clause (a) 
either wholly or partly for his own purposes or benefit, 
if in the opinion of the Income-tax Officer any such allowance 
is excessive or unreasonable having regard to the legitimate 20 
business needs of the company and the benefit derived by or 
accruing to it therefrom. 
Explanation.-The provisions of this sub-section shall 
apply notwithstanding that any amount disallowed under 
this sub-section is included in the total income of any person 25 
referred to in dause. (a) ," 
Amendment 8. In section 12 of the Income-'tax Act, in sub-section (5), for the 
of section 12. words, brackets, figure and letter "sub-section (2A}", the words. 
brackets, figures and letters "sub-sections (2A) and (4A)" shall be 
substituted. 30 
Amcn~ent 9. In section 14 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2). after 
of section 14· clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
" (aa) if a partner of a registered firm, in respect of that 
portion of his share in the profits or gains of the firm as is equal 
to the difference between his share in the total income of the 35 
firm and his share in such total income excluding the income-tax, 
if any, payable by the firm, the shares in either case being com-
puted in the manner laid down in claus~ {b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 16;". 

, 
18. In sub-section (3) of seetion'5 of the Income-tax Act, for the Amendment 
words "second proviso", the words "first proviso" shall be substituted. ~~. section 
11. In section 15C of the Income-tax Act, in clause (ii) of sub- Amendment 
section (2), for the word "eight", the word "thirteen" shall be sub- ~;c. section 
,5 stituted. 
12. In section 16 of the Income-tax Act, for the proviso to sub- Amendment 
section (2), the following proviso shall be substituted and shall be ~~. section 
deemed always to have been' substituted, namely:-
"Provided that when the sum out of which the dividend has 
10 been paid, credited ot distributed or deemed to have been paid, 
credited or distributed includes-
(i) any profits and gains of the company not included 
in its total income, or 
(ii) any income of the company on which income-tax 
IS was not payable, or 
(iii) any amount attributable to any allowance made in 
computing the profits and gains of the company, 
the increase to be made under this section shall be calculated 
only upon such proportion of the dividend as the said sum after 
20 deduction of the inclusions enumerated above bears to the whole 
of that sum.". 
13. In section 17 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b) of sub-section Amendme~lt 
(1), for the words "at the rate applicable in the case of an indivi- ~~. scctlon 
dual to the slab next to the slab exempt from super-tax", the words 
25 "at the rate of three annas in the rupee" shall be substituted. 
14. In sub-section (5) of section 23 of the Income-tax Act,- Amendment • of section 
(a) in clause (a), for the words "the sum payable by the 23. 
firm itself shall not be determined but the total income of each 
partner of the firm, including therein his share of its income, 
30 profits and gains of the previous year, shall be assessed and 
the sum payable by him on the basis of such assessment shall 
be determined", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
35 
U (i) the income-tax payable by the firm itself shall be 
determined; and 
(ii) the total income of each partner of the firm, in-
eluding therein his share of its income, prQfits and gains 
of' the previous year, shall be assessed and the sum pay .. 
able by him on the basis of such assessment shall be 
determined: "; 
• 

Amendment 
of section 
23A• 
._ .... 
Amendment 
of aection 24. 
8 
(b) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
" (b) in the case of an unregistered firm, the Income-
tax Offit:er may, instead of determining the sum payable by 
the firm itself, proceed to assess the total income of each 5 
partner of the firm, including therein his share of its 
income, profits and gains of the previous year, and deter-
mine the tax payable by each partner on the basis of such 
assessment, if, in the Income-tax Officer's opinion, the 
aggregate amount of the tax including super-tax, if any, 10 
payable by the partners under such procedure would be 
greater than the aggregate amount which would be pay-
able by the firm and the partners individually, if separately 
assessed; and where the procedure specified in this clause 
is applied to any unregistered firm, the provisos to clause IS 
(a) of this sub-section shall apply thereto as they apply 
in the case of a registered firm;". 
15. In section 23A of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "be liable to pay 
super-tax at the rate of four annas in the rupee", the following 20 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"be liable to pay super-tax at the rate of eight annas 
in the rupee in the case of a company whose business 
consists wholly or mainly in the dealing in or holding of 
investments, and at the rate of four annas in the rupee in 25 
the case of any other company"; 
(b) in clause (b) of the proviso to sub-clause (1), for 
the words "where the reserves", the words "where the ac-
cumulated profits and reserves" shall be substituted; 
(c) in the Explanation at the end of the section, in clause 30 
(b), for the word "sub-section", the word "section" shall be 
substituted. 
, 
16. In section 24 of the Incomp.-tax Act,-
(a) in the second proviso to sub-section (1), the words 
"in the manner applicable to a registered firm" shall be omitted; 35 
(b) in the proviso to sub~section (2),-
/ 
(i) in clause (c), the words "in the manner appli-
cable to a registered firm" shall be omitted; and 
.----..--- (ii) in clause (d), the words "as' a . regiSter';;"d-fii=in';1 
shall be omitted. 40 
• 

9 
17. In section 28 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (d) of the Arne endment 
• 0 IC'etlan 
proviso to sub-sectIon (1), for the words beginning with "when the 28. 
person liable to penalty" and ending with "that amount shall be 
taken to be", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
S "when the person liable to penalty is a registered firm or 
an unregistered firm which has been assessed under clause (b) 
of sub-section· (5) of section 23, then, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in the other provisions of this Act, the amount 
of income-tax and super-tax payable by the firm itself shall 
10 be taken to be". 
18. In section 34 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "within 
shall be omitted; 
Amendmeali 
of section 34e 
eight years" 
(b) for the proviso to sub-section (1), the following pro-
IS visos ~hall be substituted, namely:-
20 
30 
3S 
"Provided. that the Income-tax Officer shall not issue 
a notice under clause (a) of sub-section (1)-
(i) jor any year prior to the year ending on the 
31st day of March, 1941; 
(ii) for any year, if eight years have elapsed 
after the expiry of that year, unless the income, pro-
fits or gains chargeable to income-tax which have 
escaped assessment or have been under-assessed or 
assessed at too low a rate or have been made the sub-
ject of excessive relief under this Act, or the loss or 
depreciation allowance which has been computed in 
excess, amount to, or are likely to amount to, one lakh 
of rupees or more in the aggregate, either for that 
year, or for that year and any other year or years 
after which or after each of which eight years have 
elapsed, not being· a year or years ending before the 
31st day of March, 1941; 
(iii) for any year, unless he has recorded his reasons 
for doing so, and, in any case falling under clause (ii). 
unless the Central Board of Revenue, and, in any other 
case, the Commissioner, is satisfied on such reasons 
recorded that it is a fit case for the issue of such notice: 
Provided further that the Income-tax Officer shall not 
issue a notice under this sub-section for any year, after the 
~ expiry of two years from that year, if the person on whom 
the assessment or reassessment is to be made in pursuance 
of the notice is a person deemed to be the agent of a non-
resident person under section 43: 
209xLS 

Amendment 
of Iec:tion 
35. 
10 
Provided further that the tax shall be chargeable at 
the rate at which it would have been charged had the 
income, profits or gains not escaped assessment . or full 
assessment, as the case may be; -
(c) in sub-section (1B), for the words, brackets, figure andS 
letter "to whom a notice has been issued under sub-section 
(lA) ", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"to whom a notice has been issued under clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) or under sub-section (1A) for any of the 
years ending on the 31st day of March of the years 1941 to 10 
1948, inclusive"; 
(d) in sub-section (3), for the words beginning with "No 
order of assessment under section 23" and ending with "exceeds 
the period of eight years or four years, as the case may be", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:- 15 
"No order of assessment or reassessment, other than 
an order of assessment under section 23 to which clause 
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 28' applies or an order of 
assessment or reassessment in cases fatung within clause 
(a) of sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) of this section 20 
shall be made after the expiry of four years from the end 
of the year in which the income, profits or gains were first 
assessable: 
Provided that where a notice under clause (b) 'of sub-
section (1) has been issued within the time therein limited, 2S 
the assessment or reassessment to be made in pursuance 
of such notice may be made before the expiry of one year 
from the date of the service of the notice even if at the 
time of the assessment or reassessment the four years 
aforesaid have already elapsed:". 30 
19. In section 35 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (8), the 
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(8) Where, as a result of proceedings initiated under clause 
(a) of sUb-section (1) or under sub-section (lA) of section 34,-• (a) a firm or an association of .persons is assessed or 35 
reasselilSed, or 
(b) a company is assessed or reassessed and in respect 
thereof an order under section 23A is subsequently made, 
and the Income-tax Oftlcer concerned is of opinion that it is 
necessary to compute or recompute the total income of a partner 40' 
in the firm or a member of the association of persons or a share-
holder in the company, as the case may be, the Income-tax 

• 11 
Officer may proceed to compute or recompute the total income 
and determine the sum payable on the basis of such computation 
or recomputation as if the computation· or recomputation is a 
rectification of a mistake apparent from the record within the 
5 meaning of this section; and the provisions of sub-section (1) 
shall apply accordingly, the period of four years specified therein 
being reckoned from the date of the final order passed in t.he 
case of the firm, association or company, as the case may be. 
(9) Where the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that the 
10 income-tax payable by a company on its profits and gains out 
of which the company has declared a dividend, has not been 
paid within three years after the financial year in which the 
dividend was declared, the amount of income-tax which a share-
holder of the company is deemed himself to have paid in respect 
15 of such dividend under sectiQn 49B, or the amount for which 
credit is due to him under sub-section (5) of section 18 in 
respect of such dividend, shall be deemed to have been wrongly 
computed; and the ..Income-tax Officer may, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, proceed to recompute such 
:10 amount by reducing it in the same proportion as the amount 
of income-tax remaining unpaid by the company bears to the 
amount of income-tax payable by it on such profits and gains, 
as if the recomputation is a rectification of a mistake apparent 
from the record within the meaning of this section; and the 
25 provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply accordingly, the period 
of four years specified therein being reckoned from the date on 
which the period of three years aforesaid has expired. 
(10) Where, in any of the assessments for the years begin-
ning on the 1st day of April of the years 1948 to 1955 inclusive, a 
30 rebate of income-tax was allowed to a company on a part of its 
total income un~er clause (i) of the proviso to Paragraph B of 
Part I of the relevant Schedules to the Finance Acts specifying 
the rates of tax for the relevant year, and subsequently the 
'amount on which the rebate of income-tax was allowed as 
-35 aforesaid is availed of by the company, wholly or partly, for 
declaring dividends in any year, the amount or that part of the 
amount availed of as aforesaid, as the case may be, shall, by 
reason of the rebate of income-tax allowed to the company and 
to the extent to which it has not actually been subjected to an 
40 additional income-tax in accordance with the provisions of 
clause (ii) of the proviso to Paragraph B of Part I of the 
Schedules to the Finance Acts above referred to, be deemed to 
have been made the subject of incorrect relief under this Act, 
and the IncoII)e-~]!: Oftlcer shall recompute the tax payabJe hy 

12 • 
the company by reducing the rebate originally allowed,' as if the 
recomputation is a rectification of a mistake apparent from the 
recor~ within the meaning of this section and the provisions 
, of sub-section (1) shall apply accordingly, the period of four 
years specified therein being reckoned from the end of the S 
financial year in which the amount on which rebate of income-
tax was allowed as aforesaid was availed of by the company 
wholly or partly for declaring dividends.". 
Sfubltltution ZOo For section 37 of the Income-tax Act, the following o new lec- section 
10 tion for shall be substituted, namely:-
section 37. 
POwU'aof 
Income-tax 
authoritica. 
"37. (1) The Income-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Com-
missioner, Commissioner and Appellate Tribunal shall, ~r the 
purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit s· of 1901 
in respect of !he following matters, namely: - IS 
(a) discovery and inspection; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including 
any ofBcer of a banking company, and examining him on 
oath; 
(c) compelling the production of books of account and 20 
oUier documents; and 
(d) issuing commissions. 
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any Income-
, tax Officer specially authorised by the Commissioner in this 
behalf may,- 25 
(i) enter and search any building or place where he has 
reason to believe that any books of account or other docu-
ments which in his opinion will be useful for, or relevant 
to, any proceeding under this Act may be found and examine 
them, if found; 30 
(ii) seize any such books of account or other documents 
or place marks of identification thereon or make extracts 
or copies therefrom; 
(iii) malte a note or an inventory of any other article 
or thing found in the course of any search under this section 35 
which in his opinion will be useful for, or relevant to, any 
proceeding under this Act; 
8nd the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, 
relating to searches sPall apply 80 far as may be to searches 
under this section. 40 
, of J898. 

13 
(3) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any authority 
referred to in sub-section (1) may impound and retain in its 
custody for such period as it thinks fit any books of acCount or 
other documents produced before it in any proceeding under this 
S Act: 
10 
"ofI86oe IS 
. 20 
Provided that an Income-tax Officer shall not-
(a) impound any books of account or other documentb 
without recording his reasons for so doing; or 
(b) retain in his custody any such books or documents 
for.J1 period exceeding fifteen days (exclusive of holidays) 
without obtaining the approval of the Commissioner therefor. 
(4) Any proceecUng before any authority referred to in 
this section shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of sec-
tion 196 of the Indian Penal Code.". 
"' 
21. In section 38 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (4), the Amenciml"nl 
following clause lihall be inserted, namely:-
"(5) require any person, including a banking company or 
any officer thereof, to furnish information in relation to such 
points or matters, or to furnish s~tements of accounts and 
affairs verified in tlre manner specified by the Income-tax Officer 
or the Assistant Commissioner giving information in relation 
to such points or matters, as, in the opinion of the Income-tax 
Officer or the Assistant Commissioner, will be useful for, or rele-
vant to, any proceeding under this Act. ... 
of section 
38. 
22. In section 49B of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), for Amendme~t 
the words beginning with "at the rate applicable" and ending with ~~B. section 
"whole income of the company", the following shall be substituted 
and shall be deemed always to have been substituted, namely:-
30 "of an amount equal to the sum by which the dividend has 
been increased under sub-section (2) of section 16". 
23. In section 49D of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section (2) Amendment , of secti01l the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: - 49D• 
"(3) If any person who is resident in the taxable territories 
3S in any year proves that in respect of his income which accrues 
or arises to him during that year in Pakistan he has paid in that 
ceuntry, by deduction or otherwise, tax payable to the Govern-
ment 'under any law for the ti.me being in force in that country 

14 
relating to taxation of agricultural income, he shall be entitled 
to a deduction from the Indian income-tax payable by him-
\, (a) of the amount of the tax paid in Pakistan under 
Amendment 
of section 
58. 
any law aforesaid on such income which is liable to tax 
under this Act also; or S 
(b) of a sum calculated on that income at the Indian 
rate of tax; 
whichever is less. 
(4) Sub-section (3) shall apply in relation to all assess-
ments for the years subsequent to the year ending, on the 31st 10 
day of March, 1948, and, notwithstanding anything' contained in 
section 50, a claim for refund in respect of any of the years 
ending on the 31st day of· March of the years 1949 to 1952 inclu-
sive, may be entertained if made before the 31st day of March, 
1957.". IS 
24. In section 58 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "the second proviso", 
the words "the first proviso" shall be substituted, and for the 
words, brackets and letters "clauses (a) and (b)", the words, 
brackets and letters "clauses (a), (aa) and (b)" shall be sub- 20 
stituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the brackets, word, figures and 
letters" (3B), (3C), (3D) and (3E) ", the brackets, figures, letters 
and word" (3A) , (3B), (3C) and (3D)" shall be substituted. 
Amcndme~lt 25. In sub-section (1) of section 58F of the Income-tax Act, for the 25 
~~F. 1ICCtJ0n words "one-sixth of his salary in that year or six thousand rupees", 
the words "one-fifth of his salary in that year or eight thousand 
rupees" shall be substituted. 
Amc:mdment 26. In sub-section (2) of section 58K of the Income-tax Act, for 
~~K. section the word, brackets arid figures "clause (xii) ", the word, brackets 30 
and figures "clause (xv)" shall be substituted. 
Amendment 27. In section 59 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (c)-- of sub-
~. section section (2), for the words "for the avoidance of double taxation on 
income which may be entered into by the Central - Government 
under section 49AA" , the following shall be substituted, namely:- 3S 
"for the granting of relief in respect ofaouble taxation or 
for the avoidance of double taxation which may be entered into 
by the Central Government under this Act". 
Commence- Z8. The amendments made in the Income-tax Act by section 4 
~~:~d~nt8 andclat.ise (b) of section 15 shall be deemed to have come into force 40 
to Act J J of on the 1st day of April, 1955, and the amendments made by sections 
1922• 3 to 27 inclusive shall come into. force on the 1st day of April, 1956. 

16 
29. The Indian Tariff Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment ( 
Tariff Act) shall be amended 'in the manner specified in the Second ~~~~ 32 of 
Schedule. 
30. When any goods chargeable with a duty of Customs under Ad~tional 
5 the First Schedule to the Tariff Act, or under that Schedule read ~~~~:r:a~ 
with any notification of the Central Government for the time being 
in force, are assessed to duty, there shall, up to the 31st day of 
Mardi, 1957, be levied and collected as an addition to, and in the 
same manner as, the total amount so chargeable-
10 (a) a sum equal to 55 per cent. of such amount, in the 
case of goods comprised in Item No. 22 (4); 
(b) a sum equal to 55 per cent. of such amount, in the 
case of goods comprised in Items Nos. 48 and 51 (2), and in the 
case of textile manufactures specified in Item No. 49 when 
IS made wholly or mainly of any of the fabrics specified in Items 
Nos. 48, 48 (1), 48 (4), 48 (5), 48 (7) or 48 (10) ; 
(c) a sum equal to 45 per cent. of such amount, in the case 
of goods comprised in Item No, 47 (2) ; 
(d) a sum equal to 25 per cent. of such amount, in the case 
of goods comprised in any of the Items of the said Schedule 
other than those specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of this. 
section or in the Third or the Fourth Schedule to this Act; and 
(e) a sum equal to 5 per cent. of such amount, in the case 
'of goods comprised in any of the Items of the said Schedule 
25 specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Act. • 
31. In the Indian Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1949, in sections 4 and Amendment of Act I of 5, for the-figures "1956", the figures "1957" shall be substituted. 1949. 
I of 1944. 32. In section 6 of the Central Excises and Sait Act, 1944 (here- Amendment 
inafter referred to as the Central Excises Act) ,_ of section 6. 
30 (a) in clause (a), for the words "any specified excisable 
3S 
• 
goods", the words "any specified goods included in the First 
Schedule" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (b), for the words and letter "any excisable 
goods specified in this behalf in Part A of the Second Schedule", 
the words "any specified goods included in the First Schedule" 
shall be substituted . 
33. In section 8 of the Central Excises Act, for the words and AmSldment 
letter "any excisable goods specified in this behalf in Part B of of ACtion 8. 
the Second Schedule", the words "any goods specified in the Second 
40 Schedule" shall be substituted. 

Amendment 
of the Pirst 
Schedule. 
1~ 
M. In the First Schedule to the Central Excises Act,-
(a) for Item No.1, the following item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
.. I. KEROSENE-
Kerosene, that is to say, any mineral oil (cxc:1u.dina mineral 
colza oil and turpentine substitute) which has a 
lame height of eighteen millimetres or more and is 
ordinarily used as an iIluminant in oil bumin, 
Three annal per S 
Imperial gallon. 
lamps. . 
:B~ 1.-' Mineral Oil' means an oil conaistina of a 
single liquid hydrocarbon or a liquid mixture 
of hydrocarbons (except for alsociated im-
purities) derived from petroleum, coal, shale, 
peat or any other bituminous substance, 
and inc:1udesany similar oil produced by 
synthesis or otherwise. 
- E:cplMatitm 11.-" Flame height" shall be determined in the 
apparatus known as the amoke point ~1amp in 
the manner prescribed in this behalf by the 
Central Government by notification in the 
01!ida.I Gazette." ,; 
(b) for Item No.4, the following Item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"4. MOTOR SPIRIT-
10 
IS 
20 
Motor Spirit, that i. to say,- 25 
(,) Au.y mineral oil (excluding crIlde mineral oil) which Fifteen annal per 
has itlilaahing point below seventy-six degnes of Imperial gallon. 
Fahrenheit's thermometer, and which either by it8elf 
or in admixture with any other sue stance, il suit-
able for Ut= al fuel for interoal c:ambultion eoaines ,; 30 
and 
(n) Power Alcohol, that is to say, ethyl alcohol of any 
pade (including such alcohol when dcDatured or 
otherwise treated), which, either by itself or in ad-
mixture with any other substance, is suitable for 
being used al aforesaid. 
Ex,lanatUm I.-The exprelsion " mineral oil " has the mean-
ing assigned to it in Explanation I to Item 
No. I. 
lb&plartatUm 11.-" Flashing point" aha1l be determined in 
accordance with the tests specified in this 
behalf in the rules made under the Petroleum 
Act, 1934" ,; 
(c) in Item No. 12,-
3S 
40 
(i) in sub-item (1), for. the words "Two annas per-4S 
square yard", the words "Two -annas and six pies per square 
yard" shall be substituted; 
(it) in sub-item (2), for the words "One anna and three 
pies per square yard", the words "One anna and nine pies 
per square yard" shall be substituted; SO 

5 
10 
17 
(iii) in sub-item (3), for the words "Six pies per square 
yard", the words "One anna per square yard", shall be 
substituted; 
(iv) for sub-item (4), the following sub-item shall be 
substituted, namely:-
It (4) Cotton fabrics, coarse-that is to say, fabrics 
in which the average count of yam is less 
than 175-
(a) dhoties and sarees Six pies per square 
yard. 
(b) aU other aorts • • One anna per square 
yard." ; 
(d) in Item No. 12A, clause (v) shall be omitted; 
(e) for Item No. 16, the following Item shall be substitut-
15 ed, namely:-
20 
25 
It 16. "SOAP" means' all varieties of the product known 
commercially as soap-
I. Soap, in or in relation to the manufacture of which 
any process is ordinarily carried on with the aid of 
power or of steam for heating-
(I) Soap, household and laundry-
(i) plain bars of not less than one pound in weight. Rupees five and 
annas four per cwt • . 
(ii) other sorts Rupees six and 
annas. two per cwt. 
(2) Soap, toilet . Rupees fourteen per 
cwt. 
(3) Soap, other than household and laundry or toilet Rupees fourteen PH 
cwt. 
II. Soap, in or in relation to the manufacture of which 
no process haa been carried on with the aid of 
power or of steam for heating-
(I) plain bars of not less thaD one pound in weight Rupees four and 
annas eight per cwt. 
(i,) other sorts Rupees five and 
annas four per cwt." ; 
(f) in Item No. 21,-
(i) for the words "including pasteboard, millboard and 
cardboard, but excluding strawboard", the following words 
shall be substituted, namely:-
."including pasteboard. millboard, strawboard 
and cardboard"; 
\. 

18 
(ii) for sub-items (SHc) and (S)(d), the following sub-
items shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (c) coated board (art, chrome and board for One anna and three 
playing c:arda). pica per lb. 
(d) manilla and corrugated board • One anna per lb. 5 
(,) millboard and strBwboard other than corruga- Six pics per !b. 
ted board. 
(f) board, not otherwise specified • One anna per lb."; 
(g) in Item No. 22,-
(i) in sub-item 1 (1), the words "all sorts" shall be 10 
omitted; 
(ti) in sub-items 1(3) and 1(4), the words and figures 
"exceeds 50 tons but", wherever they occur, shall be 
omitted; 
(iii) in sub-item I (3), the words and figures "Nil in 15 
the ease of a manufacturer whose output of water paints 
does not exceed 50 tons per year", wherever they occur, 
shall be omitted; 
(iv) in sub-item 1(4), the words and figures "Nil in the 
case of a manufacturer whose output of oil paints and 20 
enamels does not exceed 50 tons per year", wherever they 
occur, shall be omitted; 
(v) the "Explanation" shall be omitted; 
. (h) after Item No. 22, the following Items shall be inserted, 
namely:- . 25 
.. 23. Vqetable Non-esscntial Oils, aU lorts, in or in rela-
tion to the manufacture of which any process is 
ordiDBrily carried on with the aid 'of power. 
Rupees seventy per 
ton. 
24. Refined Diesel Oils and Vaporizing Oil, that is to 
.. y, any mineral aU (excluding mineral colza oil and 
turpentine substitute) which has ita ftuhing point 
at or above seventy-six dep:ees of Fahrenheit's 
·Four annaB per Im-
perial ganon. 30 
thermometer. and satisfies euher of the following 
requirements :-
(I) the oil has a flame height of ten millimetres or more 
but lcas than eighteen millimetres ; or 
(il) the oil has a flame height of leIS than ten millimctres 
but has a viscosity of leas than one hundled 
aeconds by Redwood I Viacometer at one hun-
dred degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer. and 
containl less than one quarter of one per cent. by 
weight of any bituminous substance. 
Bxpltmatitm.- The expressions" mineral oil ", .. ftame heiaht .. 
and" flashing point" have the meaDings 
respectively assigned to them in Explanations 
I and II to Item No. I and in ExpItuuJti4n 
II to Item NO.4. 
25. Industrial Fuel Oils-
(a) Diesel Oil, not otherwisc specified, that is to say, Rupees thirty per 
any mineral oil which- ton. 
(I) has a flame heiaht of less than ten millimetre., 
35 
45 
50 

S 
19 
(i,) contains one quarter of one per ccnt. or more by 
weight of any bituminous substance, and 
(iii) possesses a viscosity of less than one hundred 
seconds by Redwood I Viscometer at one 
hundred degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer. 
(b) Furnace oil, that is to say, any mineral oil which- Rupees fifteen per 
ton. 
10 
(i) has a flame height of less than ten millimetres, 
(ii) contains one quarter of one per cent. or more by 
weight of any bituminous substance, and 
IS 
zo 
(iii) possesses a viscosity of one hundred seconds or 
more by Redwood I Viscometer at one hun-
dred degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer. 
Explanation.- The ex\'!essions .. mineral oil" and .. flame 
height ' have the meanings respectively as-
signed to them in &planations I and II to 
Item No. I." 
35. For the Second Schedule to the Central Excises Act, 
following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:-
"THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 8) 
TOBACCO". 
the Substitution of new Sche-
dule for 
Second 
Schedule. 
36. In respect of motor spirit chargeable with a duty of excise Ad~tiona1 
under the First Schedule to the Central Excises Act, there shall, :~::. of 
2S up to the 31st day of March, 1957, be levied and collected, as an 
addition to, and in the same manner as, the total amount so charge-
able, a surcharge of five per cent. of such amount. 
37. For the year beginning on the 1st day of April, 1956, no duty Discontinu-
under the Central Excises Act, or the Tariff Act, shall be levied in ~:. of aalt 
30 respect of salt manufactured in or imported into India. 
Declaration undeT the PTovisior&al Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
that the provisions of clause 29, clause 30, clause 31, sub-clauses 
(e), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) of clause 34 and clause 36 of this 
3S Bill shall have immp.diate effect under the Provisional Collection of 
Taxes A(.lt. 1931. 

20 
-) 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
PART I 
Rates of Income-tax 
A. (i) In the case of every individual who is married and every 5 
Hindu undivided family.-
I. Qn the first RI. 2,000 of 
total income. 
Rate 
Nil 
2. On the next Rs. 3,000 of Nine pies in the 
total income. rupee. 
Surcharge 
Nil 
One-twentieth of the 10 
rate specified in the 
preceding column. 
3. On the next Rs. 2,500 of One anna and nine Ditto. 
total income. pies in the rupee. 
4. On the next Rs. 2,500 of Two annas and three Ditto. 
total income. pies in the rupee. 
s. On the next Ra. 5,000 of Three anna and three Ditto. 
total income. pies in the rupee. 
6. On the balance of total Four annas in the Ditto. 
income. rupee. 
(ii) In the case of every individual who is not married and every 
unregistered firm or other association of persons. not being a case 
to which paragraph B or paragraph C or paragraph D of this Part 
applies,-
I. On the first Rs. 1,000 of 
total income. 
Rate 
. Nil 
Surcharge 
Nil 
2. On the next Rs. 4,000 of Nine pies in the rupee. One-twentieth of the 
total income. rate specified in the 
preceding column. 30 

21 
Rate 
3. On the next Rs. 2,500 of One anna and nine 
total income. pies in the rupee. 
5 4. On the next Rs. 2,500 of 
total income. 
5. On the next Rs. 5,000 of 
total income. 
6. On the balance of total 
10 income. 
Provided that-
Two annas and three 
pies in the rupee. 
Three annas and three 
pies in the rupee. 
Four annas in the 
rupee. 
Surcharge 
One-twentieth of the 
rate specified in the 
preceding column. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income which, 
before deduction of the allowance, if any, for earned income, 
does not exceed the limit specified below; 
15 (ii) the income-tax payable shall in no case exceed half the 
amount by which the total income (before deduction of the 
said allowance. if any, for earned income) exceeds the said 
limit; 
(iii) the income-tax payable on the total income as reduced 
zo by the allowance for earned income shall not exceed either-
(a) a sum bearing to half the amount by which the total 
income (before deduction of the allowance for earned. 
income) exceeds the said limit the same proportion as such 
reduced total income bears to the unreduced total income, 
2$ or 
(b) the income-tax payable on the income 10 reduced 
at the rates herein specified, 
whichever is less. 
The limit referred to in the above proviso shall be-
30 (i) in the case of every Hindu undivided family which as 
at the end of the previous year had-
RI. 
(a) at least two members entitled to claim partition 8,400 
(b) at least four members entitled to claim partition 12,600 : 
Provided that in the case referred to in sub-clause (a) none of the 
35 members and in the case referred to in sub-clause (b) none of the 
minimum number of four members,-
(a) is less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) is lineally descended from another member or along 
with another member is lineally descended from any other 
living member of the family not entitled to claim partition, and 
(ia') in every other case 

22 
Provided further that-
(i) no surcharge shall be payable on a total income which, 
before deduction of the allowance,' if any, for earned income, 
does not exceed the limit specified below; 
(ii) the surcharge payable shall in no case exceed half the 5 
amount by which the totllli income (before deduction of the said 
allowance, if any, for earned income) exceeds the said limit. 
The limit referred to in the above proviso shall be-
(i) in the case of every Hindu undivided family which sa tis-
fies the conditions laid down in the preceding proviso and had as 10 
at the end of the previous year-
Rs. 
(0) at least two members entitled to claim partition. 14,400 
(b) at least four members entitled to claim partition 2J,6oo 
and 15 
(ii) in every other case 7,200 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this paragraph, in the case of 
every Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara law, a son 
shall be deemed to be entitled to claim partition of the co-parcenary 
property against his father or grandfather, notwithstanding any cus- 20 
tom to the contrary. 
B. In the case of every company-
Rate 
On the whole of total Four annas in the 
rupee. 
Surcharge 
One-twentieth of the 
rate SP,ecified in the 25 
preceding column. 
C. In the case of every local authority and in every case in which 
under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, income-tax is to be charged 
at the maximum rate-
Rate 
On the whole of total Four annas in the 
income. rupee. 
D. In the case of every registered firm-
Surcharge 30 
One-twentieth of the 
rate specified in the 
preceding column. 
Rate 35 
Nine pies in the rupee. On the first Rs. 75,000 of total income 
On the next Rs. 75,000 of total ,income 
On the balance of total income 
• One anna in the rupee. 
Provided that-
One anna and six 
pies in the rupee: 
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income which 
does not exceed Rs. 40,000; 

23 
(ii) the income-tax payable shan in no case exceed one-half 
the amount by which the total income exceeds. Rs. 40,000. 
PART II 
Rates of Super-tax 
5 A. In the case of every individual, Hindu undivided family, Uh-
10 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
registered firm and other association of persons, not being a case to 
which any other Paragraph of this part applies-
Rate Surcharge 
I. On the first Rs. 20,000 Nil Nil 
of total income. 
2. On the next Rs. 5,000 One anna in the One-twentieth of the 
of total income. rupee. rate specified in the 
preceding column. 
3· On the next Rs. 15,000 Three &nnBS in the Ditto. 
of total income. rupee. 
4. On the next Rs. 10,000 Five annas in the Ditto. 
of total income. rupee. 
5. On the next Rs. 10,000 Six annas in the Ditto. 
of total income. rupee. 
6. On the next Rs. 10,000 Seven annas in the Ditto. 
of total income. rupee. 
7. On the next Rs. 10,000 Seven and a half Ditto. 
of total income. annas in the rupee. 
8. On the next Rs. 10,000 Eight annas in the Ditto. 
of total income. rupee. 
9. On the next Rs. 10,000 Eight and a half Ditto. 
of total income. annas in the 
rupee. 
10. On the next Rs. 20,000 Nine annas in the Ditto. 
of total income. rupee. 
II. On the next Rs. 30 ,000 Nine and a half annas Ditto. 
of total income. in the rupee. 
12. On the balance of total Ten annas in the rupee. Ditto. 
in~:ome. 
35 B. In the case of every local authority-
Rate Surcharge 
On the whole of total Two and a half annas Three pies in the 
income. in the rupee. rupee. 

24 
c. In the case of an association of persons being a co-operative 
society as defined in clause (5B) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act-
I. On the first RI. 25,000 of 
total income. 
Rate 
Nil 
Surcharge 
Nil 
2. On the balance of total Two and a half annas Three pies in the 
income. in the rupee. rupee. 
D. In the case of every company-
Rate 
5 
On the whole of total income Six annas and nine pies in the 10 
rupee: 
Provided that--
(i) a rebate at the rate of five annas per rupee of the total 
income shall be allowed in the case of any company which-
(a) in respect of its profits liable to tax under the Income- IS 
taac Act for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1957, has 
made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and 
payment within the territory of India, of the dividends pay-
able out of such profits and for the deduction of super-tax 
from dividends in accordance with the provisions of sub-sec- 20 
tion (3D) of section 18 of that Act, and 
(b) is a public company with total income not exceeding 
Rs. 25,000 to which the provisions of section 23A cannot be 
made applicable; 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of four annas per rupee of the total 25 
income shall be allowed in the case of any company which satis-
fies condition (a) but not condition (b), of the preceding clause: 
and. 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of three annas and ·six pies per rupee 
on so much of the total income as consists of dividends from a 30 
subsidiuy Indian company, and a rebate at the rate of one anna 
per rupee on any other income included in the total income shall 
be allowed in the case of any c9mpany not entitled to a rebate 
under either of the preceding clauses: 
Provided further that-
(i) the amount of the rebate under clause (i) or clause (ii) , 
as the case may be, of the preceding proviso shall be reduced by 
35 

5 
10 
15 
20 
30 
25 
the sum, if any, equal to the amount or the aggregate of the 
amounts, as the case may be, computed as hereunder:-
(a) on the amount representing the face at the rate of two annas per 
value of any bonus shares or the rupee. 
amount of any bonus issued to its 
shareholders during the previous 
year with a view to increasing the 
paid-up capital; and 
(b) in addition, in the case of a company 
referred to in clause (ii) of the pre-
ceding proviso which has distributed 
to its shareholders during the previous 
year dividends in excess of six per 
cent. of its paid-up capital, not 
being dividends pay.able at 'a fixed 
rate-
on that part of the said dividends at the rate of two annas per rupee. 
which exceeds 6 per cent. but does 
not exceed 10 per cent. of the paid-
up capital ; 
on that part of the said dividends at the rate of three annas per 
which exceeds 10 percent. of the rupee. 
paid-up capital ; 
(ii) where the sum arrived at in accordance with sub-clause 
(a) or sub-clause (b) or both the sub-clauses of clause (i) Qf this 
proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at in accordance 
with clause (i) or clause (ii), as the case may be, of the preceding 
proviso, only so much of the amounts-
(a) issued as bonus shares or as bonus; and 
(b) distributed as dividends, 
as is sufficient, in that order, in accordance with the rates speci-
fied in clause' (i) of this proviso, to reduce the rebate to nil, shall 
be deemed to have been taken into account for the purpose: 
Provided further that the super-tax payable by a company the total 
35 income of which exceeds Rs. 25,000 shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the super-tax which would have been payable by the com-
pany if its total income had been Rs. 25,000, and 
(b) half the amount by which its total income exceeds 
Rs.25,000. 
40 Explanation.-For the purposes of Paragraph D of this Part-
(i) the expression 'paid-up capital' means the paid-up capital 
(other than capital entitled to a dividend at a fixed rate) of the 
company as on the first day of the previous year' relevant to the 
assessment for the year ending on 31st day of March, 1957; 
4S (ii) the expression 'dividend' shall be deemed to include any 
,distribution included in the expression 'dividend' as defined in 
~ clause (6A) of section 2 of the Income-ta~ Act. 

26_ 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 29) 
PART I 
In the First Sched\.!le to the Tariff Act,-
(a) In Items Nos. 15(6), 15(7) and 15(11), to each of the exist-
ing entries in the fourth and sixth columns, the words "plus t-he 
excise duty for the time being leviable on like articles if produced 
or manufactured in India" shall b~ added. 
(b) In Item No. 27(3), to the existing entry in the fourth 
column, the words "plus the excise duty for the time being leviable 
on like articles· if produced or manufactured in India" shall be 
added.· 
(c) IJ.l item No. 28(7), in the entry in the second column, the 
words "liquid gold for glass making" shall be omitted. 
(d) In Item No. 28(21), in the entry in the second column. the 
words and letters "Vitamins A and E excluding fish-liver oils" 
shall be omitted. 
(e) In Item No. 28(28), for the existing entry in the -second 
column, the entry "Sulpha drugs, vitamins and vitamin prepara-
tions excluding fish-liver oils" shall be substituted. 
PART II 
5 
10 
15 
20 
In the First S~hedule to the Tariff Act, for Items Nos. 27(4), 27(5), 27(7), 35, 44(~), 73(14) 
and 77(6), the following Items shall be substituted, and such substitutions shall be Inserted in -
their appropriate places:-
Item 
No. 
t 
._------------------ ---------------
Name of article Nature of 
duty 
Standard rate of 
duty 
(a) Kerosene. that il to say. any mineral Revenue Three anD81 per 
oil (excluding mineral colza oil and Imperial gallon. 
turpentine IUbstitute) which hu a 
flame height of=een millimetrea or more, and is • . y used 81 an 
illuminant in oil burning lamps. 
(b) Any mineral oil [excluding kerosene 
as defined in lub-Item (a), turpentine 
IUbstitute and oils which are known 
to be used as fuel for any type of in-
ternal combustion engine) which has 
ita ftashing point below one hundred 
ctep'ee8 of Fahrenheit's thermometer. 
Revenue Three aDnal per 
Imperial pnon. 
PrcfCfelltial rate of 
duty if the article 
is the produce or 
manufacture of 
The United A British 
~ingdom Colony 
Duration 
of~ 25 
tec:tive 
rata of 
duty 
3C 
3 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
3S 
4S 
50 
SS 
27 
Item 
Nb. 
Name of article Natul'C of Standard rate 
Prefcttntial rate of 
duty if the article is 
the prodw:c or manu-
facture of duty of duty 
30 of 1934. 
27(S) 
E%pltmation [.-"Mineral oil" meanl 
an oil consisting of a single liquid 
hydrocarbon or a liquid mixture of 
hydrocarbons ~accpt for associated 
impurities) derived from petroleum, 
coal, shale, peat or any other bitl'-
minous substance, and includes any 
similar oil produced by synthesis or 
otherwise. 
Explanation I1.-"Flame height" shall 
be determined in"the apparatus known 
as the smoke point lamp in the man-
ner prescribed in this behalf by the 
Central Government by notification 
in the Official Gazette. 
&planation 11I.-"Flashing point" 
shall be detennined in accordance 
with the tcsts .pecified in this behalf 
in the rules made under the Petro-
leum Act, 1934. 
High Speed Diesel oil and Vapo~ 
oil, that is to say, any mineral od 
(excluding mineral colza oil and tur-
pentine lIubstitue) which has its f1ash-
IDg point at or above seventy-six 
degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer, 
and satisfies either of the following 
requirements, namely :-
(i) the oil bas a flame height of ten 
millimetrcs or more but less than 
eighteen millimetrca ; or 
(ia') the oil has a flame height of 
less than ten millimctrcs, but has 
a viscosity of lesl than fifty se-
conds by Redwood I Viscometer 
at one hundred degrees of Fahren-
heit's thermometer, and contains 
less than one quarter of one per 
cent. by weight of any bituminous 
substance. 
E%planafion.--The expressions "mineral 
oil". "flame height" and "flashing 
point" have the meanings respec-
tively assigned to them in EXPlana-
tions I, II and III to Item No. 
27(4)· 
Revenue 
27(7) (a) Mineral oil which has its flashing Revenue 
point at or above two hundred 
degrees of Fahrenheit's thermo-
meter, and i. ordinarily used for 
the batching of jute or other fibre. 
The United A British 
Kingdom' Colony 
Three annas per Im-
perial gallon or 15 
per cent. fill fJaionm. 
whichever is higher. 
plus the excise duty 
for the time being 
leviable 011' like arti-
cles if produced or 
manufactured in 
Iadia. 
Ra. 18"12 per ton or 
15 per cent. fill N/o-
rem. whichever is 
higher. 
Duration 
of pro-
tcc:tiw 
ratel of 
duty 

2M 
Item 
No. Name of article 
Nature 
of 
duty 
Standard rate of 
duty 
Preferential rate of 
duty if the article 
is the produce or 
manufacture of. .... 
The 
United 
Kingdom 
(6) IDdustrial Fuel Oila- Revenue IS per cent. ad • f1alar,m 
(I) Diesel oil, not otherwise 8eecified, ,Ius the ~Clae d~ty 
that is to...., any mineral oil whic:h- for. the time bel,lll -n leVl8ble on like 
(.') has ita flaahiDg point at or above articles if produced or 
one hUllClred aDd fifty degree8 of manufactured in India. 
Fahrenheit's thermometer, 
(ia') bas a ftame height of leas than 
ten miUimetrea, 
(iii') contains one quarter of one per 
cent. or more by weight of any 
bituminou8 substance, and 
(iv) po8lC1leB a visco8ity of lell 
than one hundred BCCIODds by 
Redwood I Viscometer at one 
hundred degrees of Fahrenheit's 
thermometer. 
(2) FUI'D8Ce oU, that il to .. y. any mineral Revenue 
oil whic:h- • 
IS per cent. ad WJlarlm 
,,,," the excise duty 
for the time being 
leviable on like arti-
cles if produced or 
manufactured in 
India. 
(.,) hal ita ftalhing point at or above 
one hundred 8ad fifty degrees of 
Fahrenheit'l -thermometer. 
(ia') hal a flame height of leas than 
ten millimetla. 
(iii') ccmtainl 'ODe tjuarter of one 
per cent. or more by wfight of any 
bituminoul aubItance. and 
(III) poIICIleB a viscosity of one 
hundred accondl or more by 
Redwood I Viac:ometer at one 
hundred degrees of Fahm:Iheit's 
thermometer. 
~.-The c:xpreaaions ··mineral 
on". "flame height" and 'Cfluhing 
point" have the meaningi respec-
tively aSligned to them in [htp/tlna-
Iioru I, II aDd III to Item No. 27(4). 
35 Manures, all IOrta, including animal 
bones and the following chemical 
manures, namely, IIUlphate of ammo-
nia,lUlphate of potash, kaiDit salta, aDd 
miDeral phosphates, imPo.11Cd in •. form 
indicative 0( their use for manurial 
puJp08CI, but excluding basic slag, 
nitrate of ammonia, muriate of 
potaIh. carbolime, urea, nitrate 
of lime, calcium cymamidc, ammo-
~ta and miDera1 IUper-
Free 
A 
British 
Colony 
Duration 
of 
protective S .. 
rata 
of 
duty 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
35 
4S 
so 

Item 
5 No. 
JS 
o 
13(14) 
~J 25 77(6) 
',I' 
:~. 
" :,1. 
30 
, . 
. ;. 
t 
; .~' 
~., 
Name of article 
(a) Samples of goods which are exempt 
from import duties under andm 
accordance \yith the International 
Convention to facilitate the impor-
tation of Commercial Samples and 
Advertising Material drawn up at 
Geneva and dated the 7th day of 
November, 1952. 
(b) Trade catalogues, price lists and 
advenising circularB. which are sup-
plied free of charge and which are 
exempt from import duties under and 
in accordance with the aforesaid 
Convention. 
Flash lights, complete, and flash light 
cases. ' 
Spectacles and Spectacle frames-
(a) SpectacJes, complete, other than 
those fitted with spectacle frames 
made of or plated with gold and 
silver or With either of them. 
(b) Spectacle frames, all sorts, other 
than spectacle frames made of or 
plated with gold and silver or with 
either of them and parts there-
of. 
29 
Nature of Standard rate of 
duty duty 
Revenue 
Revenue 
Revenue 
Free 
Free 
50 per cent. ad 
oaIoNm. 
so per cent. ad 
fJtJlorem. 
SO per cent. ad 
fJalorem. 
Preferential rate of 
duty if. the article Duration 
is the produc:e or of 
manufacture of protective 
The A 
United British 
Kingdom Colony 
rates 
of 
duty 

PART III 
In the First .Schedule to the Tariff Act, after Item No. 28(7), the fonowing shalt be inserted 
namely:-
Preferential rate of 
duty ifthe Irtic~ Duration" 5 
is the prodd"ce or of 
Item 
No. Name of artide 
Nature 
of 
duty 
Standard rate 
duty 
of manufacture of protccth e 
rates 
The A of 
United BridIh duty I 0 
Kingdom Colony 
28(7A) Liquid gold for glass making Revenue 62 1/2 pel' cent. tMl 
fHIltw ... 
TIlE TIlIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 30) IS 
Goods on which additional'duty of custo pm is not leviable 
Goods crmrriscd in the following Items of the First Schedule to the Tariff Act, namely:-
1(1), 2, 4(1), 4(3), 4(4), 4(5), 7(1), 8(1), 8(3), 8(4), 8(5), 9(3), 9(4), 9(5), 9(6), 12(6), 13(8), 13(9), 
15(5),15(9),15(10), 15(n), 15(12), 16, 16(1), 16(3), 18, 19, r9(r), 19(2), r9(3), 20, 20(1), 20(2),20(3), 
20(4), 20(6), 20(7), 20(8), 20(9), 21, 21(4), 21(5), 21(6), 21(7), 21(8), 21(9), 22(1), 22(2), 22(3), 22(5), 20 
27(1), 27(3), 27(4), 27(6), 27(9), 28A, 28(1), 28(7A), 28(14), 28(20), 28(21), 28(22), 28(23), 28(24), 
28(25), 28(26), 28(26A), 28(27), 28(28), 28(29), 28(30), 28(33), 28(34), 30(1), 30(2), 30(6), 30(7), 
3c(n), 30(12), 30(13), 30(14), 30(15), 30(I6),3r(4), 31(5), 32(1), 32(2), 36(2), 37, 37(1), 37(2),3 8, 
40(2),4°(6), 40(7),42, 44(1),44(4),44(7), 45, 45(3), 45(4), 45(5), 4S(6), 48(1), 48(2), 48(3), 48(4), 
48(5), 48(6), 48(7), 48(8), 48(9), 48(10), 49(c), 49(1), 49(2), 49(3), 50(1), 50(3), 50(4), 51, 52, S2(4), 2S 
53(2),54, SS(I), 5sk2 ), ss(3), 56, 56(1), 59(2), 59(3), 59(4), 59(5),60, 60(2), 60(4), 6o(5), 60(7), 60(8), 
61,61(11),63(12), 63(IS), 63(18), 66(2), 70(2), 70(3), ,0(10), 70(U), 71(2), 71(3), 71(8),7 1(9),71(10), 
71(ll), 7i (12), 71(13), 71(14), 72(4), 72(5), 72(14), 72(26), 72(27),7 2(28), 72(33), 72 (34), 72(35), 
72(40), 73(4), 73(6), 73(7), 73(8), 73(9), 73(10), 73(11), 73(12), 73(14), 73(16), 73(17),73(18), 73(19), 
74(4), 75(1), 75(5), 7S(12A), 75(14), 75(15), 7S(I6), 75(17), 75(18), 76, 77(2), 77(4), 77(6), 77(7),3° 
78(1), 79, 82(4), 83, 84(b), 84(1), 85, 85(2), 86, 86(1). 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 30) 
Goods on which additional duty of customs at 5 per cent. is lefJiable 
Goods comprised in the following Items ofthe First Schedule to the Tariff Act, namely:- 35 
4,8(2), 11(2), 11(4), 11(5), 11(6), J3(4), 15,21(3),24,24(1),24(2),24(3), 25(1),27(2),27(5),27(7), 
27(8), 28, 2S(4), 2S(8), 2S(12), :28(1 S)~ 2S(16), 28(17), 28(18), 28(19), 28(31), 29, 29(1), 30, 30(9), 
30(10), 34(3), 40(4), 40 (5), 43, 44, 46, 46(3), 47, 55, 60(3), 60(6), 61(2), 61(3), 61(8), 61(9), 62(1), 
62(2), 63(14), 63(30), 63(31), 63(32), 63(33), 63(34), 63(35), 64, 64(3), 64(4), 65, 66, 66(1),67,67(1), 
67(2), 68,68(2), 69(2), 70, 70(1), 70(4), 70(5), 70(1,),70(9), 71(7), 72, 7 2(1), 72(2), 72(3), 72(n), 40 
72(12), 72(13), 72(15), 72(16), 72(17),72(18), 72(19), 72(20), 72(21), 72(22), 72(23), 72(24), 72(25), 
73(2), 73(15), 74(2), 75, 75(2), 75(3), 75(6), 75(7), 75(7A), 75(8), 75(9), 75(10), 75(1 I), 75(12), 75(13), 
17(5), 78, 82(1), 82(3), 84(a), 85(1). 

31 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals 
of the Central Government for the next financial year 1956-57 and to 
provide for a few connected matters. The notes on clauses explain 
the various provisions contained therein. 
NEW DELHI; C. D. DESHMUKH. 
The 29th February, 1956. 

32 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 2 prescribes the rates of income-tax and super-tax and 
surcharge thereon for the financial year 1956-57. The variations 
from last year are: 
(1) under personal rates, -a small increase and steadier 
grad~ation in super-tax rates on incomes of over Rs. 70,000; 
(2) under' corporation rates, for Indian companies additional 
super-tax at 2as. per rupee ,on bonus issues and at 2as. and 3as. 
per rupee on dividend distributions in excess- of 6 per cent. and 
10 per cent. of paid-up capital, and an increase of 1a. 6ps. per 
rupee in super-tax for Indian branches of foreign companies; and 
finally 
(3) a new small graduated income-tax of 9ps. to 1a. 6ps. 
per rupee on registered firms. 
Clause 3 amends section 2 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (a) 'amends the definition of 'dividend' so that 
accumulated profits on distribution (whether capitalised or not) 
would be treated as dividends in the event of liquidation ofa com-
pany. 
Sub-clause- (b) makes an amendment to section 2 (6AA) which 
is consequential upon the amendment of section 23 (5) (b). 
Clause 4 substitutes for the existing clause (xiva) of section 4 (3) 
a new clause relating to tax exemption to foreign technicians. The 
new clause extends the exemption to techni~ians in the employment 
of Government or local authority or a corporation set up under any 
special law, and defines the expression "technician" for determining 
eligibility for tax exemption under the clause. 
Clause 5 amends section 7 of the Income-tax Act relating to 
salaries. 
Sub-clause (a) raises the exemption limit for contributions to 
deferred annuity and family provision schemes under the first pro-
viso to section 7 from 1/6th to 1/5th which is also the limit for abate-
ment in respect of provident fund contributions and life insurance 
. premia under section 15 (3) . 
Sub-clause (b) inserts a new clause (iia) in section 7 (2) relating 
to deductions from salary income; and provides for a proportionate 
a1l9wance in respect of the maintenance and normal wear and tear 
of a conveyance used by an employee for the purposes of his em-
ployment. 
clause 6.-The changes made to section 8 will secure the deduction 
of reasonable sums expended by an assessee (including a bank) in 
the realisation of interest on securities. 

33 
Clause 7 amends section 10 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (a) secures that initial depreciation al-Iowance will 
not be available for new buildings erected and new plant and 
machinery acquired after 1st April, 1956. 
Sub-clause (b) inserts a new provision specifically authorising 
disallowance of a portion of the expenditure and allowances of a 
company attributable to the amenities provided to a director or a 
substantial shareholder in certain circumstances. 
Clause 8 amends section 12 of the Income-tax Act and is conse-
quential upon . the insertion of new sub~section (4A) in section 10. 
Clause 9 inserts a new clause (aa) in section 14 (2) exempting 
from tax the proportionate share of a partner in the income-tax 
payable by a registered firm. This is consequential upon the amend-
ment made in section 23(5) (a) making a registered firm liable to 
income-tax. 
Clause 10 makes a formal amendment. 
Clause 11 extends the tax exemption at present available to new 
industrial undertakings by a period of five years, i.e. upto 31st March, 
1961. 
Clause 12 makes a clarificatory amendment to the proviso to sec-
tion 16(2) in regard to the procedure to be followed for the grossing 
up of dividends paid out of amounts which are only partly liable to 
tax. 
Clause 13 raises the flat rate of super-tax applicable to non-resi-
dents under section 17(1), from the existing rate of 1 anna, to 3 annas 
in the rupee, thereby restoring the rate which was applicable before 
the 1st of April, 1955. 
Clause 14 amends section 23 (5). 
Sub-clause (a) amends sub-clause (a) of section 23 (5) making 
a registered firm liable to pay income-tax (but not super-tax) 
independently of the tax payable by the individual partners of the 
firm on their share of profits. 
Sub~clause (b) amends clause (b) of section 23(5) in order to 
exempt unregistered firms from . payment of income-tax to which 
registered firms will now be liable. 
Clause 15 amends section 23A. 
Sub-clame (a) raises the flat rate of super-tax payable by invest-
ment companies on their undistributed profits if their distribution 
of dividends falls short of the prescribed minimum, from 4 as. to 8 as. 
while retaining the existing rate of 4 as. for other companies. 
2091 LS 

34 
Sub-clause (b) makes a clarificatory amendment securing in-
clusion of accumulated profits not transferred to reserves for deter-
mining th~ applicability of the proviso to section 23A(I) to the case 
of a company. 
Sub-clause (c) makes a formal amendment. 
Clause 16 makes amendments to section 24 which are consequential 
upon the amendment made to section 23 (5)(b). 
Clause 17 amends section 28 and is consequential upon. the amend-
ment to section 23 (5)(b). 
Clause 18 amends section 34. 
Sub-clauses (a) and (b) remove, subject to certain conditions, the 
time-limit of 8 years in section 34(1) for concealment cases and for 
cases of total escapement of income arising from non-submission of 
returns of income under section 22. 
Sub-clause (c) amends section 34(IB) giving the right of settlement, 
now available in cases re-opened under section 34 (IA), to cases re-
opened under section 34(I)(a) also in respect of re-assessments for the 
war period (1939-40-1947-48). 
Sub-clause (d) amends section 34(3) and removes the time-limit 
for completion of assessments involving concealment, whether relat-
ing to original proceedings or re-assessment proceedings. 
Clause 19.-The amendment to section 35(8) is consequential upon 
the amend,ments to section 34. 
The new section 35(9) enables the amount of income-tax deemed to 
have been paid by a shareholder in respect of dividend under section 
. 49B or section 18(5) on the presumption that the full tax assessed OD 
the company would be paid by it, to be reduced in the event of any 
portion of the tax not being paid by the company within three years 
from the financial year in which the dividend was dec18l'ed, and conse-
quential recovery to be made from the shareholder. 
The new section 35(10) authorises recovery of the rebate of income-
tax allowed in respect of profits retained by a company in any year, 
if such profits are subsequently distributed as dividends. 
Clause 20 substitutes a new section for section 37. 
The new section clarifies the powers of Income-tax Officers in re-
gard to examination of witnesses and production of accounts, and gives 
powers to search and seizure, etc., to Income-tax Officers specially 
authorised by the Commissioner. 
Clause 21 amends section 38 and empowers the Income-tax Officers 
and Assistant Commissioners to obtain general information or verified. 

35 
statements of accounts and affairs from any person for the purpose of 
the Act. The amendments are on the lines of a similar provision in 
the Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947. 
Clcluse 22 amends section 49B of the Income-tax Act in order 
to bring it in line with the proviso to section 16 (2). 
Clause 23 amends section 49D and enables unilateral relief to be 
given with effect from the assessment year 1948-49 in respect of agri-
cultural income-tax paid in Pakistan on incomes liable to assessment 
in India also. 
Clame 24 amends section 58. 
Sub-clame (a) renders clause 14(2)(aa) inapplicable for purposes 
of super-tax. This amendment is consequential upon the amendment 
to section 23(5)(a) as only income-tax and not super-tax will be payable 
by a registered firm. 
Sub-dame (b) makes a formal amendment. 
Clause 25 which amends section 58F raises the limit for abatement 
in respect of contributions to recognised provident funds from 1/6th 
to 1/5th, consistently with the limit for rebate on life insurance prem~a, 
etc. 
Clame 26 makes a formal amendment. 
Clause 27 amends section 59 (2) (c) and enables the Central Gov-
ernment to prescribe a procedure in respect of double tax relief 
agreements also. 
Clause 28 provides for the coming into force of the various amend-
ments to the Income-tax Act. 
Clause 29 seeks to increase the duties on certain items and to 
rationalise the items relating to certain kinds of mineral oils, as set 
out in the Second Schedule. The import duty on liquid gold for glass 
making and on flash lights and flash light cases is being enhanced 
in the interests of the indigenous manufacturers of these goods. The 
duty on spectacles complete is being brought up to the same level 
as that on spectacle frames to prevent evasion of duty. India being 
a signatory to the "International Convention to Facilitate the Impor~ 
tation of Commercial Samples and Advertising Material", the scope 
of the exemption hitherto accorded to trade catalogues, advertising 
circulars, etc., is being amended so as to bring it into line with the 
obligations undertaken under that Convention. A duty equal to the 
excise duty is being ad~d to the Customs duty in respect of some 
articles on which exCise duties are now being imposed. 
Clause 30 continues for another year the existing surcharges on 
Customs duties. 

36 
Clause 31 seeks to maintain for another year the status quo in 
regard to the commitments under GATT. 
Clause 32 seeks to amend section 6 of the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944, for the purpose of making it clear that that section 
applies to all the goods specified in the First Schedule notwithstand-
ing that no excise duty is leviable thereon in certain cases for the 
time being. It also seeks to enlarge the scope of section 6 (b) in 
order to cover all the good specified in the First Schedule. 
Clause 33.-The amendment proposed is consequential upon the 
amendment made to section 6. 
Clause 34.-The amendment proposed in item (a) seeks to subs-
titute a more precise definition for the existing definition of 'kero-
sene' in the First Schedule. 
Similarlyt the amendment in item (b) substitutes a more precise 
definition for the existing definition of 'motor spirit'. 
Item (c) proposes an increase of six pies per square yard. in 
respect of all varieties of cotton fabrics except coarse dhoties and 
sarees. 
Item (d) proposes the discontinuance of the exemption from 
excise duty on rayon or artificial silk fabrics ~anufactured by or on 
behalf of the same person in one or more factories in which less 
than twenty-five powerlooms in all are installed. 
Item. (e) proposes an excise duty on soap manufactured without 
the aid of power by any manufacturer. It also seeks to amend the 
definition of 'soap' so as to remove <:ertain exemptions contained 
therein. 
Item (f) discontinues the existing exemption from excise duty 
in respect of 'strawboard' and places it in the same category as 'mill-
board'. 
Item (g) amends the definitions of 'paints, pigments, etc.' in 
order to remove therefrom the exemptions in respect of manufac-
turers whose output of some of the said articles does not exceed fifty 
tons per year. 
Item (h) brings under duty vegetable non-essential oils, refined 
diesel oils, vaporizing oil and industrial fuel oils. 
Clause 35.-The amendment proposed is consequential upon the 
amendment to sections 6 and 8. 
Clause 36 continues the existing surcharge of 5 per cent. on 
motor spirit. 
Clause 3T is the usual prQvision for the discontinuance of the 
salt duty for another year. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Govemmen t 
for the financial year 1956-57. 
& & I 
The President bas, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 117 
and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, recom-
mended to Lok Sabha, the introduction and conrdderation 
of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUl~ 
Secretary. 
(Shri C. D. Deshmukh, 
Minister DJ Pinance) 