Bill No. 15-F of  2024
THE PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS (PREVENTION OF UNFAIR 
MEANS) BILL, 2024 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 6TH FEBRUARY, 2024 
RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH  FEBRUARY, 2024)
ASSENTED TO 
 ON 12TH FEBRUARY, 2024 
ACT NO. 01 OF 2024 

Bill No. 15-F of  2024        
THE PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS (PREVENTION OF UNFAIR 
MEANS) BILL, 2024 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT) 
A 
BILL 
to prevent unfair means in the public examinations and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:–– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair
Means) Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

2 
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “candidate” means a person who has been granted permission by the
public examination authority to appear in public examination and includes a 
person authorised to act as a scribe on his behalf in the public examination; 
(b) “communication device” shall have the same meaning assigned to
it in clause ( ha) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000; 
(c) “competent authority” shall mean the Ministry or a Department of
the Central Government administratively concerned with the public 
examination authority; 
(d) “computer network”, “computer resource” and “computer system”
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to  them in clauses (j), (k) and 
(l) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(e) “conduct of public examination” shall include all the procedures,
processes and activities, as may be prescrib ed, for being adopted for the 
conduct of public examination; 
(f) “institution” means any agency, organisation, body, association of
persons, business entity, company, partnership or single proprietorship firm, 
by whatever name it may be called, which is o ther than the public 
examination authority and the service provider engaged by such authority.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, it is clarified that 
“company” includes a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 2013; or a limited liability partnership firm as defined in 
clause (n) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership 
Act, 2008;  
(g) “notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly; 
(h) “organised crime” means an unlawful activity committed by a
person or a group of persons indulging in unfair means in collusion and 
conspiracy to pursue or promote a shared interest for wrongful gain in 
respect of a public examination; 
(i) “person associated with a service provider” means a person who
performs services for or on behalf of such service provider irrespective of 
whether such person is an employee or an agent or a subsidiary of such 
service provider, as the case may be; 
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k) “public examination” means any examination conducted by the
public examination authority, as specified in the Schedule, or conducted by 
such other authority as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(l) “public examination authority” means an authority as specified by
the Central Government by a notification, from time to time for conducting 
the public examinations; 
(m) “public examination centre” means such premises, which is
selected by the service provider or otherwise selected by the public 
examination authority, to be used for conduct of public examination and 
which, amongst o thers, may include any school, computer centre, 
institution, any building or part thereof and the same shall include the entire 
periphery and land appurtenant thereto which may be used for security and 
other related reasons for conduct of the public examinations; and 
21 of 2000. 
21 of 2000. 
18 of 2013. 
7 of 2009. 

3 
(n) “service provider” means any agency, organisation, body,
association of persons, business entity, company, partnership or single 
proprietorship firm, including its associates, sub-contractors and provider of 
support of any computer resource or any material, by whatever name it may 
be called, which is engaged by the public examination authority for conduct 
of public examination. 
(2) Words and expressio ns used herein but not  defined and defined under
any other law for the time being in force, shall have the same meanings as 
assigned to them in those laws.  
CHAPTER II 
UNFAIR MEANS AND OFFENCES
3. The unfair means relating to the conduct of a public exam ination shall
include any act or omission done or caused to be done by any person or group of 
persons or institutions, and include but not be restricted to, any of the following 
acts for monetary or wrongful gain— 
(i) leakage of question paper or answer key or part thereof;
(ii) participating in collusion with others to effect leakage of question
paper or answer key; 
(iii) accessing or taking possession of question paper or an Optical
Mark Recognition response sheet without authority; 
(iv) providing solution to one or more questions by any unauthorised
person during a public examination; 
(v) directly or indirectly assisting the candidate in any manner
unauthorisedly in the public examination; 
(vi) tampering with answer sheets including Optical Mark
Recognition response sheets; 
(vii) altering the assessment except to correct a bona fide error
without any authority; 
(viii) willful violation of norms or standards set up by the Central
Government for conduct of a public examination on its own or through its 
agency; 
(ix) tampering with any document necessary for short -listing of
candidates or finalising the merit or rank of a candidate in a public 
examination; 
(x) deliberate violation of security measures to facilitate unfair means
in conduct of a public examination; 
(xi) tampering with the computer network or a computer resource or a
computer system; 
(xii) manipulation in seating arrangements, allocation of dates and
shifts for the candidates to facilitate adopting unfair means in examinations; 
(xiii) threatening the life, liberty or wrongfully restraining persons
associated with the public examination authority or the service provider or 
any authorised agency of the Government; or obstructing the conduct of a 
public examination; 
(xiv) creation of fake website to cheat or for monetary gain; and
(xv) conduct of fake examination, issuance of fake admit cards or offer
letters to cheat or for monetary gain. 
Unfair means. 

4 
Conspiracy for 
unfair means. 
Disruption to 
conduct public 
examination. 
Other offences. 
No premises 
other than 
examination 
centre shall be 
used for public 
examination. 
Offences in 
respect of 
service 
providers and 
other persons. 
4. No person or group of persons or institutions shall collude or conspire to
facilitate indulgence in any such unfair means.  
5. ( 1) No person, who is not entrusted or engaged with the work pertaining
to the public examination or conduct of public exam ination or who is not a 
candidate, shall enter the premises of the examination centre, with intent to disrupt 
the conduct of the public examination. 
(2) No person authorised, engaged or entrusted with the duties to conduct
public examination shall, before  the time fixed for opening and distribution of 
question papers–– 
(a) open, leak or possess or access or solve or seek assistance to solve
such question paper or any portion or a copy thereof in unauthorised manner for 
monetary or wrongful gain; 
(b) give any confidential information or promise to give such confidential
information to any person, where such confidential information is related to or 
in reference to such question paper for monetary or wrongful gain. 
(3) No person, who is entrusted or en gaged with any work pertaining to
public examination shall, except where he is authorised in furtherance of his 
duties so to do, reveal or cause to be revealed or make known to any other person 
any information or part thereof which has come to his knowledg e for any undue 
advantage or wrongful gain. 
6. If any person or group of persons or institution  commits any unfair means
or offence under sections 3, 4 and section 5, the service provider shall forthwith 
report the offence to the concerned police author ities and also inform the public 
examination authority: 
Provided that if the service provider resorts to unfair means and commits 
the offence or is involved in facilitating an offence, the public examination 
authority shall report the same to the concerned police authorities. 
7. It shall be an offence for the service provider or any person associated
with the service provider to cause any premises, other than the examination centre, 
authorised by the public examination authority, to be alternatively used for the 
purpose of holding public examination, without the written approval of the public 
examination authority: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be an offence where 
any change in the examination centre without prior consent of the pu blic 
examination authority is due to any force majeure. 
8. (1) Any person, including the person associated with a service provider,
shall be deemed to have committed an offence if he individually or in collusion 
with any other person or group of persons o r institutions assists any person or 
group of persons or institutions in any manner unauthorisedly in  the conduct of 
public examination. 
(2) Service provider or any person associated with it shall be deemed to have
committed an offence if he fails to re port incidence of any unfair means or 
commission of any offence. 
(3) Where an offence committed by a service provider is, prima facie ,
established during investigation to have been committed with the consent or 
connivance of any director, manager, secret ary or other officer of such service 
provider, such person shall also be liable to be proceeded against: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence. 

5 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860.
45 of 2023. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860.
45 of 2023. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860.
CHAPTER III 
PUNISHMENT FOR OFFENCES 
9. All offences under this Act, shall be cognizable, non -bailable and
non-compoundable. 
10. (1) Any person or persons resorting to unfair means and offences under
this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than three years 
but which may extend  to  five years  and with fine up to  ten lakh rupees. In case 
of default of payment of fine, an additional punishment of imprisonment shall be 
imposed, as per the  provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, 
the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said 
Act. 
(2) The service provider shall also be liable to be punished with imposition
of a fine up to one crore rupees and  proportionate cost of examination shall also 
be recovered from such service provider and he shall also be barred from being 
assigned  with any responsibility  for the conduct of  any public examination  for a 
period of four years. 
(3) Where it is  established during the  investigation that offence under this
Act has been committed with the consent or connivance of any Director, Senior 
Management or the persons in-charge of the service provider firm, he shall be liable 
for  imprisonment for a term not less than three years but which may extend to ten 
years and with fine of  one crore rupees. In case of default of payment of fine, an 
additional punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed as per the provisions of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, 
the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said 
Act. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the offence was committed without 
his knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 
11. (1) If a person or a group of persons including the examination authority
or service provider or any other institution commits an organised crime, he shall 
be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than five years but which may 
extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than one crore rupees. In 
case of default of payment of fine, an additional punishment of imprisonment shall 
be imposed as per the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, the 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act. 
(2) If an institution is involved in committing an organised crime, its property
shall be subjected to attachment and forfeiture and  proportionate cost of 
examination shall also be recovered from it. 
CHAPTER IV 
INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION
12. (1) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or
Assistant Commissioner of Police shall investigate any offence under this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central
Government shall have the  powers to refer the investigation to any Central 
Investigating Agency. 
Cognizable 
offences. 
Punishment for 
offences under 
this Act. 
Organised 
crimes. 
Officers 
empowered to 
investigate. 

6 
Members, 
officers and 
employees of 
public 
examination 
authority to be 
public 
servants. 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith by 
any public 
servant. 
Provisions of 
this Act to be 
in addition to 
other laws. 
Power to make 
rules. 
Laying of 
rules. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
13. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the public
examination authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the 
meaning of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, 
the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said 
Act. 
14. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings under this Act, shall  lie
against any public servant, in respect of anything which is done in good faith or 
intended to be done in the discharge of his official functions or in exercise of his 
powers: 
Provided that the public servants in the service of any public examination 
authority shall be subject to administrative action in terms of service rules of such 
public examination authority:  
Provided further that nothing shall prevent proceeding against such public 
servants where, prima facie case exists for establishing commission of an offence 
under this Act. 
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation
of, any other law for the time being in force: 
Provided that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law in force. 
16. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–– 
(a) to lay down procedures, processes and activities for being adopted
for conduct of the  public examination; 
(b) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.
17. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session, immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions within three years, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
as appear to it to be necessary for removal of difficulty. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 

7 
CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENT TO THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 1944 
19. In the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944, in the Schedule,
after serial number 5 and entries relating thereto, the following serial number and 
entries shall be inserted, namely:–– 
"6. An offence punishable under the Public Examinations (Prevention 
of Unfair Means) Act, 2024.". 
Amendment of 
Ordinance 38 of 
1944. 

8 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (k)] 
ANY EXAMINATION CONDUCTED BY— 
1. Union Public Service Commission.
2. Staff Selection Commission.
3. Railway Recruitment Boards.
4. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection.
5. Ministries or Departments of the Central Government and their attached and
subordinate offices for recruitment of staff.
6. National Testing Agency.
7. Such other authority as may be notified by the Central Government.
——— 
8 

A 
BILL 
to prevent unfair means in the public examinations and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
________ 
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament) 
RS-P&PS-GB(E)—023—15-02-2024.