As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

24 809 2001

Bill No. 15 of 2001

‘THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
By
‘Suri Basavanacoup Kouur, M.P.
A
BILL
(further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001. Shon tile and
(2) It shall come into force at once. oar
2. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (2).— Anodes
“@) sub-clause (a) shall be omitted; and 65

(ii) in the Explanation, clauses (a) and (b) shall be omitted.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 217(2) of the Constitution inter-alia stipulates that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court unless he has for at least ten years
held a judicial office in the territory of India. This stipulation eliminates many legal lumi-
naries, who don't fulfil this condition but otherwise eminent, being considered for _
appointment as a judge of a High Court. It is, therefore, proposed to remove this condi-
tion. The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution to achieve the above objective.

New Deut, BASAVANAGOUD KOLUR
January 31, 2001.



ANNEXURE

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
217. U1) s * *

(2)A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court unless
| he is a citizen of India and—

(a) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of India; or
(b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court or of two or
more such Courts in succession;
Explanation—for the purposes of this clause—

(a) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in
the territory of India, there shall be included any period, after he has held any judi-
cial office, during which the person has been an advocate of a High Court or has
held the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State,
requiring special knowledge of 18:

* * * * * * *

(७) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in
the territory of India or been an advocate of a High Court, there shall be included
any period before the commencement of this Constitution during which he has held
judicial office in any area which was comprised before the fifteenth day of August,
1947 within India as defined by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has been an
advocate of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be.

* * * * * * *

Appointment
‘and conditions
of the office of
a Judge of a
High Court.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basavanagoud Kolur, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6490LS—20.02.2001.