AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

22 MAR 2002

Bill No. 15_ of 2002

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
By
‘Suri RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:-—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002.

2. In article 105 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that that no such immunity in respect of any vote given by him or
abstinence from voting in Parliament shall be available to him if such act of voting or
abstinence is under the influence of monetary or any other consideration.”

Short title.

Amendment of
article 105.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The privileges and immunities provided in article 105 of the Constitution to
the Members of Parliament are meant to protect them from malicious prosecution.
‘These are essential for Members of Parliament to perform their duties without fear or
favour.

However, these privileges and immunities are capable of being misused for
personal aggrandizement. This will defeat the very objective of these privileges,
Therefore, this possibility has to be obviated by taking such cases of voting or
abstinence from voting out of the protective ring of article 105.

This Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

February 4, 2002.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * *

105, (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the rules and
standing orders regulating the procedure of Parliament, there shall be freedom of
speech in Parliament,

(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court
in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee
thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under
the authority of cither House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or
proceedings.

* * * * * * *

Powers,
Privileges, etc. of
the Houses of
Parliament and of
the members and
committees
thereof.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India,

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5342LS—05-03-2002,