1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. After article 85 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“85A. Notwithstanding anything contained in article 85,—
(i)  each House of Parliament shall compulsorily sit for not less than one
hundred days in a year;
(ii) there shall be four sessions including a special session of Parliament;
and
Short title.
Bill No. 15 of  2019
5
Insertion of
new article
85A.
Minimum
number of
days in a year
for sessions of
Parliament,
etc.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(iii) the number of hours unutilized due to disruptions shall be
compensated by extending each session by as many hours as the sittings were
adjourned due to disruptions:
Provided that the special session of Parliament shall be for a minimum of
fifteen days and shall only be devoted to deliberations of at least two urgent
matters of public importance to be decided by all political parties and no other
business including Government legislative business shall be transacted in that
session.
Explanation.—A productive day in Parliament shall be of at least seven
hours and for calculating the number of days for which the session has to be
extended, the number of adjourned hours shall be converted into number of
productive days, after adjusting the hours when the House transacted business
beyond seven hours.”.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Since the inception of Parliament of India in 1952, Parliament used to devote one
hundred to one hundred and twenty days of a year to sit in sessions. This trend, however,
witnessed a decline over decades, bringing down this number to seventy to eighty days in
a year. Over the years, disruptions in the smooth functioning of the Parliament sessions have
become a rather common feature in the Indian democracy. This causes grave monetary loss,
wastage of time and most importantly, delay in the decision-making on vital issues of public
importance by hasty passing of laws without sufficient deliberation. Various issue which
resonate strongly within the society are not paid enough attention, get overlooked, or are
not adequately discussed. Due to these reasons, productivity of Parliament is on a decline
and the people of the country are gradually losing faith in the relevance of this supreme law-
making institution.
More time should be allotted for debate and discussion on important subjects so as to
arrive at solutions and increase productivity of the Parliament. There is no rule to dictate the
minimum number of days the Parliament should mandatorily be in sessions.
In India, as a practice, usually the Government overshadows the selection of the
topics of discussion in Parliament. To avoid logjams in the smooth functioning of Parliament
and to prevent washout of sessions, it is crucial that the opposition also gets equal and
adequate voice in Parliament. Therefore, opposition parties should also have an adequate
say in deciding the agenda of Parliament so as to increase accountability of the Government.
In the light of the above, the Bill, therefore, seeks to insert new article 85A  in the
Constitution with a view to—
(i) each House of Parliament shall compulsorily sit for not less than one hundred
days in a year;
(ii) there shall be four sessions including a special session of Parliament; and
(iii) the number of hours unutilized due to disruptions shall be compensated by
extending each session by as many hours as the sittings were adjourned due to
disruptions.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
November 27, 2018.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that each House of Parliament shall compulsorily sit for
not less than one hundred days in a year. It also provides that there shall be four sessions
including a special session of Parliament and that the number of hours unutilized due to
disruptions shall be compensated by extending each session by as many hours as the
sittings were adjourned due to disruptions. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is, estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one hundred and twenty crores per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to involve.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3262LS(S3)—30-01-2019.