THE CHILD DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2007
By
SHRIMATI ARCHANA NAYAK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for all-round development of children and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Child Development  Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i)  “appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) “child’’ means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
and
(iii) “prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 15 of   2007
5
10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Child
Development Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the
Fund in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund, donations or contributions received from
other organisations or individuals.
(4) The Fund shall be utilised in such manner as may be prescribed for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
4.  Every child shall have the right to—
(i) free education upto senior secondary level in all schools including
Government aided private schools;
(ii) scholarship, in such cases as may be prescribed;
(iii) nutritious food, including midday meal in the schools;
(iv) free transport facilities between place of residence and the educational
institutions;
(v) free bicycles, where there are no proper transport facilities;
(vi) free vocational training;
(vii) free access to the public libraries under the control of the appropriate
Government;
(viii) free access to games and sports facilities; and
(ix) free travel in railways for undertaking educational tour.
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause ( i), ‘‘free education’’ means education
without payment of charges of fee of any kind and includes supply of books, stationery
items and uniform, free of cost.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the provisions of
this Act.
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Setting  up of
the Child
Development
Fund.
Rights of a
child.
Appropriate
Government to
implement the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children are the future of a country. Majority of the children in our country do not
have access to quality educational facilities and sports facilities due to lack of funds with
their parents. In fact, their parents are so poor that sometimes they can’t even afford a single
square meal in a day. Consequently, due to the lack of proper nutrition and proper health
care, these children become disease prone.
Moreover, in many rural areas children do not have any recreational facilities.
It is, therefore, necessary to bring a law providing basic educational facilities free of
cost and access to sports facilities to every child to ensure all round development of his
personality.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARCHANA  NAYAK
November 8, 2006.
————
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER
ARTICLE 117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. 2-42/2006-CW, dated 31 January, 2007 from Shrimati Renuka
Chowdhury, Minister of State of the Ministry of Women and Child Development to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Child Development
Bill, 2007 by Shrimati Archana Nayak, Member of Parliament, recommends to the House
the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the creation of a Child Development Fund. Clause 4
confers certain rights on children. The Central Government, besides contributing to the Fund,
shall bear the expenditure for facilities to be provided to the children in the Union
territories. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand
crores per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crores is also likely to
be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for all-round development of children and for matters
connected  therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Archana Nayak, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—228LS(S-5)—14-02-2007.