THE PAYMENT OF BONUS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
By
ADV. P.T. THOMAS, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
com-
mencement.
Bill No. 15 of 2010
5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in clause (13) for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "fifteen
thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
3. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"10. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every employer shall be bound to pay
to every employee in respect of the accounting year commencing on any day in the year
2009 and in respect of every subsequent accounting year, a minimum bonus which shall be
11 per cent. of the salary or wage earned by the employee during the accounting year or one
hundred rupees, whichever is higher, whether or not the employer has any allocable surplus
in the accounting year:
Provided that where an employee has not completed fifteen years of age at the beginning
of the accounting year, the provisions of this section shall have effect in relation to such
employees as if for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "sixty rupees" were
substituted.".
4. In section 12 of the principal Act, for the words "three thousand and five hundred
rupees", at both the places where they occur, the words "five thousand rupees" shall,
respectively, be substituted.
Amendment of
section 2.
Substitution of
new section for
section 10.
Payment of
minimum
bonus.
Amendment of
section 12.
21 of 1965.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 provides for payment of bonus to employees covered
under the Act. According to clause (13) of section 2 of the Act, employee means any person
(other than an apprentice) employed on a salary or wage not exceeding ten thousand per
mensem in any industry to do any skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, managerial,
administrative, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment
be expressed or implied. According to section 12 of the Act, the bonus payable to an employee
whose salary or wage exceeds three thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem shall be
calculated as if his salary or wage were three thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem.
The Act, therefore, at present provides for payment of bonus to only those employees
whose salary or wage does not exceed ten thousand rupees per mensem. Further, section 12
read with section 10 provides that the percentage of minimum bonus, which at present is
8.33 per cent., payable to an employee shall be calculated by taking the maximum salary or
wage as three thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem even if the salary or wage
exceeds Rs. 3500/-.
The existing provisions are not adequate in the present scenario of rising inflation.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the definition of employee so as to make all such employees,
whose salary or wage does not exceed fifteen thousand rupees, eligible for payment of
bonus. The Bill also seeks to enhance the calculation ceiling of bonus from three thousand
five hundred rupees to five thousand rupees and to enhance the minimum bonus payable
from 8.33 per cent. to 11 per cent. of the salary or wage earned by the employee during the
accounting year for which the bonus is being paid.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.T. THOMAS
December 16, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (13) of section 2 of the Payment of Bonus
Act, 1965 to enhance the eligibility limit for the payment of bonus from ten thousand rupees
per mensem to fifteen thousand rupees per mensem. Clause 3 seeks to increase the minimum
bonus payable from 8.33 per cent. to 11 per cent. of the salary or wage earned by the
employee during the accounting year. Clause 4 seeks to provide for enhancing the calculation
ceiling of bonus from three thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem to five thousand
rupees per mensem.
The additional expenditure on this account, from the Consolidated Fund of India will
be due to increase in percentage of minimum bonus payable from 8.33 to 11 per cent.,
calculation ceiling from three thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem to five thousand
rupees per mensem and eligibility limit from ten thousand rupees to fifteen thousand rupees
per mensem. The additional approximate expenditure for payment of adhoc bonus to the
Central Government employees and in respect of employees belonging to Railways, Post,
etc. (Productivity Linked Bonus) will be to the tune of rupees two hundred crore and rupees
five hundred crore, respectively. The additional approximate expenditure for payment of
bonus to the employees of Central Public Sector Undertakings would be around rupees three
hundred crore.
The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965
(21 of 1965)
* * * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * * * *
(13) "employee" means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on a salary
or wage not exceeding ten thousand rupees per mensem in any industry to do any skilled or
unskilled, manual, supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical or clerical work for hire
or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied;
* * * * * * *
10. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every employer shall be bound to pay
to every employee in respect of the accounting year commencing on any day in the year 1979
and in respect of every subsequent accounting year, a minimum bonus which shall be
8.33 per cent. of the salary or wage earned by the employee during the accounting year or
one hundred rupees, whichever is higher, whether or not the employer has any allocable
surplus in the accounting year:
* * * * * * *
12. Where the salary or wage of an employee exceeds three thousand and five hundred
rupees per mensem, the bonus payable to such employee under section 10 or, as the case
may be, under section 11, shall be calculated as if his salary or wage were three thousand and
five hundred rupees per mensem.
* * * * * * *
Definitions.
Payment of
minimum
bonus.
Calculation of
bonus with
respect to
certain
employees.
5

A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965.
—————
(Adv. P .T. Thomas, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND— 221LS(S5)—24-02-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————