THE RIGHT TO ACCESS OF JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS AND
INFORMATION BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for access to judicial proceedings of the Supreme Court and its Benches
by prescribing digital recording of all judicial proceedings and making them
available online to the public in general to foster greater accountability
and for the matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Access of Judicial Proceedings and
Information Act, 2016.
Bill No. 15 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The provisions of this Act shall apply exclusively to the proceedings of the Supreme
Court and its Benches.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "audio-visual content" means the content containing both audio and video
components and stored in a digital format;
(b) "judicial proceedings" means proceedings taking place before the Supreme
Court or any of its Benches;
(c) "information" includes such information as may be obtained under the Right
to Information Act, 2005;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "Secretariat" means the Supreme Court Secretariat established under
section 4.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE S UPREME COURT S ECRETARIAT
FOR RECORDING, STORAGE AND ACCESS OF
JUDICIAL P ROCEEDINGS
4. (1) The Central Government shall, after consultation with the Chief Justice
of India, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Secretariat to be known
as the Supreme Court Secretariat for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Secretariat shall work under overall supervision of the Chief Justice
of India.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and
employees to the Secretariat, as may be necessary, to ensure effective implementation
of the provisions of this Act.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of officers and employees of the Secretariat shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Secretariat shall—
(i) make audio-video recording of all judicial proceedings;
(ii) make audio-visual recording of such other information as may be
prescribed;
(iii) upload on especially created website, the judicial proceedings and
information referred to in clauses (i) and (ii);
(iv) maintain a database of all judicial proceedings and information;
(v) create a database of the audio-visual archives within twenty four hours of
any hearing including the name of the judge, parties involved, date of hearing, chamber
number, case number and case type,
to ensure easy access to the judicial proceedings and information.
6. Save as otherwise provided in section 7, whoever, responsible for uploading judicial
proceedings or information, fails by way of negligence or omission, to upload the judicial
proceedings or information, shall be suspended from the service immediately and an enquiry
Application of
the Act.
Establishment
of Secretariat.
Functions of
the Secretariat.
Penalty.
Definitions.
22 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Committee consisting of such officials as may be prescribed, shall be constituted to
recommend appropriate action.
CHAPTER III
REFUSAL OF R ECORDING OR S HARING OF J UDICIAL P ROCEEDINGS
7. (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 8 of the Right to Information Act, 2005,
every citizen shall have the right to access to audio-visual contents of judicial proceedings
and information.
(2) If during the course of a judicial proceeding, a judge of the Supreme Court feels
that a particular proceeding should not be recorded or once recorded should not be shared
with the public, the judge may direct the Secretariat not to record that judicial proceeding or
withhold such recording from uploading on the especially created website, as the case may
be.
(3) Whenever a judge orders not to record any judicial proceeding or withhold such
recording from uploading on especially created website, he shall record his reasons in writing
in doing so and make such reasons available to the public through the especially created
website.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the
removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order or direction shall be made or given after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification and in consultation with the Chief
Justice of India, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and, if before the expiry of
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Right to
access to
judicial
proceedings.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
22 of 2005.
35

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Supreme Court is the highest Judicial forum and final court of appeal under the
Constitution of India with the power of judicial review.
At present, the proceedings of the Supreme Court are available in public domain in the
text format after each hearing. However, as the proceedings are lengthy , the arguments
involved are complex, understanding of justice and the rationale behind the judgement
becomes difficult for a common man.
Adding two more sensory sources for information 'audio and video' will increase the
effectiveness as well as the speed of dissemination of the legal information, both to the legal
fraternity as well as common public at large.
In today's world, some of the legal issues are too complex where some of the expressions
of the opposing view on the Bench are lost in plain text format (including but not limited to
expression of point of information or sarcasm). This can be preserved only through visual
archives. Video archives of complex topics will also help intervening agencies like mdeia,
civil society and political parties to demystify the arguments of contradictory views and
enhance public understanding. Thus, a common man would be able to see and hear directly
from the horse's mouth beyond the rhetoric of today's hyper media communication.
Lastly, a visual medium will also help in setting illustrations of exemplary legal conduct.
This will not only enhance the faith and respect of the common man in the judiciary but also
stand as a shining example for the conduct of judges across the country and provide law
students and aspirants an in-depth flavour of high standards expected of them.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
December  4, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Supreme Court Secretariat for
recording, storing and providing access to judicial proceedings of the Supreme Court and its
Benches. It also provides for appointment of officers and employees to the secretariat to
ensure effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. Clause 5 provides for maintaining
website and database for making available the records of judicial proceedings of the
Supreme Court and its Benches. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for  carrying out
the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for access to judicial proceedings of the Supreme Court and its Benches by
prescribing digital recording of all judicial proceedings and making them available
online to the public in general to foster greater accountability and for
the matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4164LS(S3)—16.02.2016.