1
Constitution of
Accreditation
Board.
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRIMATI KA VITHA KALV AKUNTLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, after Chapter III, the following Chapter shall
be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IIIA
CLINICAL TRIALS OF DRUGS
15A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Board to be known as the Clinical Trials Accreditation Board which consists of
the following members, namely:—
Bill No.  15 of  2018
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIIA.
23 of 1940.
5
10

2
(a) Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Department of Health and Family Welfare—Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) Directors of all All-India Institutes of Medical Sciences—members, ex-officio;
(c) Director-General of Health Services, Directoratre General of  Health Services,
New Delhi—members, ex-officio;
(d) Director, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh—member, ex-officio;
(e) Director, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
New Delhi—member, ex officio; and
(f) Director, Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry—member, ex-officio;
(2) The Accreditations Board shall accredit investigators and trial sites for conduct of
clinical trial of drugs.
(3) The Accreditation Board shall appoint a Registrar to maintain a registry of clinical
trials and their outcomes.
(4) The Accreditation Board shall constitute a Committee of Experts to examine
applications for conduct of clinical trials by accredited investigators.
(5) The Accreditation Board shall appoint such officers and staff as are necessary for
discharge of its functions under this Act.
15B. (1) A clinical trial shall be conducted only by an accredited investigator entity at
an accredited trial site.
(2) An accredited investigator shall apply to the Committee of Experts for permission
to conduct clinical trials.
(3) Each such application shall be examined by the Committee of Experts, with special
reference to, but without prejudice to examination of any other aspect that may be relevant,
the possibility of serious adverse consequences for human subjects, existence of free and
informed consent of human subjects and the provisions for adequate compensation in the
case of any injury or adverse effect on such subjects due to the clinical trial.
(4) The Committee of Experts shall give its decision on an application for clinical trial
within sixty days:
Provided that the Accreditation Board may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
reverse the decision of the Committee of Experts within a period of ten days from the
date of decision of the Committee of Experts.
15C. Every human subject participating in a clinical trial shall be informed about the
entire procedure of clinical trial and the possible adverse effects of such trial on his health:
Provided that unless an application for clinical trial is accompanied by a
declaration of free and informed consent made by such human subject, no permission
for clinical trial shall be granted.
15D. Every human subject participating in a clinical trial or his legal heirs, as the case
may be, shall be paid adequate monetary compensation in the case of any adverse effect on
his health during the course of a clinical trial or as an after-effect of the trial:
Provided that in the case of death of the human subject or a serious adverse
effect on his health causing permanent disability, the compensation shall not be less
than ten lakh rupees.
Conduct of
clinical trials.
Informed
consent.
Compensation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Penalty for
conducting
clinical trial
without
permission.
15E. (1) Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts clinical trial
of drugs without obtaining permission under section 15B, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years and shall also be liable to fine which shall
not be less than twenty lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts clinical trial
without obtaining permission and such trial causes grievous hurt or death of trial participant,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but
which may extend to eight years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than
thirty lakh rupees.
(3) The fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the trial participant or, as the
case may be, his legal heirs.
15F. Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 15E is again convicted
under that section, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than fifty lakh rupees.
15G. Whoever, responsible to provide compensation for clinical trial related injury or
death under this Chapter fails to do so, shall be punished with imprisonment which may
extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than twice the amount of the
compensation.
15H. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company, for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to the proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section—
(i) "Company" means any body corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.".
5
10
15
20
Penalty for
repeat
offence.
Penalty for
failure to
provide
compensation.
Offences by
companies.
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
India has been a major target for investigators seeking human subjects for clinical
trials of drug both by multi-national corporations as well as Indian pharmaceutical companies.
The high mortality rates and serious adverse effects on the health of human subjects have
often been considered indicative of the fact that human subjects in clinical trials are being
treated as guinea pigs in India. The fact that in many cases no compensation is paid and,
even where it is paid, it is not sufficient relative to the injury suffered by the human participant
due to the clinical trial, shows the lack of sensitivity for such cases.
In view of the above, the Bill seeks to make the following amendments in the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, 1940—
(i) providing for establishment of an Accreditation Board for granting
accreditation to investigators (who will conduct trials) and trials sites (which can be a
hospital or other place where the trial will be conducted);
(ii) constitution of a Committee of Experts to examine applications for clinical
trials;
(iii) appointment of a Registrar for keeping registry of clinical trials and their
outcomes;
(iv) providing for mandatory free and informed consent from human subjects
participating in clinical trials and provision of adequate compensation for injuries or
death due to such trials; and
(v) providing for punishment for conduct of clinical trials without permission
and for failure to provide compensation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KA VITHA  KALV AKUNTLA
December  18, 2018.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of an Accreditation Board, a Committee of
Experts, and appointment of a Registrar and other officers and staff of the Accreditation
Board. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure about rupees seven crore will be involved
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore is also likely to be involved.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
————
(Shrimati Kavitha Kalvakuntla, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3631LS(S3)—20.01.2018.