1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. In the seventh schedule to Constitution in List II-State List, after entry 41, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"41A. Services of the institutions of self-government and self-government Service
Selection Board.
Bill No.  15 of  2017
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
the seventh
schedule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 40 of the Constitution provides for organization of Village Panchayats and
endow them win such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function
as units of "Self Government". Keeping in view this Constitutional mandate of Directive
Principles of State Policy, the Part IX of the Constitution relating to Panchayats was
incorporated by 73rd Amendment in the Constitution. Article 243(d) defines "Panchayat" as
"an institution (by whatever name called) of self government constituted under article 243(B)
for the rural areas."
Article 243(B) envisages the constitution of Panchayats. Article 243(G) envisages the
power, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
The State Legislature is competent to endow the Panchayats with such powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of Self Government
including those powers in relation to the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
Entries 17, 18 and 19 of the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution deal with education
including Primary, Secondary school, Technical Training, Adult and Non formal education.
Article 246 deals with the subject matter of laws made by the Parliament and the
Legislature of the States.
As per article 246(3), the Legislature of any State has exclusive power to make laws for
such State with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II, i.e., the State List of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
However, in the State List, there is no provision which gives legislative competence to
the State in making law with respect to the services of the institution of Self Government as
defined in Part IX of the Constitution of India.
Hence in view of this, it is necessary to empower legislature of the State to legislate
with respect to the services of the institution of the Self Government. Therefore, entry 41A in
the Seventh Schedule of the State List is required to be incorporated with respect to the
services of the  institutions of  Self Government and Self Government Service Selection
Board.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI  LEKHI
November 22, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
List II-State List
* * * * *
41. State public services, State Public Service Commission
* * * * *
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4961LS(S3)—10-03-2017.