THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances  Act, 1985.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the  Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2008.
2. In the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in section 2, for sub-section (xviii), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
‘(xviii) "poppy straw" means all parts (except the seeds, the leaves, the husk,
the roots and the stems) of the opium poppy after juice has been extracted
therefrom.'.
Short title.
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No.  15 of 2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
561 of 1985.
10

2
3.  In section 15 of the principal Act, after the proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:
"Provided further that no person who has been issued a licence for cultivating opium
poppy shall be subjected to any punishment, if, after harvesting it, he possesses either the
leaves, the husk, the roots or the stems of the opium poppy.".
4. In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words "which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend
to twenty years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees", the words "which shall not be less
than six months but which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty-
five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; and
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "two lakh rupees", the words "twenty-five
thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
5. In section 53A of the principal Act, in sub-section (i), the following proviso shall be
added at the end, namely:—
"Provided that any statement made by any person before any officer under this section
shall not be the conclusive proof of offence having been committed under the Act unless
it is proved by other corroborative evidence.".
Amendment
of section
53A.
Amendment
of section 15.
Amendment
of section 19.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The cultivators of opium poppy plant after extraction of the juice, keep poppy
straw which includes the leaves, the husk, the roots and the stems until it is sold. The
existing definition of "poppy straw" in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985, includes such leaves, husk, roots and stems. This definition needs to be
amended so that the cultivators and other persons in possession of these parts of the
poppy plant, are not harassed by the enforcement authorities.
Punishment prescribed for contravention of the provisions of the Act in relation
to poppy straw and for embezzlement of opium by cultivators is excessive. It is, therefore,
necessary to reduce the extent of punishment prescribed so as to make it realistic and
also to facilitate implementation of the provisions of the Act by the enforcement
authorities and the courts.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; LAXMINARAYAN  PANDEY
December 12, 2007
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NARCOTIC D RUGS AND P SYCHOTROPIC S UBSTANCES ACT, 1985.
(61 OF 1985)
* * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context other requires,—
* * * * * *
(xviii) "poppy straw" means all parts (except the seeds) of the opium poppy after
harvesting whether in their original form or cut, crushed or powdered and whether or not
juice has been extracted therefrom;
* * * * * *
15. Whoever, in contravention of any provisions of this Act or any rule or order
made or condition of a licence granted thereunder, produces, possesses, transports,
imports inter-State, exports inter-State, sells, purchases, uses or omits to warehouse
poppy straw or removes or does any act in respect of warehoused poppy straw shall be
punishable,—
(a) where the contravention involves small quantity, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the contravention involves quantity lesser than commercial quantity
but greater than small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years, and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;
(c) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend
to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees;
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a
fine exceeding two lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
19. Any cultivator licensed to cultivate the opium poppy on account of the Central
Government who embezzles or otherwise illegally disposes of the opium produced or
any part thereof, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than ten years but which may extend to twenty  years and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a
fine exceeding two lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
53A. (1) A statement made and signed by a person before any officer empowered
under Section 53 for the investigation of offences, during the course of any enquiry or
proceedings by such officer, shall be relevant for the purposes of proving in any
prosecution for an offence under this Act, the truth of the facts which it contains,—
(a) When the person who made statement is dead or cannot be found or is
incapable of giving evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or
whose presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense which,
under the circumstances of the case, the Court considers unreasonable; or
Definitions.
Punishment
for
contravention
in relation to
poppy straw.
Punishment
for
embezzlement
of opium by
cultivator.
Relevance of
statements
under certain
circumstances.
4

5
(b) When the person who made the statement is examined as a witness in the
case before the court and the court is of the opinion that, having regard to the
circumstances of the case, the statement should be admitted in evidence in the
interest of justice.
* * * * * *

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
————
(Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—292LS(S5)—19.02.2008.