THE ERADICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT BILL, 2015
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Eradication of Unemployment Act, 2015.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, —
(a)  " Government" means  the Central Government; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No. 15 of 2015
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
5

2
3.  The Government shall endeavour  to provide every citizen, who has attained the age
of eighteen years and who is registered with Employment Exchange, with employment
suitable to his age, qualification, skill and potential.
4. Till such time as employment is provided to a citizen under section 3, he shall be
entitled to unemployment allowance at such rate commensurate with his qualifications and
skills, as may be prescribed.
5. An Unemployment Insurance Scheme, with such features, as may be prescribed,
shall be framed and implemented by the Government so as to provide for a special fund for
the grant of unemployment allowance under this Act.
6.  Every citizen whose name is registered in the Employment Exchange shall be eligible
to receive benefit of unemployment allowance under this Act subject ot his furnishing an
agreement to contribute to the Unemployment Insurance Scheme for a prescribed period
immediately after securing employment at such rate, as may be prescribed.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter  have effect only  in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Employment
to citizens.
5
10
15
20
45
Grant of
unemploy-
ment
allowance.
Unemploy-
ment Insur-
ance Scheme.
Contribution
to Unemploy-
ment Insur-
ance Scheme.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The problem of unemployment has assumed menacing proportions in our country.
Even the educated citizens are living in indigent state. Their energy is not being utilized for
nation building. Due to desperation and abject poverty, they are choosing the path of
violence and crime. Lack of employment opportunities in the country is also leading to brain-
drain and exodus of a large number of skilled and unskilled persons abroad. It is high time
that concerted efforts be made by the Government to assure employment to the citizens of
the country and to provide unemployment allowance to those who have not been able to
secure employment. It is also necessary to formulate and implement an Unemployment
Insurance Scheme for the purpose, so that the scheme may serve to finance the funds to
provide relief to unemployed people.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK'
December 23, 2014.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Government shall endeavour to provide
employment to all eligible citizens who have attained the age of eighteen years or above.
Clause 4 provides for unemployment allowance to unemployed citizens. Clause 5 provides
for Unemployment Insurance Scheme to be formulated and implemented by the Central
Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred fifty crore
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made would
relate to matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4330LS(S-3)—09-02-2015.