As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

_ १९ 0११ 200

Bill_No. 15 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Supt P.C. Tuomas, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—

“16A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the State may make
provision for reservation in favour of persons belonging to economically weaker section
of the society in the posts and services under the State:

Provided that the percentage of reservation shall not exceed twelve percent.

Short title.

Insertion of
new article
16A.

Reservation
for economi-
cally weaker
sections of the
society in
posts and
services.


2

(2) The provisions of clause (7) shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained in any judgement or decree or direction or order of any Court of Law or
Tribunal or Authority having judicial powers to the contrary.

Explanation: For the purpose of this article, —

“persons belonging to economically weaker section of the society” means persons
whose income from all sources is below rupees twelve thousand per annum but shall
not include persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and socially
and educationally Backward Classes.”.

Insertion of new 3. After article 29 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,

anicle29A.  namely:—

Reservation “294A. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the State may make

ee: provision for reservation in favour of persons belonging to economically weaker
ly weaker apis pilacusee é

section ofthe section of the society in all educational institutions under the State:

पक Provided that the percentage of reservation shall not exceed twelve percent.

institutions. (2) The provisions of clause (/) shall have effect notwithstanding anything

contained in any Judgement or decree or direction or order of any Court of Law or
Tribunal or Authority having judicial powers to the contrary.

Explanation: For the purpose of this article, —

“persons belonging to economically weaker section of the society” means persons
whose income from all sources is below rupees twelve thousand per annum but shall
not include per. ons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and socially
and educationally Backward Classes.”.

20


tens eaten

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The people belonging to the economically weaker sections are not getting benefit of
any reservation scheme. The poor amongst them are becoming poorer day by day. They
‘cannot compete with others. It is, therefore, necessary to provide reservation in favour of
those economically weaker sections of the society in posts and services and in all educational
institutions under the State.

The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to making reservation for
economically weaker sections without affecting the rights of the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes.

Hence this Bill.

New Devt; P.C. THOMAS
November 19, 1999.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri 8८. Thomas, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3197LS—8-1-2000.