THE HOSPITAL-ACQUIRED INFECTIONS (PREVENTION,
CONTROL AND MANDATORY REPORTING) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PREM DAS RAI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive inspection control policy and antimicrobial stewardship
programme for hospitals and other healthcare facilities to prevent and control the
incidence of hospital-acquired infections, mandatory reporting system for such
infections and for matters connected herewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hospital-Acquired Infections (Prevention, Control
and Mandatory Reporting) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Committee" means the Hospital-Acquired Infection Advisory Committee
constituted under section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No.  160 of 2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "data" means any information submitted by a hospital or a healthcare facility
to the Central Government;
(c) "healthcare facility" means any general, critical care or specialized healthcare
institute;
(d) "hospital-acquired infection" means any localized or systemic condition
resulting from an adverse reaction due to the presence of an infectious agent or its
toxin that occurs in a patient in a hospital or a healthcare facility; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Hospital-Acquired Infections Advisory Committee.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of members,
including experts from the medical profession, pharmacy, public health and health
communities, as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Committee shall have its headquarter at New Delhi.
(6) The Committee may also set up offices at such conspicuous places with prior
approval of the Central Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(7) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff, as may
be necessary, for the efficient functioning of the Committee.
4. The Committee shall—
(a) advise the Central Government in preparation of an action plan for prevention,
control and mandatory reporting of hospital-acquired infections;
(b) define the criteria for determining healthcare facilities which shall be covered
under this Act;
(c) evolve a system for mandatory reporting by hospitals and healthcare facilities
of hospital-acquired infections;
(d) frame a comprehensive infection control policy to prevent hospital-acquired
infections;
(e) frame an antimicrobial stewardship programme to promote rational use of
antibiotics in hospitals and healthcare facilities;
(f) suggest measures to address hospital-acquired infections;
(g) submit periodical reports on the extent, pattern and trends of hospital-
acquired infections, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed;
(h) recommend to the Central Government the penalties, which may be imposed
on a hospital or a heathcare facility for non-compliance of the provisions of this Act;
(i) create public awareness about effective measures to reduce the spread of
infections in communities, hospitals and healthcare facilities; and
(j) perform such other tasks as may be assigned to it by the Central Government
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The mandatory reporting system under clause (c) of section 4 shall include—
(i) patient's diagnosis at the time of admission;
Constitution
of Hospital-
Acquired
Infections
Advisory
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Mandatory
Reporting
system.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(ii) specific infectious agents or toxins and site of each infection;
(iii) clinical department or unit within the hospital or a healthcare facility
where the patient gets infected or is diagnosed with infection for the first time;
(iv) any relevant, specific, surgical, medical or diagnostic procedure performed
during admission;
(v) data regarding implementation and evaluation of interventions to reduce
hospital-acquired infections; and
(vi) any other informations deemed appropriate by the Central Government.
(2) The instructions under the mandatory reporting system shall be—
(i) based upon scientific evidence; and
(ii) capable of being used and easily understood by the public including patients.
6. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Committee for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) Every hospital and healthcare facility shall maintain a programme capable of
identifying, tracking and mandatory reporting of, hospital-acquired infections, in such
form and manner, as may be specified by the Committee.
(2) Every hospital and healthcare facility shall submit data relating to prevention,
control and mandatory reporting of hospital-acquired infections to the Committee in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
8. Every hospital and healthcare facility shall constitute a task force to ensure effective
implementation of the infection control policy framed by the committee under clause (d)  of
section 4.
9. Every hospital and  healthcare facility shall formulate a  mechanism to ensure
implementation of the antimicrobial stewardship programme framed by the Committee to
promote rational use of antibiotics.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the
Committee.
Role of
hospitals and
healthcare
facilities.
Constitution
of task force.
Formulation
an
antimicrobial
stewardship
programme.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Hospital-acquired infections are infections that patients acquire during the course of
receiving treatment for other conditions in a hospital or in a healthcare facility. Hospital-
acquired infections are global public health issues. World Health Organization (WHO)
suggests that hospital-acquired infections are the most frequent adverse events in healthcare
delivery worldwide and at any given time, seven per cent. and ten per cent. patients in
developed and developing countries, respectively, acquire  at least one hositpal-acquired
infection.
Hospital-acquired infections are undesirable from the perspective of both the patient
and the hospital and result in increased mortality, prolonged hospital stay, increased resistance
to antimicrobials, increased recovery time and in some cases create long term disability. The
additional financial burden of cost attributable to these infections has serious financial
implications for patients, particularly in view of low health insurance coverage in India.
At present, no national data is available on the prevalence of hospital-acquired
infections in India. The knowledge about prevalence of hospital-acquired infections in India
comes from studies conducted in a few hospitals. A report estimated that one in four patients
admitted into hospitals in India developed hospital-acquired infections, compared to incidence
of five to ten per cent. in most developed nations.
Lack of national surveillance system has hampered assessment of healthcare burden
associated with hospital-acquired infections in India. Continued surveillance, effective
infection control programmes, rational use of antibiotics and enhanced public awareness
can reduce the incidence of hospital-acquired infections, improve patient care and help
better prioritization of resources.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide, inter-alia, for the following measures—
(a) constitution of Hospital-Acquired Infection Advisory Committee to advise
the Central Government in preparation of an action plan for the prevention, control and
mandatory reporting of hospital-acquired infections;
(b) mandatory reporting of hospital-acquired infections by every hospital and
healthcare facility;
(c) constitution of a task force in every hospital and healthcare facility to ensure
effective implementation of infection control policy framed by the Committee;
(d) antimicrobial stewardship programme to promote rational use of antibiotics;
and
(e) creation of public awareness about effective measures to reduce the spread
of infections in communities, hospitals and healthcare facilities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PREM DAS RAI
April 5, 2015
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for Constitution of a Hospital-Acquired Infections
Advisory Committee for the prevention, control and mandatory reporting of hospital-acquired
infections in hospitals and health facilities. Clause 4 provides, inter-alia, that the Committee
shall create public awareness about effective measures to reduce the spread of infections in
communities, hospitals and healthcare facilities. Clause 6 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to the Committee for carrying out the purposes
of this Act. Clause 7 provides that every hospital and healthcare facility shall maintain a
programme capable of identifying, tracking and mandatory reporting of hospital-acquired
infections and submit data relating to prevention, control and mandatory reporting of hospital-
acquired infections to the Committee. Clause 8 provides for Constitution of a task force by
every hospital and healthcare facility to ensure effective implementation of infection control
policy prepared by the Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of
rupees five hundred crore per annum would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive inspection control policy and antimicrobial stewardship
programme for hospitals and other healthcare facilities to prevent and control the
incidence of hospital-acquired infections, mandatory reporting system for
such infections and for matters connected herewith.
————
(Shri Prem Das Rai, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1358LS(S3)—14-07-2015.