As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2 31६ 2am

Bill No. 160 of 2000.
—_

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

By
‘Supt Surest Kurur, M.P.

A

Bet {1 Pree | gre pi
नह , 20) व om
further to amend the Constitution of India. serene 24.4
o

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-— —

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000, Shorttitle.

2, In article 248 of the Constitution, for clause (1), the following clause shall be Amendment
substituted, namely:— of article 248,

5 “(1) The Legislature of a State has exclusive power to make any law with
Fespect (0 any matter not enumerated in the Union List or Concurrent List.”,

३. Article 249 of the Constitution shall be omitted, Omission of
anticle 249,

4. In article 251 of the Constitution, for the words “articles 249 and 250", the words Amendment of
“article 250” shall be substituted, article 251,


Amendment of 5. In article 252 of the Constitution, for the words “articles 249 and 250”, the words
article 252. “article 250” shall be substituted.
Atmendatent of 6. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, —
the Seventh
‘Schedule. (0 in List I — Union List, entry 97 shall be omitted;
(ii) in List Il — State List, after entry 66, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—

“67. Any other matter not enumerated in List I or List II] including any
tax not mentioned in either of those Lists.”.

8


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A time has come whefi the Centre-State relations need to be strengthened by judi-
cious redistribution of degislative and executive Powers between the Centre on the one
hand and the States on the other. States autonomy has to be enlarged so as to enable them
to shape and enhance their eccnomic Progress without depending on the largesse given
by the Centre. In a democratic set-up, it is essential that the State Legislatures and
Governments must have sufficient freedom and powers to fulfil the mandate and desires
of the people electing them. Denial of this reduces the constituent federal units to the
status of dependencies. It is, therefore, considered necessary that the/residuary powers of
legislation in relation to subjects not enumerated in the Union List or the Concurrent List
should vest in the States rather than the Centre as at Present.) The power of Parliament to
interfere in the matters ‘mentioned in the State List should also be done away with. The
Present Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.

New Deva; SURESH KURUP
October 25, 2000



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *

248. Residuary powers of Legistation—(/) Parliament has exclusive power to make
any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.

(2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a tax not men-
tioned in either of those Lists,

249, Power of Parliament to legislate with respectito a matter in the State List
in the national interest—(/) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of
this Chapter, if the Council of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than
two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the
national interest that Parliament should make laws with respect to any matter enumerated
in the State List specified in the resolution, it shall be lawful for Parliament to make laws.
for the whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to that matter while the
resolution remains in force,

(2) A resolution passed under clause (1) shall remain in force for such Period not
exceeding one year as may be specified therein:

Provided that, if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of
any Such resolution is passed in the manner provided in clause (1), such resolution shall
Continue in force for a further Period of one year from the date on which under this clause
it would otherwise have ceased to be in force.

* *

* *

cither of the said articles power to make, the law made by Parliament, whether passed
before or after the law made by the Legislature. of the State, shall prevail, and the law
made by the Legisiature of the State sha! to the extent of the Frepugnancy, but so long only
as the law made by Parliament continues to have effect, be inoperative,

252. Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and
adoption of such legislation by any other State—(/) If it appears to the Legislatures of
two or more States to be desirable that any of the matters with respect to which Parliament
has no power to make laws for the States except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should
be regulated in such States by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are
Passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for Parlia-
ment to pass an Act for regulating that matter accordingly, and any Act so Passed shall
apply to such States and to any other State by which it is adopted afterwards by resolution
Passed in that behalf by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each of the Houses

(2) Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amended or repeated by an Act of
Parliament passed or adopted in like manner but shall not, as respecte any State to which
iC applies, be amended or repealed by an Act of the Legislature of that Sate

&

* * *

SEVENTH SCHEDULE

(Article 246)
List I—Union List
* * * * .
97. Any other matter not enumerated in List If or List HI including any tax not
mentioned in either of those Lists,
* * * * *

4