Bill No. 160 of  2018
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE URBAN AREAS (EQUITABLE DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish an Urban Areas Equitable Development Authority to provide for clean and
hygienic maintenance of environment and public spaces, resettlement of persons
living in slums in decent housing facilities, issuing guidelines for employmentof
persons in slums in the reconstruction activities, facilitating system of
self policing among citizens, proper underground drainage and sewerage
network, dedicated paths for pedestrians and cyclists, formulate policies for subsidising
cycles and promoting eco-friendly transport, creation of  community markets for
hawkers, issuing licenses to hawkers, providing for minimum standards to be
maintained by private hostels  and paying guest accommodations and recommending
their compulsory registration, framing guidelines for ensuring equal redistribution
of economic and work opportunities in urban areas and for all matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Urban Areas (Equitable Development and
Regulation) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  “annual report” means a report giving the details of developmental activities
taken up   over a year by the Authority and detailing about targets set and achieved;
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b)  "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State or a Union Territory
having  legislature, the concerned State Government or the Union Territory Government,
as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "authority" means the Urban Areas Equitable Development Authority established
under  section 3;
 (d) "community house" means resting areas for the homeless with aim of providing
shelter, food and water, either run by the appropriate Government or in Public-Private
Partnership mode;
 (e) "cycle lane" means lane along major roads dedicated to bicycles;
 (f) "hawker" means seller of unregistered or informal units set up along the roads,
on  pavements, footpaths;
 ( g) "pavement" means elevated platform along both sides of the road for
pedestrians;
 (h) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
 ( i) "private hostel or paying guest accommodation" means facility providing
accommodation and/or food to non-local students, working professionals and run by
private individuals;
 (j) "slum" means places of residence in urban areas with little living space, without
proper  ventilation, basic drinking water and sanitation facilities, often described as
not fit for human habitation; and
 (k) "urban agglomerations" means urban areas constituting a town and its adjoining
outgrowths.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification  in
the Official Gazette appoint, there shall be constituted, an Authority, to be known as the
Urban Areas Equitable Development Authority.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) Minister of State, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs — ex-officio
Chairperson;
(b) Director General, Central Public Works Department (CPWD), Ministry of
Housing and Urban Affairs — ex-officio  Vice-Chairperson;
(c) Secretaries of the Union Ministries of Housing and Urban Affairs and Statistics
and Programme Implementation — ex-officio Members;
(d) Chairperson, Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited
(HUDCO) — ex-officio Member;
(e) Director, National Institute of Urban Affairs — ex-officio Member.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(4) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of services of officers and staff of
the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
(2) The expenditure incurred by the Members referred to in sub-clauses (a) to (e) of
section 3 to attend the meetings of the Authority shall be borne by the Ministry or department
or authority concerned.
5. (1
) The Authority shall discharge such functions as may be necessary to ensure
overall and equitable development of urban areas in the country and formulate a
Constitution
of Urban
Areas
Equitable
Development
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
comprehensive policy within one year of setting up of the Authority to be put in action to
achieve this objective.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the Authority shall include to:—
(a) undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about the dwelling
conditions in slums, extent of coverage of underground sewerage system, surplus
land under various Ministries of the Central Government. The condition of pavements
and cycle lanes, hawkers, status of migration into urban agglomerations and private
hostels and paying guest accommodations which shall be completed within one year
of setting up of the Authority;
(b) formulate framework for re-construction of decent housing facilities for citizens
residing in slums and resettlement of people therein which shall include to,—
(i) recommend to the Central Government of the land pooling of surplus
lands with various Ministries, for the purpose of constructing houses for
residents of slums;
(ii) recommend to the Central Government to include re-construction of
dwelling areas in slums under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005;
(iii) issue guidelines to the appropriate Government for re-construction of
houses in slums; and
(iv) issue guidelines to the State Governments to employ the unemployed
residents of the slum in the construction of houses for them;
(c) formulate guidelines for the construction of community houses for homeless
destitutes in urban areas;
(d) recommend measures to the appropriate Government for prohibiting littering
on roads and public spaces, including—
(i) development of the system of self policing by citizen volunteers for
maintenance of clean and hygienic environment; and
(ii) determining of increased fine of upto five thousand rupees for littering;
(e) recommend to the State Governments to recognise a unit as a municipality,
only if more than ninety-five percent of the households are connected with underground
sewerage network, which shall include to,—
(i) establish framework for construction of underground sewerage work;
and
(ii) assist the State Governments in undertaking the construction of
underground drainage system;
(f) provide guidelines to the Central Government for improving the condition of
pavements for pedestrians which shall include to,—
(i) recommend to the Central Government of the minimum size of the
footpath, on all major roads with traffic; and
(ii) issue guidelines to the State Governments regarding maintenance of
the footpaths and pavements;
(g) recommend to the Central Government for compulsory lanes for cycles on all
major roads with traffic and National Highways,  which shall include to,—
(i) formulate scheme of providing subsidy to customers for cycle purchase;
and
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
42 of 2005

4
(ii) frame guidelines for the State Governments to promote eco-friendly
means of transport;
(h) establish policy guidelines for construction of community markets for hawkers
in urban areas,  which shall include to, —
(i) frame guidelines for the appropriate Government for resettlement of
hawkers in metro stations and subways;
(ii) issue guidelines to the State Government regarding compulsory
licensing of the hawkers; and
(iii) formulate guidelines to the State Governments for checking the
harassment of hawkers by Police and other authorities;
(i)  recommend to the Central Government regarding regulating the private hostels
and paying guest accommodations in urban areas, which shall include to, —
(i) prescribe minimum standards for basic amenities like food, rent
chargeable, area of living space, along with any other safety specifications it
may see fit; and
(ii) formulate procedure for compulsory registration of private hostels and
paying guest accommodations in urban areas;
(j) formulate framework for equal distribution of work opportunities between
different urban centres, which shall include to,—
(i) provide guidelines to the State Governments for disincentivising
companies and imposing fee on the companies which set up their office in tier I
cities;
(ii) provide guidelines to the State Governments for incentivising the
employee to work in towns (with less than 10 lakh population) vis-a-vis cities;
and
(iii) develop Hardship Index, whose value on a scale from 1 to 100 will rank
the urban areas of the country, based on set of predetermined criteria including—
distance of the urban area from the sea, climate and geographical accessibility of
the area by flights and other means of transport, and other criteria as may be
prescribed by Authority; and
(k) recommend to the Central Government any other activity related to urban
development; and
(l) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The Authority shall disseminate any necessary knowledge and information collected,
to the respective departments of the State Governments.
6. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, an annual
report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes it has undertaken and
recommended to the Government during the previous year and it shall contain statements of
annual accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and the Central
Government shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as it is
received.
7. The Central Government shall, from time to time, provide, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
Annual report
and its laying
before the
Parliament.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
9. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Governments, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before the Parliament while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may be
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Parliament makes any
modification in the rule or decides that the rules should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the last fifteen years, India underwent rapid urbanization. Urban population in India
grew by 2.76 per cent. per annum during 2001-11 to an estimate of 377.1 million. The level of
urbanization in the country as a whole, defined as the proportion of urban population to total
population, increased from 27.82 per cent in 2001 to 31.14 per cent. in 2011. This migration
from farm labour to industry, is mainly because of over employment in agriculture and lack of
infrastructure related to education, health care in rural areas. Indian cities are not designed to
handle this kind of population influx from villages.This has put pressure on urban facilities
and services reflected in lack of dwelling facilities, clean and hygienic environment, proper
drainage and sewerage networks, dedicated paths for pedestrians and cyclists,  encroachment
by hawkers among others rapid urbanization has resulted in lack of decent housing facilities,
especially for the urban poor. High demand for the land in urban areas and the implied high
prices of land has led to steady growth of slums and unplanned settlements. Presence of
slums within urban areas, puts pressure on its civic services and impacts the overall urban
service delivery. With a view to provide a permanent solution for the problem, the Bill
constitutes an Authority for resettlement of the people dwelling in the slums in urban areas,
which will utilise the surplus land of the Government to build houses for slum dwellers and
other homeless persons.
To maintain clean and hygienic environment in urban areas, the Bill proposes prohibition
of littering on roads and public spaces, through system of self-policing by the citizen
volunteers. It also provides for compulsory underground sewerage network properly
connecting all houses in a municipality. It also imposes stringent conditions to be imposed
on the local bodies and a unit to be termed as a  municipality only if it satisfies the above
underground sewerage network.
The Bill formulates minimum size for footpaths, which must be made compulsory on all
major roads with traffic, to address the poor condition of the pavements and absence of
cycle lanes. The Bill also provides for dedicated lanes for cyclists, along all major roads and
highways of the country and providing subsidy on cycle purchases to customers. To address
the harassment faced by hawkers from the police and other authorities, the Bill directs the
appropriate Government to issue licenses to these vendors, construct dedicated community
markets for hawkers.
The cities are usually face an influx of migration of people searching for better education
and job opportunities, increasing demand for hostels. The Bill proposes to regulate the
private hostels by making their registration compulsory and prescribing minimum standards
for basic amenities like quality of food, rent chargeable, area of living space etc. To ensure
equal distribution of work opportunities among its citizens in cities and towns, the Bill
imposes a fee on the companies setting up their branches in tier I cities. Such proposed fee
will act as a disincentive for the companies and propel them to open more of their offices in
tier II and tier III cities and towns. Such a scheme will work as an effective mechanism for
redistribution of opportunities. To incentivise employee to work in these towns (with less
than ten lakh population) vis-a-vis cities, the Bill proposes a Hardship Index whose value on
a scale of 1 to 100 will rank the towns and regions of work, based on their relative appeal.
Criteria for deciding such appeal of towns, will include distance of town from the sea, its
overall weather condition, its accessibility by flight and other means of transport among
others. And the salary of the employees will be calculated in proportion to this Index. Such
provision will also help in augmenting the urban infrastructure in tier II and tier III cities and
towns.
6

7
Finally, the Bill seeks the public expenditure on urban development. While revenue
expenditure by the Government for urban development stood at a mere 8 per cent. of total
expenditure, share of capital expenditure was even low at six per cent. in 2011-12. The Bill
proposes that the Government must increase its expenditure on urban development and its
allocation to the States.
The Bill endeavours to enable urban dwellers access to basic urban services of decent
housing facilities, clean and hygienic environment and overall development of infrastructure
in urban areas, as enshrined in the Directive Principles of State Policy in the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA
January 18, 2018.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Urban Areas Equitable Development
Authority and also appointment of such number of officers and staffs for its functioning.
Clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring
expenditure of five hundred crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish an Urban Areas Equitable Development Authority to provide for clean
hygienic maintenance of environment and public spaces, resettlement of persons
living in slums in decent housing facilities, issuing guidelines for employment
of people in slums in the reconstruction activities, facilitating system of
self policing among citizens, proper underground drainage and sewerage
network, dedicated paths for pedestrians and cyclists, formulate policies for subsidising
cycles and promoting eco-friendly transport, creation of  community markets for
hawkers, issuing licenses to hawkers, providing for minimum standards to be
maintained by private hostels  and paying guest accommodations and recommending
their compulsory registration, framing guidelines for ensuring equal redistribution of
economic and work opportunities in urban areas and for all matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1925LS(S3)—25-10-2018.