IDK 
SABPtA 
CORRIGE 
!·DI_~,~ 
to 
THE 
HOTEL-RECEIPTS 
TAX 
BILL, 
1980 
eTo 
be/As 
int'roduced 
in 
Lok 
Sabh§ 
7 
Page 
6, 
line 
14,-
after 
811." 
.9!!.il 
"(I)" 
NEW 
DELHI; 
AU.9ll.~t_ll~ 
1980 
Sravana 
20, 
1902 
(Saka) 

~ : J 
As INTRODUCED IN Lmt SApHA .• t ~ .. 1 .: ~ • 
, "f! .• ~ 
BiD No. 160 of 1_ 
THE HOTElrRECEfPT~f TAx BILL, 1'980 
,( 
ARRANGEMIlNT OF CLAUSES 
.. , ";' 
CLAUSES 
ci 
1. Short title and extent. 
2. Definitions. 
'/ .' ' .. 
3. Application of the Act. 
4. Tax authorities. ", 
5. Charge of tax. 
6. Scope of chargeable receipts. 
7. Computation of chargeablp. !'eceipts. 
8. Return of chargeable receipts. 
9. Self-assessment. 
10. Assessment. 
11. Best judgment assessment. 
12. Re-opening of assessment at the instance of the assessee. 
13. Receipts escaping assessment. 
14. Advance payment of hotel-receipts tax. 
15. Penalty for failure to furnish returns, comply with notices, 
concealment of receipts, etc. 
16. Penalty for false estimate of, or failure to pay, hotel-receipts tax 
payable in advance. 
17. Opportunity of being heard. 
18. Appeals to the Commissioner (A()peals). 
19. Appeals to Appellate Tribu'lal. 
20. Rectification of mistakes. 
21. Hotel-receipts tax deductiblr in computing total income under 
Income-tax Act. 
22. Revision of order prejudicial to revenue. 
23. Revision of orders by Commissioner. 
24. Application of provisions of Income-tax Act. 
25. Income-tax papers to be available for the purposes of this Act. 
26. Wilful attempt to evade tax, etc. 

CUUSIB 
27. Failure to furnish returns of chargeable receipts. 
28. Failure to prod~ce accounts and documents. 
29 • .J:'''' a.tMement inv~atipn •. e~c. 
30. Abetment of false return, etc. 
31. Punishment for ~(l,,@ci Iq~tloe.c.. 
32. Certain offences to be non-cogn'uble 
33. bmtitution of proceedings and composition of offences. 
34. Power to make rules. 
35. Power to exempt. 
36. Power to remove difficulties. 
31. Consequential amendments. 
~ '''':'' .,. ..... ~ . ~ 
I ' . ..J 

5 
to 
IS 
54 of 1888. 20 
lWIiX ... ., "'··1_ 
THE HOTEL-RECEIPl'S TAX BILL, 1960 
A 
BILL 
j I '$ 
toimpoile a special &a.:c on groS'If'ee8iptSlof· certain hot8lt. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
11-. ,(i~ 'llU'Act may be caUedl the HOtel-Receipts Tax Act, 1980. 
,(at' It'ltIII'teJIdB 1ti'1heWhdle l df indIa. 
Z. In tlOl~Act,uriless ~ c~t otherwise requires,-
<J.) "a ___ " means a person by \\thomlWtel,j,reeefpts tax' or 
a~ otb8r 8Uftl!lof rhOIteyr ispaylble under tbis Act and include&-
(a) every person in respect of Whom any proceeclin:g under 
this Act has been taken for the assessment of his chm-s-ble 
receipts or of the amount of refund due to him or of the 
c.bargMble-:NfI!ipts of'" other. pelon in respeetof which 
_ it- .... s_18 fir of diM I 8mOOOt'dI. refuftd due tb I such . other 
p8llloa;· 
(~I -evayT ~' .. is deemec.t to be an usessee in 
deillllt---y prtitllllOndf th~' Aet; 
'{IJ f .... MIft,.ifti.4ud~' reusessme'llt; 
(3) "asses8ment year" means the .. ~ri~ of twleve months 
GdPla8l ....... Itt ~c;IApnt ~ry year: . 
~ . .,.....,,- ~. the ,~ BOard' of' Direct Taxes c0nSti-
tuted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1983; 
Short 
title 
and 
extent. 
Deftni-
tions. 

Applica-
tion of 
the Act. 
(5) "chargeable receipts" means the total amount of all char .. 
referred to in section 6, computed in the manner laid down in 
section 7; 
(6) "hotel" includes a building or part of a building where 
residential accommodation is, by way of business, provided for a 5 
monetary consideration; 
(7) "hotel-receipts tax" or "tax" means the tax chargeable 
under the proviSions of this Act; 
(8) "Income-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
(9) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 10 
Act; 
(10) "room charges'" means the charges for a unit of residential 
accommodation in a hotel and includes the charges for-
(a) furniture, air-conditioner, refrigerator, 
telephone, television, and 
radio, music, 
(b) such other services as are normally included by a hotel 
in room rent, 
,but ;~es,Bot .,include charges for food, drink and any services other 
tho those·referred to in 3ub-clauses (a) and (b); 
15 
(11) all other words and expressions used herein but not 20 
defined and defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the meaningB 
respectively assigned to them, in that Act., 
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and sub-seetlon 
(3), this Act shall awly in relation to every hotel wherein the room 
charges for residential accommodatron provided to any person at any 25 
time during the previous yetlr arc not less than seventy,;,ft\I'e rupees per 
day per individual. " 
Explanation.-Where the room charges are payable otherwise than 
on daily basis or per individual; then the. rQ9mcharges ·.hal1.,be comput-
ed as for a day and per individual based on the period of occupation of 30 
the residential accommodation for which the/charges are. payable and 
the number of individuals ordinarily permitted to occupy such 
accommodation accordtng to th~, rules. and cU5tom of the hotel. ,. 
(2) Where a composite cbarge is payable 'm respect of raBidentlal 
accoDUDOdation and food, the room chargeslneluded thereM' shall be 35 
determined in the prescribed man.q.er. 
(:1) Where-
(i) .a composite cha.-gei. payable, in respect' fJf '1cetidential 
accomm~tion, fOQd, dril;lk and otbe &el'Vicee, '01' any of them, and 
the case is not covered by the provisions of sub-section '(I), or 40 
(ii) it .appears to the Income-tas- Qftlcer that . the charges for 
residential accommoda~n, food" dftDk· or other' .. rvtoea . are 10 
arranged that the room chargt"F. are,~! !~el'lta.d aad the other 
charges are overstated, 
the Income-tax Ofticershall, for the 'Purposes .of IU'-sect»n 'tl)~ ~aeter- 45 
mine the room char.ses on such reasonab~: Quia ,88 he ,may deem fit. 
43 of 198L 

3 
4. (l) Every ~tor of Inspection CommiaaiOller of IDc::ome-itax, 
Commissioner 01 Income-tax (Appeals), IDspecting Assiatant COID:IDII-
sioner of Income-tax, Income--tax OfIlcer and Inspector of Income-tax shaD 
have the like powers and perform the like fUDctions under this Act as he 
5 has and performs under the Income-tax Act, and for the exerciae of his 
powers and the performance of his functions his jurisdiction wuler this 
Act shall be the same as he has under the fucome-tax Act. 
(2) All officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act 
shall observe and follow the OIrders, instructions and directions of the 
Board: 
I~ 
46 of 1973. 
15 
Provided that no such orders, inStructioDS or directions &hall be is-
sued-
(a) so as to require any tax authority to make a particular ...... 
ment or to dispose of a particullll' case in a particular manner; or 
(b) so as to interfere with the discretion of the CommissioneT 
(A ppeals) in the exercise of his appellate functions. 
(3) Every Income-tax Officer employed iD the execution of this Act 
shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and directiGDs isloed for 
his guidance by the Director of Inspection or by the Commissioner or by 
the Inspecting Assistant Commissioaer within whose jurisdietien he per-
20 foml!> his functions. 
5. (I) Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be charged on 
every person carrying on the business of a hotel in relation to which this 
Act applies, f<>r every assessment year commencing on or after the 1st 
day of April, 1981, a tax in respect of his chargeable receipts of the pre-
25 vious year at the rate Of fifteen per cent. of such receipts: 
Provided that where such chargeable receipts include any charges re-
ceived in foreign exchange, then, the tax payable by the assessee shall be 
reduced by an amount equal to five per cent. of the charges (exclusive 
of the amounts payable by way of sales tax, entertainment tax, tax on 
~o luxuries or tax under this Act) so received in foreign exchange. 
~ Erplanaticm.-For the purposes of this sub-section,-
(a) charges received in Indian currency obtain~ by conver-
sion of foreign exchange into Indian curre~cy shall, 10 such cases 
and in such circumstaftces as may be prescribed, be deemed to have 
been received in foreign exchange; and 
75 (0) "foreign exchange" and "Indian. currency" shall have the 
. pectively assigned to them 10 clauses (h) and (k) of 
meat~1Og2s rfesthe Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973. sec 'on 0 • 
n rrrangement made between a perRon carry10g 
(2) Wh.ere, under a 1 c~o ~ hich this Act applies and any other ~crson 
on tnt:: busmess of a ~ote with him, any food, drink or other servJc.es is 
40 having do~c connection . of such aotel by the second-mentioned . d d on the premlses h t or are prov1 e Om. is of opinion that suc arrangemen 
person and the I~come-t~x t ce;Oiding or reducing the liability under 
made wIth a View 0 a has been mentioned person, then, 
this Act by the first- . ed erson shall also be deerned to be a 
45 (a) the second-menbo~ p f a hotel to which this Act applies; . the busme'Ss 0 
person carrymg on 
and . shall be charged on the second-mentioaed 
(b) hotel-recelpts tllX fa food drink or other services SO pro-
rson in respect of charges r we~ the chargeable receipts of the 
pe h·m as if such charges So vided by I 
'1'u: 
authorl-
tl-. 
Charp 
of talL 

Scope of 
charge-
able 
receipts. 
Computa-
tion of 
charge-
abw 
rec:eiptl. 
4 
'b~. of a hotel deemed" to be carried on by him under claulle (a), 
and all the provisions .ot thiJAct shalt'apply acconiiQ&ly. 
B~n.-For the: purpoaes· of· thili 8U~ion,-
(i)· a closE" connection shall be deemed to exist: between a person 5 
carrying on the busfness of a hotel and another person if, in relation 
to the person carrying on the bUSihess of a hotel, such other person 
i._pemon referred·to in! clauae ~b) 01' wb--section (2) af section faA 
of the :IncGDle-tu Act; 
(ii) any food, drink or other services shall be deemed to have 10 
been provided on the premises of a hotel if the same is or are provided 
in the hotel or any place awurtenant thereto and where the hotel Is 
situate in a part· of building, ia any other part of the building. 
6. ('1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the chargeable receipts 
of any previous year of an' I!lSBeSsee shall be the total amount at all 15 
charges, by wha~ name calle.l, received by, or accruing or arising 
to, the aSiessee in· connection with the proviJion of residential aceom-
modatioD, food., drink and other IlerlYices or any dfthem (ineluding such 
cbar.ges from persons. not provided with sueh aoeommodation) in the 
coume . of carrying on the oo.tnns c» a hotel tb which this Act applies ~ 
and shall also include every amount collected by the 88seSlee by way 
of tax under this Act, sales tax, entertainment tax and tax aD luxuries. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where any 
such charges have been included in· the chargeable receipts of any pre-
vious year as charges accruing or ariBing tD the assessee during that pre- 25 
vious year, such charge. shall net be iBClu.ded in the chargeable Ncat'pts 
of any subsequent previous year in which they are received by the 
assessee. 
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the follOWing 
deductions shall be allowed in computing the chargeable receipts of any 
previous year- 30 
(i) the amount of charges aacruing or arising in an earlier pre-
vious year which is establiihed to have become a bad debt during 
the previous year: 
ProviGed that such charges have been taken into aecount in com-
puting the chargeable receipts of 'be.asseaeBe Of any earlier previous 35 
year and the amount baa been written off aJ irrecoverable in the 
accounts of, the assessee for the pnwtous year during whieh it is 
established to have become abed debt; 
(ii) any amount payable by way of sales tax,entertainment tax 
or tax on luxuries in respect 'OfMlycharges included in the charge-
able receipts of the previous year; 40 
(iii) the amount of 1:0' atzaiogeableunder thia Aet. 
Explanation.-For the removal of BOubtB, it is bereby declared that 
in computing the chargeable receipts of a previous year, no deduction, 
other than the deductions specified in this sub-section, shan be allovrf!lt!' 
from the total amount of. charges 'received by, or aeurublg or ariSing to, 
the- aaMSSee. 45 
(2) In computing the chargeable receipts of a previous year, the 
amount at charges wbiC'hisreceived by or wbich aecru" or art_ to the 
aBiessM before the .e1ipiry df· OM I1Wmtb :fIIom 'tbe«Id, oftbe maDth mwhich 
tldJ Act cames in~ 'farce shalbJtrt,lae tBwn tnMo I acaoUDt. 

S 
b ~,,(1) ~very ,person, who, dUl~ng the plleviousyear, carried on ~ ; 
. u..ness of a ,hotel in relation .to which this Act applies or is assessable, 
10 respect .of the chargeable receipts of any other .per8GJlWlde:r this Act, 
s~ f\lrDlsh ·areturn of .his chargeable l'eoeipte or the chargeable 
S recelJlts. qf such other person of the previous year in tbeprescribed .form 
and verified in .the prescribed manner and setting .forth such other parti_ 
culars as may beprescribod"before the expiry .of four months from ,the 
end of the previous year in respect of the business of the hotel or where 
there is more .than one previous year in ·respect ·of such .business, 'from 
I 0 the ,end of the previous year which expired last before the .commence-
ment af the assessment year, or before the 30th day ,of June of the 
assessment year, whichever is later: 
Provided that, on an application made in this behalf, the Income-tNc 
Officer may, in his discretion, extend the date for furnishing the return. 
15 (2) In the case of any person who, in the Income-tax Officer's opiniol1, 
is assessable under ·this Act, whether in respect of his own chargeable 
receipts or in ,respect of tre chargeable receipts of any other perscn,·the 
Income-tax Officer may, before the end of the relevant assessment year, 
issue a notice to him and serve the same upon him, requiring him to 
2,0 furnish within thirty days from the date of service of the notice a return 
of his chargeable receipts or the chargeable receiph of Bur:h other PM'Son 
of the previous year in the prescribl'd form and verified in the prescribed 
manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed: 
Provided that on an application made in this behalf, the Income-tax 
2,5 Oftlcer may. in his discretion, extend the d.'lte for furn!shin~ the return. 
(.l) A':lY assessee who has not furnished a return within thctitne 
allowed l1~der sub-section (1) or sub-aection (2), or having furnished a 
retu··'1 under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), discovers any omission 
or wro" ~ statement therein, may furnish a return or a revised return, 
3c the ,.~·se may be at any time before the assessment is made. as.( , 
9. (1) Where ~ny hotel-receipts tax i~ payable ~ the baBis of ~ 
. d t be furnished under sechon 8 or section 13, after takIng return reqUIre 0' . . d . 't t the amount of hotel-receipts tax, if any. already paid u, n er In 0 accoun. . h t . . f this Act the assessee shall be Hable to pay sue ax 
anYf pr°tuVISl?nhm·Og the ret~rn and the return shall be aecompanied by 35 be ore rms 
proof of payment of such tax. 
ssment under ~ection 10 or sectign 11 has been made, 
(2) After an.dasse dub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been any amount pal un er s 
paid towards such assessment. . 
f'1 to pay the hotel-receIpts tax or any part 
40 (3) If any assessee it:I:h provisions of sub-section (1), the Income-
thereof in accorda~cectthat a esum equal to two per cent. of such tax or 
tJlX Officer may dU'e be shall be recovered from him by way of 
part thereof. as the cas~~ay Ing' ";'hlch the defeult continues: 
nalty for every mOYl ur 
pe I . g any such penalty, the assessee shall '" 
4S Provided that before ::l~ of being heard. 
given a reasonable oppor 
faking an asaeesmeM under this Act, the 
10. (1) For the purpose 0 ~ any person who has ~hed a retarD 
Income-tax Officer may serve 0 
Return of 
charp-
able re-
ceipts. 
Self .. 
assen-
ment . 
. ) 
Asseaa-
ment. 

Best 
judg-
ment 
auess-
ment. 
Re-open-
ing of 
assess-
mentat 
the inst-
ance of 
the 
assessee. 
6 
under section 3 or upon whom a notice has been sen-ed under sub-leCtion 
(2) of aection 8 (whether a return has been furnished or not) a notice 
requiring him on a date therein to be specifted, to produce or cause to 
be produced such accounts or documents or other evidence as the 
Income-tax Officer may require for the purpole8 of this Act and may, S 
from time to time, serve further 1I0tices requiring the proctuetion of lueh" 
further accounts or documents or other evidence as he may require. 
(2) The Income-tax Ofticer, after considering such accounts, docu-
ments or other evidence, if any, as he has obtained under sub·section (1) 
and after taking into aCeOunt any relevant material which he has 1 0 
gathered, shall, by an order in writing, assess the chargeable receipts and 
the amount of the hotel-receipts tax payable on the basis of such 
assessment. 
11. (11) 1£-
(a) any person fails to make the return requited by any notice IS 
given under sub-section (2) of section 8 and has not made a return 
or a revised return under sub-section (3) of that section, or 
(b) any person having made a return, fails to comply with all 
the terms of a notice issued under sub-section (1) of seriion 10, or 
(c) the Income-tax Officer is not satisfied about the .correctness 20 
or the completeness of the acc(lunts of the assessee, 
the Income-tax Officer, after taking into account all relevant material 
which he has gathered, shall make the assessment of the chargeable 
receipts to the best of his judgment aud determine the sum payable by 
the assessee or refundable to the assessee on the basis of such assessment. 25 
12. (1) Where an assessee asse&sed under section 11 makes an applica-
tion to the Income-tax Officer, within one month from the date of service 
of a notice of demand issued in c:onsequence of the assessment, for the 
cancellation of the assessment on the ground>-
(i) that he was Qrevented by sufficient cause from making the ~o 
return required under sub-section (2) of section 8, or . 
(ij) that he did not receive the notice issued under sub-section 
(1) of section 10, or 
(iii) that he had not a re:lsonable opportunity to comply, or was 
prevented by sufficient cause from complying, with the terms of the 35 
notice referred to in clause (ii), 
the Income.tax Officer shall, if satisfied about the existence of S'IlCh 
ground, cancel the assessment 'lnd proceed to make a fresh assessment 
in accordance with the provisions of section 10 or section 11. 
(2) Every application made under lub.aecticm (1) shall be disposed of 40 
within ninety days from the date of receipt thereof by the Income-tax 
Officer: 
Provided that in computing the period of ninety days aforesaid, any 
delay in disposing of the application Which is attributable to the asseaee 
shall be excluded. 4S 

5 
10 
7 
13. If-
(a) the Income-tax Oftlcer has reason to believe' that by reMon 
of the omission <!r failure on the part of the assessee to make a return 
under section 8 for any assessment year or to disclose fully and truly 
all material facts necessary fur his asseSSme'llt tor any assessment 
year, chargeable receipts for that year have escaped assessment or 
have been under-assessed or have been made the subject of excetSive 
relief under truE Act, or 
(b) notwithstanding that there hal been no omislionor failure 
as mentioned in clause (a) on the part of the assessee, the Income-
tax Officer has, in consequence of information in his possession, reason 
to believe that chargeable receipts assessable for any assessment year 
have escaped assessment or have been under-assessed or have been 
the subject of excessive relief under this Act, 
!:' he may. in cases falling under clause (a), at any time, and in cases fIll. 
ing under clause (b), at any time within four years of the end Of that 
assessment year, serve on the assessee a' notice containing all or any of 
the requirements which may be included in a notice under section 8,and 
may proceed to assess or reassess the amount chargeable to hotel-receipts 
20 tax, and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply, as if the 
notice were a notice issued under that section. 
14. (1) Hotel-receipts tax shall be payable in advance during the 
fina'neial year in respect of the chargeable receipts of the period which 
would be the previous year for the immediately following assessment year 
2<; ~n accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2) Hotel-receipts tax shall be payable in advance in two instalments 
on the following dates during the financial year, namely:-
(i) the 15th day of September in respect ~f the chargeable re-
ceipts attributable to the first half of the preVIOUS year; and 
3c (ii) the 15th day of March in respect .00 the chargeable receipts 
attributable to the second half of the preVIOUS year: 
Provided that the hotel-receipts tax payable in advance during the 
fi . I commencfng on the 1st day of April, 1980 shall be payable nanCla year 
in one sum on the 15th day of March, 1981. 
(3) E assessee shall in each financial year, on or before suth of 3 <i very , I' t t' bi' d - h' h an instalment of hote -recelp s ax IS paya e Ul a -
the dates no;\: t~: Income-tax Officer, an estimate of the chargeable re-
va.nce, se. table to the relevant part of the previous year and the hotel-
celP:s attnbu bl' advance on SJch chargeable receipts and shall pay 
:ecelpts tax pa~t h~t~-receiPts tax as accords with his estimate on or 
-40 such amount I t date specified in sub-section (Z): before the re evan , 
. sect of the hotel-receipts tax payable in advaIlce 
Provided that 10 re P mencing on the 1st day of April, 1980, the 
during the financial yehar Icomme tax Officer an estimate of the charge-h 11 end to t e nCO - be h -assessee s as. I t the period which would t e preVIOUS year 
4.5 able receipts attrlbutab e 0 ing on the 1st day of April, 1981 and the 
nt year commenc bl' ts d for the assessme I' JV;l!;Ce 0:1 such chargea e recelp an 
hotel-receipts tax payab e hInt ~-receiPts tax as accords with his estimate uch amount of 0 e shall pay s h 15th day of March, 1981. on or before t e 
Receipt. 
escapilll 
a3sess-
ment. 
Advance 
payment 
of hotel-
receipts 
tax. 

Penalty 
for failure 
to furnish 
returns, 
comply 
with 
notices, 
conceal-
ment of 
receipts, 
etc. 
Penalty 
for false 
estimate 
of, or 
failure 
to pay, 
hotel_ 
receipts 
tax pay-
able in 
advance. 
8 
(4) Every estimate under this section shall be sent in the preacrtbed 
form anci verifted in the pN8Ol"ilged monet. 
(!) tf alli' assessee dOes not pay on ot before thespeclfted date any 
instalment of hotel-receipts ta~ payable :ih advatlce, he shall be deemed 
to be an assessee in default· b1 respect of such 1nStalmenl S 
II. (1) tf, in the c"urse ef any p!'eeeedin~ under this Act, the Ineome-
tax Officer or the Commissioner (Appeals) is satisfted that any persen-
(a) bu, witbouire&lGIl8ble C8UJe, failecl to funUh tM return 
Gfcbaqfeable receipts which he wu required. to furnish UDder 1Ub-
section (1) of section 8 ur by notice given. under sub-eeeUtm (2) of lC' 
section 8 or section 13 '01' laM, without reasonable eMIle, failed tel fur-
Dilh it within the time allowed and the IM8IleI" required.,. IUb-
section (1) of section 8 &r by such JIlotice, 118 the cue may be, or 
(b) has, without reasonaWe cause, failed to comply with the 
notice under sub-section (1) of section 10, or 15 
(c) has ecmcealed the particulars 01. his chergea.ble recel})ts or 
furnished inaccurate particulars of such receipts, 
he may direct that such person shall pay by way of penalty,-
(i) in the cases referred to in clause (a), in addition to the hotel-
receipts tax payable by him, a sum equal to two per cent. of the 20 
assessed tax for every month during which the default con.tiliued, 
but not exceeding in the aggregate fifty per cent. of the asseseed tax. 
ExplaMtion.-In this clause, "assessed tax" means hotel-
receipts tax chargeable undet' the provisions of this Act, as reduced 
by the sum, if any, paid in advance under section 14; 25 
(ii) in the Ckses referred to iTl clause (b), i'n adc:litiOh to the hotel-
receipts tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than ten 
per cent. but which shall not exceed fifty per cent. of the amount of the 
hotel-receipts tax which would have been avoided it the return made 
by him had bHn accepted 85 correct; 30 
(iii) in the cases referred to in clause (c), in addition to the hotel-
receipts tax payable by him, a sum wbkh shall not be less than, but 
which shall not exceed twiee, the amount of hotel-l'eceipts tax which 
would have been avoided if the return made by him had been accepted 
as correct: 35 
Provided that in a case 'falling under clause (c), the Income-tax Oftlcer 
shall not impose any penalty wtthnut the previous approval of the Ins-
pecting Assistant Commissioner. 
(2) On making an order imposing a penalty under this section, the 
Commissioner (Appeals) shall forthwith send a copy of the same to the 40 
Income-tax Officer. 
16. If, in the course of any proceedings in connection with the UleI8-
mtmt under section 10 or section 11, the Income-tax Offteer is satisfted 
that any assesse-e-
(a) has furnished under section 14, an estimate of the hotel- 45 
receipts tax payable in advance by him which he knew or had 
reason to believe to he untrue, or 

9 
(h) Us, wiUlout ~le aUla failed to tuolJah an ;'u-
Dltte o~ the hote1-recei~ t4ut ~yaWe in advaaee by'!Wn in acccri-
ance WIth the provisions of aeetion 14 -. , 
he may direct that the assessee shall, in addition to the hotel-receipts 
5 tax payable by him, pay by way of penalty a sum-
10 
15 
(i) which, in the c~e reteneQ, to rp cla~ (4), ~ DO~, be l~ 
than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one and a hall times the 
amo~t by which the hotel-receipts tax paid in advance during the 
ftnanclal year immediately preceding the asaesament year faUs Ihort 
of eighty-five per cent. of the hotel-receipts tax char"'ble under 
the provisions of this Act; 
(ii) which, in the case referred to in clause (b), shall not be 
less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one and a hl'lf times of 
eighty-five per ceRt. 'Of the hotel-neeipta tax charpable wader the 
provisions of this Act. 
17. No order imposing penalty under section 15 or section 16 shaLl be Oppor-
made unless the assessee has been heard, or has been· given' a reasonable tunity of being opportunity of being heard. heard. 
18. (1) Any person objecting to the amount of ho4lel-receipta tax 
20 for which he is assessed by the lneQme-tax OfBcer, Gl' denying bis liabiU~ 
to be assessed under this Act, f)t objecting to an o!!cier un_r I8Ction 12 
refusing to re-open an assessm.ent made UNler section 11 or objediDg to 
Iny penalty or ftne imposed by the Income-ta~ Offteer, or to the amount 
a110wed by the Income-tax Oftlcer by way.of any relief Wider Illy pro-
2'1 vision of this Act, or to any refusal by the lnooJlle-tax OIBcer to graDt 
- relWf, or to an order of rectifl,c~tion having the effect of enh8Dl=~B the 
2lisessment or reducing the refu~d, or to a~ order refusing to .allow t~e 
clpim made by the assessee fora rectUicati.on un4er section ~ may 
,.ppeal to the Comrpissiop.er (Appeals). 
30 (Z) Every appeal shall be in the presCl"i.bed forlJ1 and shall be verified 
in the pcescribed manner. 
35 
(3) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the followinl 
date, that is to 8ay,-
(a) where the appeal relates to assessment or penalty or fine, 
&he date of service of the notice of demand relating to the Ulle88-
ment or penalty or fine, or 
(b) in any other case, the date on which the intimatioJlof tbe 
order sought to be appealed against is served: 
p id d that the commissioner (Appeals> may admit an appeal 
roY e , t'on of the said period jf he is satisfied that the appellant a.fter the explra 1 . . .. tha . d 
40 b c'! u1ncient cause for not presenijng It WIthin t peno . 
. 11 • s C~siGPer .(Appeals) sbtU hear and detenaiDe the 
(4) The b. t.~ the pr~ of·-this Act, pass II,ICh orders u he -111 and. 811,ec ""', _-1..ft· "'-- _ 
-""- ...1 h orders may lllcluJe aJl OI'Cier _ncmg - as .... 
~ fit aRu suc 
~or~alty: 
45 <ler enbanclng tile auessmeat or peDalty .hall 
Pr.ovi4ed that an ~ rSOR .a«eetedthereby has been liveR. a rea-
_ .... be made "nles8 pe. apiMt sueh enMaeelllftt. 
InA -nftPtumty of ghowillf callie 
tcmaWe Vl"l""'" 
Appeals 
to the 
Commis-
aoner 
(Appeals). 

Appeals 
to 
Appellate 
'l'ribunal. 
Rectifica-
tion of 
mistakes. 
10 
. (5) The proeedure to be adopted lin the bearing &!ld determination of 
me appeals shall, with any neeessary modiftcatton, be in accordance 
with the procedure applicable' in relation to income-tax. 
19. (1) Any assessee aggriev~cl by an order passed by a Commissioner 
under section 22, or an order passed by a Commissioner (Appeals) 5 
under any provision of this Act, may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
against such order. 
(2) The Commissioner may, it he objects to any order passed by the 
Commissioner (Appeals) under any provision of this Act, direct the I 0 
Income-tax Officer to appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against the 
c.rder. 
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) snall be 
med within sixty days of the date on wbic:h the order sought to be 
appealed against is communicated to the assel8ee or to the Commis-
sioner, as the case may be. J 5 
(4) The Income-tax Ofilcer or the assessee, as the case may be, on 
receipt of a notice that an appeal against the order of the Commissioner 
\Appeals) has been preferred under sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2) by the other party may, notwithstanding that he may not have 
appealed against such order or Rny part thereof, within thirty days of ~o 
tnt> receipt of the notice, file a memorandum of croS8~jectiOns, verified 
1'1 the prescribed manner, against any part of the order of the Commis-
sioner (Appeals), and such memorandum shall be disposed of by the 
Appellate Tribunal as if it were an appeal presented within the tilX1e 
specified in sub-section (3). ~5 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit the filing 
of a memorandum of cross-objections after the expiry of the relevant 
period referred to in sub-section (3) or SUb-section (4), if it is satisfied 
that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within that period. 
(6) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed 30 
form and shall be verified in the prescribed ~anner and shall, except 
in the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2) or a memorandum 
of cross-objections referred to in sub-section (4), be accompanied by a 
fee of one hundred and twenty-fivt" rupees. 
(7") Subject to the provisions of this Act, in hearing and making an 35 
order on any appeal under this section, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
Exercise. the same powers and follow the same procedure as it exercises 
and follows in hearing and making an order on any appeal under the 
Income-tax Act. 
ZO. (1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the .p 
record, the Income-tax Officer, the Commissioner (Appeals), the Com-
missioner and the Appellate Tribunal may, ·of his or its own motion or 
on an application by the assessee in this behalf, or where the· authority 
concerned is the Commissioner (Appeals), by the Income-tax Ofticer 
also, amend any order passed by him or it in any proceeding under 45 
this Act within four years of the date on which such order was palsed. 
(2) An amendment which has the effect of enhancing the aaaessment 
or reducing 8 refund or otherwise increasing the liability of the auesaee 
shall not be made under this section unless the authority concerned has 

11 • 
lIVeD notice to the assessee of its intention 80 to do and has allowed 
Ule assessee a reasonable opportunity of bemg heard. 
(3) Where an amendment is made .\mder thisseciion. the order shall 
be paued in writing by the authority concerned. 
5 (4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, where any such 
amendment has the effect of reducing the assessment. the Income-tax 
Ofticer shall make any refund which may be due to 8uch assessee. 
(5) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhancing the 
assessment or reducing the refund already made, the Income-tax Ofticer 
I 0 .nall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed form 
.pecifying the sum payable. 
21. NotWithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, in 
computing the income Chargeable to income-tax under the head "Profits 
and gains of business or profession" in the case of an assessee carryLtg 
I 5 on the business of a hotel to which this Act applies, the hotel-receipts 
tax payable by the assessee for any assessment year shall be deductible 
from the profit.; and gains of the business of the hotel assessable for 
that assessment year. 
22, (1) The Commissioner may call for and examine the record ot 
20 any proceeding under this Act and if he considers that any order passed 
therein by the Income-tax Officer is erroneous in so far as it is prejudi-
cial to the interests of the revenue, he may, after giving the assessee an 
opportunity of being heard and after making or causing to be made such 
enquiry as he deems necessary, pass such order there~n as the cifc~m­
stances of the case justify, including an order enhancmg or modifymg 
25 the assessment, or cancelling the assessment and directing a fresh 
a£sessment. 
!,.2) No order shall be made under ~b-section (1)-
(a) to revise an order of reassessment made under section 13, 
or 
(b) after the expiry of two years from the date of the order 
sought to be revised. 
N t 'th tanding anything contamed in sub-section (2), an order (3) 0 WI S t' . th f , , d th's section may be passed at any line m e case 0 
in reVISIon un er 1 • if h' h h been passed in consequence of, or to give e eel to, 
35 an order, W lC d' as tion contained in an order of the Appellate Tribu-
any findIng or lrec 
H' h Court or the Supreme Court. nnl, the Ig 
, uting the period of limitation .for the purposes 
Explana~wll.-In :~mp riod during which any proceeding under this 
of sub-secbon (2), Y ~ r r injunction of any court shall be excluded. 
40 section is stayed by an or eo, 
.. may either of hIS own motion or on an 
23. (1 ) The Commissionefr re~ision call for the record of any pro-
. b the assessee or I I ta om Gpplicatlon y, hich has been taken by an ncome- x eer 
ceeding under t~lS AC~ W make such enquiry or cause such enquiry 
lubordinate to hun a~ ~ay th provjsions of this Act, may pass such 
45 to be made and, subJect 0 e 
Hotel-
receipts 
tax 
deducti-
blein 
comput-
ina 
total 
income 
under 
Income-
tax Act. 
Revision 
of order 
prejudi-
cialto 
revenue. 
Revision 
of orders 
by Com-
milsioner. 

Appli-
cation of 
provi-
sions of 
Income-
tax Act. 
Income-
tax 
papers 
to be 
avail-
able 
for the 
purpoees 
of this 
Act. 
12 
_cter thereon, not bein, anarder prejudicial to. the ....... e, u J •• 
&hinks fit. 
(2) 'l'heCommiaioner ,ball DOt of his own moiioa revile ey oJ'der 
under this section if the order has been made more than ODe 1MI' 
»reviously. 
(3) In the case of an application .for revision UDder this I8Ction by 
the al8eUee, the application shaU be made within one year from the 
aate on whK:h the order in question was communicated to him or the 
Gate on which he otherwise came to know of it, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that the CommiJSioner may, if he is satisfied that the useuee J C 
was prevented by sufficient cause from makiag the application within 
that period, admit an application made after the expiry of that period. 
(4) The Commissioner shall not revise any order under this section 
1D the following cases:-
(a) where an appeal againat the order lies to the Commissioner 15 
(Appeals) but ... not been made aad the ~ within which such 
appeal may be made has not expired, or the ..... ee has not waived 
his right of appeal; or 
(b) where the order has been made the subject of an appeal to 
the Commissioner (Appeals). 2:, 
(5) Every application by an assessee for revision under this section 
shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five rupees. 
Explanation.-An order by the Comrniasioner ~eclining to interfere 
shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed not to be an order 
prejudicial to the assessee. ~5 
!to The provisions of the fotlowing semons and Schedules of the 
Income-tax Act and the Income-tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 
1~2, a~ in force from time to time, sh!tll apply with neoet88ry modiftca-
tions as if the said provisions and the rules referred to hotel-receipts tax 
instead of to income-tax:- 30 
2(43B) ~d (44),41(4),118,125, 12M, 128 to 136 (both inclusive), 
138, 140, 144A, 156, 159 to 163 (hath inclusive), 166, 167, 170, 171, 
173 to 179 (both inclusive), 187, 183, 189, 219 to 227 (both inclusive), 
228A, 229, 231, 232, 237 to 242 (both inclusive), 244, 245, 254 to 282 
(both inclusive), 265, 266, 268, 269, 278B, 2'78C, 278D, 2M, 281H', 282, 35 
283, 284, 287. 288, 288A, 28aB, 289 to 293 (both iDcluaive), the Second 
Schedule 8IIId the Third Schedule: 
Provided that references in the said provisions and the rules to the 
"assessee" shall be construed as references to an assessee as defined in 
this Act. 
25. (1) NotwithstandiDe anythina COIltained in the Income-tax Act, 
aU iDformaiion contaic.ed in any statement or return made or furnished 
under the provisions of that Act or obtained or collected for the purposes 
of that Act may be used for the purpOIJel of this Act. 
40 
(2) All informatKm contained in any Btatement ~r return made or 
f!lrnimed under the provisions of this Ad or ObtaiBed or coUecUld for 45 
Ute purposes of this Act may be uaed ror the purpeteI fJf the ItlOOme-talf 
Act. 

5 
10 
13 • 
•. (1) If a person wnfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to 
evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this 
Act, ,he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable 
on h1ln under any other provision of this Act, be punishable,-
(i) in a case where the kmount sought to be evaded exceeds 
one hundred thousand rupees, with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend 
to seven years and with ftne' , 
(ti) in any other case, with rigorous impril!lOnment fer a term 
which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to 
three years and with fine. 
(2) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade 
the payment of any tax, penalty or interest under this Act, he shall, 
without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on him under 
15 any other provision of this Act, he IYunishable with rigorous imprilOD-
ment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which 
may extend to three years and shall, in the discretion of the court, also 
be liable to fine. 
ExpLanation.-For the purposes of this section, a wilful attempt to 
20 evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this 
Act or the payment thereof shall include a case where any person-
(i) has in his possession or control any books of account or 
other documents (being books of account or other documents rele-
vant to any proceeding under this Act) containing a false entry or 
25 statement; or 
(iii) makes or causes to be made any false entry or statemeat in 
such books of account or other documents; or 
(iii) wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any relevant entry 
or statement in SUM books of account or other documents; or 
(iv) causes any other circumstance to exist which will h~ve the 
f bl'ng such person to evade any tax, penalty or mterest effect a ena 1 
bl 'mposable under this Ad or the payment thereof. chargea e or 1 
'lfull fails to furnish in due time the return of 27 If a person Wl Y d L --to . 'ts h'ch he is required to furnish un er SUu-DQ; Ion 
chargeable ,recelp : 1 tice ojven under sub-section (2) of section 8 
~ (1) of sectlon 8 or Y no o. 
;,5 . . 13 ho shall be pw11shable,-or sectIOn , ~ 
h the amO'Ullt of tax which would have been 
(i) in a case were " undred f '1 had not been dlsCOvered, exceeds one h .. 
evaded if the al ur~th ri oro us imprisonment for a term. which 
thousand rupees, WI . g on+hs but which may extend to seven 
shall not be less than SIX m • 
40 . years and with fine; 
case with imprisonment for a term which 
(ii) in any other h 'months but which may extend to thr." 
hall not be less than t ree 
~ears and with fine: 
Wilful 
attempt 
t" evade 
tax. etc. 
Failure 
to fur-
nish re-
turns of 
charge-
able . 
receipts. 

Failure 
to pro-
duce 
accounts 
and 
docu-
ments. 
False 
state-
ment in 
verifi-
cation, 
etc. 
Abetment 
of false 
return, 
etc. 
Punish-
mentfor 
s'!'r.ond 
andsu .. 
!'rQunt 
offence •. 
14 
Provided that a person shall not be proceeded aJainst under this 
section for failure to furnish in d~e time the ret~ of chargeable 
receipts under sub-se<:tion (If of sections. if-
(4) the return is ·furnishcd by him before the expiry of the 
assessment year; or 
(b) the tax payable by him on the chargeable receipts deter-
mined on assessment as reduced by the tax paid in advance under 
se<:tion 14, if any, does not exceed three tboUADd rupees. 
28. If a person wilfully f.ws to produce, or cause to be produced, on 
5 
or before the date specified in any notice served on him under Bub- 10 
section (1) of section 10, such accounts and documents u are referred 
to in the notice, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine equal to a Bum cal-
culated at a rate which shall not be less than four rupees or more than 
ten rupees for every day during which the default continues, or with r 5 
both. 
29. If a person makes a statement in any verification under this Act 
or under any rule made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement 
which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false, or does 
not believe to be true, he shall be punishable,- 20 
(i) in a case where the amount of tax, which would have been 
evaded if the statement or account had been accepted as true, 
exceeds one hundred thO"..lsand rupees, with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which shall Qot be less than six months but which may 
extend to seven years and with fine; 25 
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to 
three years and with fine. 
30. If a person abets or induces in any manner another person to make 
and deliver an account or a statement or declaration relating to any 30 
chargeable receipts which is false and which he either knows to be false 
or does not believe to be true or to commit an offence under sub-section 
(1) of section 26, he shall be puni~hable,-
(i) in a case where the ar.\ount of tax, penalty or interest which 
would have been evaded, if the declaration, account or statement had 3S 
been accepted as true, or which is wilfully attempted to be evaded, 
exceeds one hundred thousand rupees, with rigorous imprIsonment 
for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may 
extend to seven years and with fine; 
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term 40 
which shall not be less than three monthe but which may ~xtend to 
three years and with fine. 
31. If any person convicted of an offence under 8ub-section (1) of 
Rction 26 or section 27 or section 2' or section 30 is again convicted for 
an offence under any of the aforesaid provisions, he shall be pUlllshable 4S 
for the second and for every subsequent offence with rigorous imprison-
ment for a term which shaD not be less than six months but which may 
extend to seven years and with fine. 

Z ot 1974. 
45 ot 1860. 
15 • 
32. Notwithstanding anyt,hing contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
~ure, 1973, an offence punishable under section 26 or sectian 27 or sec-
tion 29 or section 30 shall be deen1cd to be non-cognizable within the 
meaning of that Code. 
5 33. (1) A persan sqall not be proceeded against for any offence under 
aectiWl 26 or section 27 or section 28 or section 29 or section 30 for any 
o~ence under the Indian Penal Code relating to any platter ~onnected 
wlth or arising out of this Act, except at the instance of the Commissibner. 
(2) The Commissioner may, either before or after the institution of 
10 proceedings, compound any offence punishable under section 26 or section 
27 or section 28 or section 29 or section 30. 
34. (1) The Board may, subject to the control of the Central Govern-
ment, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 
IS (2) In partiC'UJar, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
35 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the manner in which the room charges may be determined 
under sub-sedion (2) of section 3 in cases where composite charges 
are payable in respect of residential accommodation and food; 
(b) the cases and the circumstances in which payments made in 
Indian currency by conversion 'Of foreign exchange i'nto Indian currency 
shall be deemed to have been made in foreign exchange for the pur-
poses of sub-section (1) of section 5; 
(e) the form in which returns under section 8 may be fur~ished, 
the manner in which they may be verified and the other partIculars 
which a form may contain; 
(d) the form in which an estimate u~der section 14 may be 
sent and the manner in which it may be verified; 
(e) the form in which appeals under section 18 or ~ection 19 
fil d d the manner in which they may be verlfied; may be e an 
f . which a memorandum Of cross-objections under (f) the orm m 'fi d' 
t· (4) of section 19 may be veri e , sub-sec Ion 
d t be followed on applications for rectifica-(Q) the proce ure 0, . 
tion ~f mistakes under sectIon 20, 
. h· h no+ice of demand may be served on (h) the form lD w IC a .. . . 
d ub-section (5) of section 20, the assessee un cr s . 
h'ch by this Act IS to be or may be (i) any other matter WI, 
Prescribed. . . h 11 the I nferred by thiS section s a on t make ru es co . t (3) The power 0 . th eof include the power to gIve re ros-
An f th exerCiSe er l' th ..... fi . t ccasion 0 e f them from a date not ear ter an 
11 Et 0 t the rules or any 0 .. 
pective effect 0 ment of this Act. 
h date of commence 
t e t shall cause every rule made under 
(4) The Central Governmen av be, after it is made before each 
. tion to be laid, as so~n. asj m ~sion for a total period of thirty 
thl~ sec . t while It IS n s 4S HoUse of Parhamen 
certain 
.~. 
tobe 
Don-co,-
nizable. 
IDItitu-
tiOD of 
proceed-
inpand 
compoal.-
tion of 
offences. 
Power 
to make 
rul_ 

-Power to 
exempt. 
Power to 
remove 
diftlcul-
ties. 
Conse-
quential 
amend-
meDta. 
to 
days ..mtch may be comptiaed in one JeSldeil or m t1N or tbOre euccea· 
SiYe sessions, and if, before the expiry of the eetIion i~Wy 
following the session or the successive 'sSidftS aforeilai4, beth treGlea 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both HcnlIeB tINe 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect S 
only in such modlfted form or be of no effect, as the eMe may be; 80, 
however, that any such modification or annltlment mall be 'Wfthout 
prejudice to the validity of anything previausiy done under that rule. 
35. Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it ianeces-
Dry or expedient so to do either in the pubJ.ie interat Or' having recant 10 
to the peculiar circumstances of the ease, it may. by notifteaticm :In 
the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, it any, as may be 
specified in the notification, exempt any hotel or any clasa of hotels from 
the levy of hotel-receipts tax. 
31. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions ef this J ~ 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not iftConsisteot with the . 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
37. (1) In section 2 of the Central Boards of Revenue Aet, 1963, in 20 54 of 1981. 
sub-clause (1) of clause (c) ,-
(a) in item (mi), the word "ane!" oeCUtTtng at the ~C! whall be 
omitted; and 
(b) after item (mi) as so amended, the fol1GWiftg item shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(viii) the Hotel-Receipts Tax Act, 1980; and". 
(2) In the EcOJ!1omic Offences (Inapplicability of Limitation) Act, 
lQ74, in the Schedule, after entry 2A relatlng to the Interest-tax Act, 
197', the foltowtftg entry snaU be inserted, ftame1'y:-
"2B. The Hotel-Receipts Tax Act, 1980.". 
2S 
12 of 19'14. 
45 of 11'1'" 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REA.SONS 
The ebjeet of tile Bill is to impese a speciu tJb on gron MCeipta of 
certain eatepries of hotels. The provisitlns ctf the Bm will apply in 
reWion to Wels in which tRe room charges !or residential accommoda-
tion provided to any person at any time during the relevant accoUJliing 
year are Rs. 75 or more per day per individual. The tax will be levied 
at the rate of 15 per cent. on thl9 chargeable receipts of the hotel which 
witl( inelude aU charges received or accruing or arising during the 
ftCf>\lDting yeaT. A rebate equal to ftve per eent. wiH, however, be 
aAovted in respect of charges received in foreign exchange. The charges 
received or accrumg or arising before the expiry of one month from the 
end of the month in which the l~gislation comes into fotce will not be 
liable to tax. The tax will be allowed as deduction in computing the 
taxable income under the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
2. The Notes on clauses exp13in the varwus provisions· of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; R VENKATA.RAMAN. 
The 7th August, 1980. 
l' 

Clause 2 contains definitions of certain terms and expressionJ uled 
in the Bill. 
Sub-cl4use (6) deIn.. a. "hotel''; According tID the deftni'tionj 
"hotel" includes a building. or part of a building where residential 
f.ecommodation is by way of business provided for . a menetary COIIIi-
deration, .. 
Su.b-cZause (10) defines "room charges", According 1;0 the definition, 
Icroom charges" means charges for a unit of residential aaconunodatioD in 
II hotel and includes charges for furniture"ir-conditioner, refrigerator, 
radio, musiC, telephone. television and for such other services as are 
normally included by a hotel i'n room rent, but does not include charges 
for food, drink and any other services, 
Thp. other deftnitions are self-explanatory, 
Clause 3 seeks to provide that the provisions of the Bill will apply 
in relation to any hotel wherein the room charges for residential 
accommodation provided to any person during the previous year are 
seventy-five rupees or more per day per individual. Where a compo· 
site charge is payable for residential accommodation and food, the room 
charges included therein will be determined according to the rules to 
be framed by the Central Board of Direct Taxes. Where the assessee 
has understated the room charges and over-stated other charges in 
order to escape liability under the provisions of the Bill or where a 
composite charge is payable not only in respect of residential accommo-
dation and food but also other services, the Income-tax Officer will be 
empowered to determine the room charges included therein on a 
reasonable basis. 
Clause 4 !leeks to give jurisdiction in respect of hotel-receipts tax 
to the same authorities as have jurisdiction under the Income·tax Act. 
Clause 5 leeks to make a provision for charging a tax named "hotel-
receipt. tax" in respect of the chargeable receipts of a hotel at the rate 
Of 15 per cent. for the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years, A 
rebate O'f five per cent. has, however, b~n allowed in respect of charges 
received in foreign exchange, 
Where under an arrangement between a person carrying on the 
business of such hotel and any other person who is closely connected 
with him any food, drink or otht!r services is or are provided on the pre-
mises of the hotel by the latter and the Income-tax Officer is of the view 
that this arrangement has been made with a view to enabling the former 
to avoid or reduce the liability to hotel-receipts tax, the person providing 
food, drink or other services will also be liable to hotel-receipts tax in 
rc~pect of the charges received by him. For this purpose, a person will 
be deemed to be closely connected with the person carrying on the 
business of the hotel, if, in relation to the person calT)'llng on such 
business, he is the person referred to in clause (b) of section <lOA (2) 
18 

d~ 
of the Income-tax Act. For the pur~ of this, proviiio" food .drink or othe ---..I --- .." · r IKI4nces wtl1 be deemed to have been provided on the p~ 
ml~ of the hotel if ·they are provided in any part of the buUding in 
which the hotel is situate or at any place appurtenant thereto. 
· Clause 6 seeks to define the scope of "chargeable receipts". Under 
thIS .clause, chargeable receipts will be the total amO'Unt of all charges 
~elVed by, or accruing or arising to, the assessee in the previous year 
In connection with the provision of residential accommodation food 
drink and other services in the course of carrying on the busin~s of ~ 
hotel. . 
. <:lause 7 provides the manner for computing the chargeable receipts. 
Sub-clause (1) provides that the amount of chargeable receipts will 
be computed by deducting the amounts payable by the assessee by way 
of sales tax, entertainment tax or any tax on luxuries, as also the tax 
leviable under the Bill from the total amount of the charges retelTed 
to in clwse 6. 
Sub-clause (2) provides that Clny charges received o'r accrUing to the 
assessee before the expiry of one month from the end of the month in 
which thi:> legislation comen into force will not be included in the 
chargeable receipts. 
Clause 8 provides for filing of the return of chargeable receipts. 
Sub-clause (1) requires every assessee who carries on the business 
of a hotel covered by this Bill or who is assessable in respect of the 
chargeable receipt<; of any othel' person under this Bill to fUrnish a 
return of the chargeable receipts of the hotel, before the end of four 
months from the end of the previous year in respect of the business of 
the hotel, or 30th June of the assessment year, whichever is later. 
Sub-clause (2) seeks to empower the Income-tax Officer to fssue a 
notice to any person who is asses~able under this Act requiring him 
to furnish a return of the chargeable receipts within th;irty days from 
the date of service of the notice. 
Under both these sub-clauses, the Income-tax Officer has been autho-
rised to extend the time for furnishing the return. 
Sub-clause (3) seeks to enable an assessee. who h~ not tumiahecltbe 
·thi the time allowed or who haVing furnIshed the return return WI n . ftl · mission or wrong statement therem to e a return or dIscovers any 0 . b f h ). . d t n as the case may be, at any tIme e ore t e comp etlon. a revise re ur , 
of the assessment. 
Clause 9 provides for payment of hotel-receipts tax on se!f-
ass-essment. 
(1) eks to provide that where the hotel-receipts tax 
Sub-clause b ~ f the return exceeds the tax already paid under 
payable on th~ . aSls fOthis Bill the assessee shall pay the hotel-receipts 
th Prc.vlslon 0, I h f f h aoy a ~r f filing the return and enc ose t e proo, 0 sue 
P ~~~~ . . 
tax so ·th the return. a ment along WI 
P Y 2) vides that hotel-receipts tax paid onte!f .. uae .. 
Sub-clClUSe ( pr: to have been paid towards. the. ......ment. 
Jl\ent shall be dee me 

10 
.9ub~ .. (a) .... ., prMide tlbat if aD a ....... mot pay tW 
Aotel-receipts we in a~'with the provtsiClla of tuHl .... (1), 
_ shall be liable to a pentityat the rate of two-per cent. par J»nib of 
the tax payabJe OIl sel£-aaeesment. If tk defaGh is in J'1tIIP8Ct. of a 
part of the tax payable on self-assessment, the amount of penalty shall 
!»e two per eent. per month of that part in respeet of which the default 
is committed. 
Clause 10 provides that the Income-tax Officer may call for 
accounts, documents or other evidence from the assessee for the purpose. 
of his assessment, and shall make the assessment after considering the 
acc.ount5, documen.ts or other evidence so obtained and any relevant 
material gathered by him . 
... Clause 11 relates to the beat judgment al8C!JSlment. It any person 
fails to furnish the return in resJ'Ollse to the ~ given under elause 
8 (2) or hal not made a return (lr a revised retum under clause 8 (31) , 
or having made the return fails to comply with all the terms of the 
notice issued under clawe 10 (1), or the Income-tax Officer is not satis-
fied about the correctness or the completeness oIthe accClWlts of the 
assessee, the Income-tax Officer, after taking into account all the rele-
vant materialshe has gathered, wHl make a best judgment aJaeSSmellt 
of the chargeable receipts and detC'rmine the amount of tax payable or 
rE'fundable- to- the assessee. 
Clause 12 provides for re-opening of the best judgment asses.ment 
at the instance of the assessee. 
s.&..c:l4ruse (1) provides that where an aSIIUsee BI8e9leCi \lDlier d.MIIe 
11 makes an applieatiGn to the lDcome-t"ax OAcer within one moath 
from the date of service of a notice of demand for the cancellation of 
the assessment on the ground that he was prevehted by suftlcient cause 
from making the return required under cl8'USe 8 (2) or that he did not 
rE'ceive the notice under clause 10 (1) or that he had not a reasonable 
opportunity to comply or was prevented by sufticient cause from 
eomplyiftl with the notice UDder clause 16(11), tbe IncoJDe-tlax OIlcer 
shall cancel the best judgment aasessmeot if he is satisfied about the 
existence of such ground and proceed to make a fresh assessment 
under clause 10 or clause l'l. 
Sub-cloose (2) provides that E:very application for re-opening ot 
Dest judgment assessment shall be disposed of within 90 days from the 
date of receipt of the application by the Income-tax Officer. For this 
purpose, any delay in dlspesing of the applica*ion attributable to the 
assessee will be excluded. 
Cla'Ule 13 relates to the assessment or reassessment of charjeable 
receipts which have escaped assessment or have been under-assessed. 
This clause provides that in the caSE' of an omission or failure on the 
part of the assessee to file a return or to disclose fully and truly alt 
the material facts necessary for his assessment, such proceedings may 
lie initisteci Many' tiae, .. in cather C!8I8S, within f01lr ,... of the 
end ot the ftMaat allelSlMDt year. 

21 
Clause 14 :provides for payment of hotel-receipts tax in advance. 
Sub-cJause (1) seeks to provide that hotel-receipts tax payable in 
~ "Of the, cha.rgeable receipts of any previous year shall be paid 
utmg the financIal year immediatelv preceding the relewnt 8IIeII-
ment year. • 
,S~b-clause (2) seeks to provide that the botel-receipts tax shall be 
paId In advance in two instalments on the specified dates. The speci-
fied, dates are 15th September in respect of the chargeable receipts 
attrlbutable to the first ha.lf of the previous year and '15th March in 
respect of the chargeable receipts attributable to the second half of the 
previ<Tus year. 
Sub-clause (3) seeks to provide that every assessee shall send to the 
Income-tax Officer an estimate of the chargeable receipts attributable 
to the relevant part of the previous year and the hotel-receipts tax 
payable thereon and shall pay the tax so payable on or before the due 
da.tes specified in sub-clause (2). The estimate is to be sent to the 
Income-tax Officer on or before the date on which the relevant instal-
ment of the hotel-receipts tax is due. 
It has been further provided that in respect of the hotel-receipts 
tax payable in advance during the financial year 1980-81. the assessee 
shall send to the Income-t~x Officer nn estimate of the <:hargeable 
receipts of the previous year relevant for the assessment year 1981-82 on 
or before 15th March, 1981 and pay such hotel-receipts tax in one sum 
on or before 15th March, 1981. 
Sub-clause (4) provides that the estimate of the chargeable receipts 
and the tax payable thereon in advance shall be made in the form and 
verified in the manner prescribed for these purposes. 
Sub-cla'U.'le (5) seeks to provide that in cases of delay or default In 
making payment of any instalment of hotel-receipts tu payable 121 
advance, the assessee s'hall be deemed to be an assessee in default in 
respect of such instalment. 
Cla'U.'le 15 seeks to malte a provis:o!1 for the imposition of penalty 
on an assessee for his failure, without reasonable cause, to furnish a 
f hargeable receipts or to produce the accounts, documents or return 0 c· at 
h 'd c required by the Income-tax Officer, and for any conce -ot er eVl en e . . __ ~ . 
f h geable receipts or furmshmg of inaccurate particwars of ment 0 c ar ., f . - t 'I'he penalty for concealment or furmshmg 0 maccurate such recelp s. - . ed b h I 
Particulars of chargeable receipts shall not fbehlmpyOS t~ t eAnciotmet-
-th ut the prior approval 0 t e nspec mg ss s an tax Officer WI 0 
Commissioner. 
Cla'U.'le 16 seeks to make a provisj~n fO: tsthet imposltbio1n in°f ped nalty 
fIe estimate of hotel-recelp ax pay. e • vance 
for fumiSh~ng a a ':ho~t reasonableL'ause, to furnish such estimate. and for fallure, WI 
'd that the assessee shall be given a reasonable 
Cla'U.'l~ 17 pro:l e~eard before any penalty under clause 15 or clause 
opportumty of being . 
16 is imposed upon hIm. . 
to ppeals by the assessee to the Com, mumoner _ e 1~ relates a nr. 
\..-laUS, rder passed by the Income-tax umcer. 
(Appeals) against any 0 

22 
'Clause 1~relates to appeals to the Appeaate Tribunal by 8sses8ees 
and to appeals by the lDcome-taJc Officer (under the direction ofjhe 
Commissioner of Income-tax) against any order made by the CoDUDia .. 
sioner" (A~). It has ~ provided that in dispoiing of ~ 
appeals, the Tribunal shall exercise the same powers and foll~w the 
same procedure as it exercises and follows in disposing of any appeals 
under the Income-tax Act. 
Clause 20 provides for the rectification of mistakes apparent :fn1m 
the record in any proceedings by the Income-tax Officer, the Commis-
sioner (Appeals), the Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal" at&O 
motu or at the instance of the asses.-;ee, or where the authority con-
cerned is the Commissioner (Appeals), at the instance of the Income-
tax Officer also, within four years of the date on which the order 
sough t to be rectified has been passed. 
Clause 21 seeks to provide that in computing the income of the 
assessee chargeable to income-tax under the head "Profits and gains of 
business or profession" for any assessment year, the hotel-receipts tax 
payable by him for that assessment year shall be deducted from the 
profits and gains of the hotel. 
Clause 22 empow(!rs the Commissioner of Income-tax to revise any 
order. not being an order of reassessment passed by the Income-tax 
Officer which is prejudicial to revenue, within a period of two years 
from the date of the order sought to hc revised. 
Clause 23 empowers the Commissioner of Income-tax to give relief to 
the ossessee on revision either of his own motion or on an application 
by the assessee of any order passed by the Income-tax Officer. 
Clause' 24 seeks to make applicable to the proceedings in relation to 
hotcl-receipts tax, certain provisions of the Income-tax Act,. per-
taining to various matters for which no separate provisions nave been 
made in the Bill, e.g, control Of income-tax authorrties, issue and ser-
vice of notice of demand. collection and recovery of tax, reference to 
High Court, appeal to Supreme Court. etc. It also seeks to apply the 
provisions of the Income-tax (Certificete Proceedings) Rules, 1962 to the 
proceedings of recovery of arrears of hotel-receipts tax. 
Clause 25 provides that all information contained in any statement 
or return made by the assessee or furnished in any proceeding under 
the Income-tax Act, may be used for the purposes of proceedings 
relating to hotel~recejpts tax and vice versa. ' ' 
Clause 26 seeks to make a wilful attempt to evade any tax,penalty 
or interest chargeable or imposable under the legislation or to evade 
the payment of any such tax, penalty or interest punishable under the 
law. Any person- . 
. ,. 
(i) who has in his posses~ion or control any books of aeeount 01' 
other documents (heing books of account or other doc1J,men~ rele-
vant tQ any. proceeding under the legialatiO'll containi..ng a f~ae entsY 
or statement, or . 

23 
" (U), who makes or causes to be made any false entry in suell • 
bOob or aecodnt Or tJftier tI~Utbet1ta' at 
, ,(~~~ ~~o \Vilfully omi~ or caus~ to h.o. mnittAd nny ent"' W,',', 
Bta~rnent in lIuch bOob of .ceount or ot~ dci~t;: qr -il 
(iv) who causes any other circumstance to exist which will have 
the e~ct of enabling him to eVade Ilhy tax or Pflyni6nt th~Nof, 
shall be guilty of off'ence under this provision. 
, Where. the amount sought to be evaded through the wilfUl tltt~t 
ex~~ rUpees orie llOth, the punishment ,will be tigortfus IttiPrlldhment Idi-
a minImum term of six months and a rlUfiirtiiliti teHfi' of seven ~ 
~n~ fine. In. a?y other case, th~ punishment ,will be ri.f,>rous imprison. 
Jllent for a mlnlIXlUm term of three months 'and a maximum term Of three 
years and firie. Punishment ,for wilful attempt to evade ~he fayment bf 
ta~" penalty or interest shall be i'lgorotis iifiptf§6ritrl~nt fot a mhiimlirrt 
ferm of three months and a maximum term of three years and ftH~. 
Clause 27 seeks tu provide the punishm~nt far wilful failure to fur-
nish returns of chargeable receipts liild~r sti1:)·~lfiilse (i) of ~lguge 8 or in 
response to no,ices under sub·dauae (2) of that clause or claQli 13. The 
punishment under this clause will depend on the amount of tJx whicll 
wO"Uld have been evaded if the failure had not been dlseove~ed. WheN 
the amount of such tax exceeds rupees one lakh, the puniahrrient ~n be 
r1llorous imprisonment for a minimum term of six month.atW a JIlaxi· 
mum term of seven years and fine and, in aay othet cue, rigoro(8 
imprisonment for a minimum term of t~tee months and a maximum term 
Of three years and fine. These provlsioll8 win not apply if the ratuM 
Is furnished before the ead of the relevant asaesmnem year or it the taX 
payable on the chargeable receipts determined on asee.ament u redUeed 
by advance tax paid, if any, d'oes not exceed Rs. 3,000 
Clause 28 seek~ to, flrovide that in case of failure (jf' an asil~ilsee to 
pt oduce books of account, documents, etc., that n1ly be called f'at by tt.te 
Income-tax Officer bv a ';10lice issued under clause to(I), th~ a~"'~ 
shall be liable to punishment with rigorous, ir.nI?rison,?ent for a term 
which may ex',·nd to one year or With fine or with both. 
Clause 29 ~f'eks to provide the punishment for a false verifil::ation in 
a stateme~t or for delivery of a false acc'".lfJt,pr, '"ta~~n~. Where the 
am'Ount of iax which would have been evaded if the statement or ac· 
count had been accepted as true exceeds rupees one lakh, the punishment 
shall be rigorous imprisonment for a minimum term of six months and 
to Maximum term of seven years and fine. In any other case, the p1Jttish-
ment shall be rigorous imprisonment for a minimum term df three 
months and maximum term of three years _fiae. 
Clause 30 set-ks to provide for the p~~!shnifm! r~~ ~~t. of making 
~M d~iivet-y d~ ~ faIlle ac~dtrnt, St~te~~t or aec~M'itttm, rel~t'tilg t.t' ~e 
~hBrg~8ble reeetpfs lis also the abfltffient of wftflll Ii~tefil'pt~, tv., tIx. 
Under this provision. the abetment of the aforesaId offent'es 1ft 'cde'8 
h th amount of tax penalty or interest which would have been were e ' . evaded if the ,1ccount, statement or declaratIon had been accepted as 
h 'ch is wilfully attempted to be evaded exceeds rupees one lakh, true, or w 1 

~4 
the punishment shall be rigoroua impriaoAment IIlra IDlmmum period 
of six months and a maximum period of seven years and fine. In any 
other case, the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment for a mini-
J'Qum term of three months and a maximum term of three years ncI fine. 
Clause 31 ~ks to provide that where a person who has been can-
victed of an offence under clause 26 or clause 27 or clause 29 or clause 
30 is again convicted for an offence under any of these provisions he 
I'ball be punishable for .. he second and every subsequent offence with 
ngGrOus imprisonment for a minimum term of six months and a maxi-
mum term of seven yean and fine. 
CZa'ILSe 32 ~ks to provide that notwithstanding anything contained 
ill the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the following 
Qftences shall be deemed to be non-cognizable within the meaning of 
that Code: 
(i) wilful attempt to evade tax, etc. (clause 26); 
(ii) failure to furnish returns <Yf chargeable receipts (clause 27); 
(iii) false statement in veriflcation (clause 29); 
(iv) abetment of false return, etc. (clause 30). 
Clauae 33 seeks to provide tha •.. no person shall be proceeded against 
for any offence under clause 26, clause 27, clause 28. clause 29 or cla".ue 
30 or for any offence under the Indian Penal Code relating to any matters 
connected with or ariaing out of this legislation, except at the instance 
of the Commissioner. l!Qwever, the Commissioner has been empowered 
to compound any offence punishable under any of the claWte8 referred 
to above, either before or after the institution Of proceed:lng •. 
Clause 34 seeks to empower the Central Board of Direct Taxes to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this enactment and in this behalf, 
inUT alia, to prescribe variC1Us fOrms such as the form of return of 
chargeable receipts. 
Clause 35 seeks to empower the Central Government to exempt any 
hotel or any class of hotels from the levy of the hotel-receipts tax. 
Clause 38 seeks to empOwer the Central Government to remove any 
dlfficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. This 
power shall be available to the Central Government for a perioi Of two 
years from the commenceme'nt of t!1e enactment. 
Clauae 37 seeb to amend the Central Boards of Revenue Act, I_ 
to include the new tax in the list of direct taxes enumerated In sub-claU8e 
(1) of clause (c) of section 2. 
The clauae alto seeks to amend the Economic Offences (Inappli-
('ability of Limitation) Act, 1974 to make the proviaioDa of the Code 01 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 .s to limitation inapplicable to offences provided 
f.,. in the Bill. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUK 
The proposed hotel-receipts tax will be administered by the Income-
tax Department. Ac<:orclingly, clause 4 of the Bill provides that the tax 
authorities under the Income-tax Act will be the tax authorities for the 
purposes of the prO!posed legislation. It is proposed to carry on the 
administration of the Act by augmenting the strength of the Income-tax 
Department, to the minimum extent necessary. 
2. "'he administrative expenditure likely to be involved in the initial 
stages in implementing the hotel-!'ecelpts tax is estimated to be of the 
order of Rs. 8 lakhs for a full year as indicated in the following chart: 
A. RECURRING EXPENDITURE 
1. Pay amI allowances of officers 
Rs. in lakhs 
l.48 
II. Pay and al10wances df staff 3.77 
III. Incidental expenses (including class IV staff) 0.78 
IV. Office accommodation 1.43 
TOTAL 7.38 
B. NON-RECURRING EXPENDITURE 
V. Furniture, office equipment, etc. 0.60 
TOTAL 7.98 
Rounded off to Rs. 8.00 lakhs. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clw.se 24 of the ~ptcri1~ ibf tbe ~tdoft of certain proviaiOM 
~ ~be ~tax Act, as if the said provisions referred to hotel-
t!C~+pis .' ~ . _~e~4 ,of ~o. iri~,?me:-t~. ,$ogle of tlie p~~.iSf?:~ .. of ,~ 
.~c~e;'~ Af;t. ~~ed. ~~ t~~ c1.a~e pro'yiqe ~r the .. r~!lg ~f.~ 
[e.g. -.cti0lJ 132 (i4) . in relation to any s~h ,or seizllte. ~fe\ilarl1 ita 
~~4 to ~e procedure to be fo~lo~~ fC?~. ~~tainin~ e~try" iri~ ~ 
building or place to be, ,~!U'c;pe.d 1.P:~.ior ~~'ag ~e cu~.¥.~ of any 
-books o{ account, or otlier documents or assets seIZed; section 158 in 
zeaard to tilt fdrm of notice of demand of ~, inter.·, peu~ty, fine, 
ar Mher IUnta payllble; _tiOn ~ as _ tb& fo~m ill 'ld~~cb cla~j.;for 
r~fwu!s 1Jl~ be made and the manner i~ which they may be ver~~,d; 
rule 91 of .he Second Schedule as to the form to be used for any wder, 
notice, warrant or certificate and M era of t~ same ~~le ,~ to the 
proc~<:l':lre to ~e followed by Tax Recovery Commissioners, Tax Reco-
very Oftlcers abd other officers). Matters in respect of which rules may 
be made under these provisianSi are matters of <k!tail or prOcedure and 
have already been approved by Parliament as matters which may be 
regula . .ed by rul~ 
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to empower the Board \0 make rules for 
carrying ~ut the purposes ~f the legislation. The matters in respect of 
which rules m~y b~ made relate to matters of detail or procedure such 
as the manner {ii which room charges may be determined in cases where 
composite charges are levied in respect of residential accommodation' and 
food, the cases and circumstances in whJch paymenti made hi Indian 
curretiey by conversion of foreign exchange sba11 be deemed It) have been 
made in foreign exchange fo!' the purposes of sub-section (1) of section 5, 
the fetm in wl\ich returns may be furnished or estimates may be sent 
and the mBftTler ;.n .-hich thf>Y may be verified. the form in whlch appeals 
may be filed and the m°m-ner in wh!ch th~y may be, verified and the 
procedure to be followed on applications for rectification of mistakes. 
AF, ·he mat.ers in re!'lpert of which rules may be made under the 
provisions of the Income-tax Act made applicable- by clause U or under 
clause 34 are matters of detail or procedure, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a nonnal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL BOARDS OF REvENuE ACT, 1963 
(54 OF 1963) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-
• • • • • 
(c) "direct tax" means-
(1) any duty leviable or tax chargeable under-
• • • • • 
45 of 1974. (vii) the Interest-tax Act, 1974; and 
• • • • 
27 
Defini-
tions . 

. ' 
LOk &ABilA 
A 
BILL 
" 
. ..." .. 
(ShTi R, Venkataraman, Minister of Finance.) 