1
Short title and
commencement.
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2017
By
SHRI KALIKESH NARAY AN SINGH DEO, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 8 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (herein referred to as the
principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"8A. (1) The State Government shall, in each sanctuary, constitute a Local
Advisory Committee to assist the State Board for Wild Life constituted under
section 6.
(2) The Local Advisory Committee shall consist of:—
(a) the Chief Wildlife Warden not below the rank of Divisional Forest
Officer— Chairperson;
Bill No. 160 of  2017
5
10
53 of 1972.
Constitution
of Local
Advisory
Committee.
Insertion of new
section 8A.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) Member of Legislative Assembly within whose constituency the
sanctuary is situated— Member;
(c) two representatives of the Panchayati Raj Institutions— Members;
(d) one representative of non-governmental organisations— Member;
(e) one person having expertise in the field of wildlife conservation—
Member;
(f) one representative each from departments of the State Government
dealing with Home and Veterinary matters—Members; and
(g) the officer in-charge of the sanctuary as Member-Secretary,
to be appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Committee shall meet quarterly to deliberate and render advice on the
measures to be taken for better conservation and management of the sanctuary including
participation of the people living within and around the sanctuary.
(4) The Committee shall regulate its own procedure including quorum.
(5) The minutes of the meeting of the Committee shall be submitted to the Chief
Wildlife Warden within a period of ten days.".
3. In section 38-O of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for sub-clauses (c), (d), (e) and (f), the following sub-clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(c) lay down normative standards for eco-tourism activities, tourism
activities and guidelines, from time to time, for tiger conservation in the buffer
and core areas of tiger reserves;
(d) assist Tiger Conservation Foundation by laying down normative
measures for addressing conflicts of men, wild trees and wild animals and
emphasize on co-existence in the forest areas outside the National parks,
sanctuaries or tiger reserves, as the case may be, in the working plan code;
(e) provide information on protection measures through future conservation
plan based on the report of the Steering committees constituted under sub-section
(2) of section 38U;
(f) co-ordinate research and monitoring on tiger, co-predators, prey, habitat,
related ecological and socio-economic parameters and their evaluation;".
(ii) after sub-clause (j), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
(ja) facilitate and coordinate the functioning of several Tiger Conservation
Authorities in different States constituted under the Act; and
"(jb) decide, in consultation with the National Board for Wild Life, the
State Boards for Wild Life and the appropriate Union Ministry, the quantum of
compensation payable in the event of wild life-human conflict, in addition to the
immediate payment of ex-gratia compensation;".
(iii) in sub-clause (k), for the word "functions", the words, "residuary functions"
shall be substituted.
4. After section 38P, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"38PA. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Regulatory Authority to regulate the activities of the National Tiger
Conservation Authority and shall submit an annual report to the Central Government
in this behalf.
Amendment of
section
38-O.
Insertion of new
section 38PA.
Constitution of
Regulatory
Authority and
procedure to
regulate Tiger
Conservation
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) The Regulatory Authority shall consist of,—
(a) the Secretary, Union Minister  of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change- Chairperson;
(b) ten Chief Wild Life Wardens- member;
(c) five experts or professionals having prescribed qualifications and
experience in conservation of wild life and welfare of people living in tiger reserve
who are not already appointed members of the National Tiger Conservation
Authority—member; and
(d) one member from the National Green Tribunal, member,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that every member appointed under clauses (b), (c) and (d) shall be appointed
for annual non-consecutive terms.
(3) The Regulatory Authority shall address any grievance or dispute filed by a State-
level or local body or Authority related to the administration of Tiger Reserves, the
conservation of the tiger and the performance of the National Tiger Conservation Authority.
(4) Every grievance or dispute filed under sub-section (2) shall be addressed on a
majority of the votes of the member of the Regulatory Authority present and voting.
(5) Every member of the Regulatory Authority shall be empowered to highlight a
specific issue in the functioning of the National Tiger Conservation Authority and the Tiger
Conservation Authority Fund:
Provided that no such issue shall be tabled and resolved unless counter filed by a
majority vote from the members of the Regulatory Authority:
Provided further that in the case of a grievance against the decisions of the National
Tiger Conservation Authority, the Regulation Authority shall act as the harmonising, resolution
and deciding forum.
(6) The Central Government shall remove a member referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 38PA, from office if he—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent;
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) is, without, obtaining leave of absence from the Regulatory Authority, absent
from three consecutive meetings of the said Authority; or
(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to
render his continuation in office detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that no member shall be removed from office under this sub-section
unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(7) Any vacancy in the office of a member shall be filled by fresh appointment
and such member shall continue for the remainder of the term of the member in whose
place he is appointed.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
appointment of the members of the Regulatory Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
5. In section 38U of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be added, namely:—
"(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section  (1), the Steering
committee shall undertake the estimation of population  of tiger and its natural prey
species, status of habitats, disease surveillance, mortality survey, patrolling, reports
on untoward happenings and such other management aspects as it may deem fit
including future plan conservation, and report to the Tiger Conservation Authority for
the preparation of future conservation plan.".
6. In section 38X of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Tiger
Conservation Foundation shall ensure the implementation of eco-tourism and tourism
policy in accordance with the normative standards for eco-tourism activities, tourism
activities and guidelines laid down under sub-clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section
38-O and section 38XA.".
7. After section 38X of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"38XA. (1) The State Government shall formulate a comprehensive policy to
promote and incentivize tourism and eco-tourism over conventional wildlife tourism
under its jurisdiction.
(2) While formulating the policy under sub-section ( 1), the State Government shall
take into account,—
(a) maintenance of the integrity of the forest reserve;
(b) participation of the local communities in eco-tourism;
(c) rights and benefit sharing with the local communities;
(d) sustainable use of indigenous material;
(e) education, training and capacity building in conservation,—eco-tourism and
ancillary techniques;
(f) adequate assessment mechanism to assess the impact of eco-tourism activities
on the wild life reserve and local communities; and
(g) developmental activities in tune with the ecological integrity of the forest
reserve.
(3) No new infrastructure shall be set up within the core zone of the Wild Life Reserves,
except for the purposes of the principal Act or with the special permission of the authority(s)
empowered thereunder in this regard.
(4) The State Government shall constitute a Community Development Fund from the
revenue received from the visitor registration in each wild life reserve.
(5) The Community Development Fund shall be utilized for the development of local
community livelihood in that region.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the term 'Local' shall comprise of
the field staff and the residents of and in close vicinity of the forest reserve area.
(6) The State Government shall levy a minimal conservation fees from the Wild Life
tourism industry taking into consideration capacity, economic segment or such basis as it
may deem fit to fund eco-tourism development and community upliftment projects the forest
reservation.
Insertion of new
sections 38XA
and 38XB.
Amendment of
section 38U.
Amendment of
section 38X.
Formulation of
policy to
promote and
incentivize
tourism and
eco-tourism.
Establishment
of Tiger
Conservation
Foundation
and its
functions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
fifty per cent. of the total number of persons to be engaged in infrastructural development
shall be reserved in favour of local persons in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the reservation in favour of local persons may be increased on
unavailability of requisite work force in the local community.
(8) The Tiger Conservation Foundation shall, in consultation with the Local Advisory
Committee, direct the officer-in-charge of every Tiger Reserve to prepare a comprehensive
tourism plan in pursuance of Tiger Conservation Plan and the national Tiger Conservation
Authority.
(9) The Tourism plan under sub-section (7) shall be prepared in tune with the State
Tourism and Eco-Tourism strategy and submitted to the Tiger Conservation Foundation and
Steering Committee for approval.
(10) The tourism plan prepared under sub-section (7) shall take into account:—
(a) identification and monitoring of ecologically sensitive areas in and around
forest reserves to protect the ecological integrity;
(b) assessment of capacity of Tiger Reserve at three levels namely physical, real
and permissible in terms of visitors, vehicles, residential as well as commercial
infrastructure;
(c) fixation of ceiling on the number of visitors to a Forest Reserve at any point
in time and annually based on the capacity assessment;
(d) designation of area for eco-tourism development;
(e) limiting tourism activities to the delineated tourism zone;
(f) registration of tourism vehicles with the Forest Reserve management;
(g) mandating the presence of authorised guide in every vehicle;
(h) local community participation to generate a mutually beneficial relationship
between Wild Life conservation and Local community development;
(i) development of codes for standardization of private sector tourism industry
in the vicinity of the forest reserves;
( j) mechanism for the assessment of impact of tourism on Wild Life;
(k) development of appropriate infrastructure development codes for the forest
reserves;
(l) preparation of an effective list of restrictions for the visitors;
and
(m) inculcation of subsidized registration for educational, survey and academic
research purposes.
38XB. (1) The religious sites located within the forest reserve area shall be
subject to the provisions of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, the principal Act and
the Environment Protection Act, 1986.
(2) The Tiger Conservation Foundation established under section 38X shall be
responsible for periodical review of developments of religious sites located within the forest
reserve area.
(3) The religious sites located within the forest reserve area shall comply with the
rules and regulations prescribed for the tourism industry with regard to building codes,
pollution control, alternate energy usage, conservation fees and free passage of Wild Life.
Jurisdiction
over sacred and
religious sites
located within
the reserve
areas.
69 of 1980.
29 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
Explanation.— The conservation fee shall be uniform across all religions in the entire
Indian territory.
(4) Any set up, temporary or permanent, for the purpose of stay shall be restricted to
the dates nominated for the appropriate authorities in this regard, with prior approval of the
respective forest reserve officer-in-charge.”.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is home to seventy per cent. of the world's total tiger population. Despite the
consistent increase in funding for conservation and persistent Government efforts, the
continuous decline in the tiger population has been relentless. Thus, a sustainable solution to
ensure the protection of tigers needs to emerge from within an inclusive framework.
The current model of tiger conservation is governed by the Wild Life (Protection)
Amendment Act, 2006, which led to the constitution of the National Tiger Conservation
Authority and Project Tiger. Eleven years hence, the statistics prove that this system has not
only failed to protect tigers, but also failed to prevent a loss in their habitat.
The foundation of any conservation strategy is the pattern of ownership that it advocates.
A careful and calculated transition from State ownership to a public-private ownership, along
with a strong emphasis on community control, should be considered. This transition can be
facilitated by putting into effect new eco-tourism rules that will simultaneously increase the
State Governments' revenue for conservation and reduce their dependence on central subsidies.
Initializing the processes of decentralization, privatization and an inclusion of local
communities can create the framework necessary for sustainable and long-term conservation
of India's national animal. It is the duty of the Government to build deeper relationships with
respective State Governments, the local communities and most importantly, the conservation
bureaucracy and wildlife research community. This amendment has been proposed to address
the above-mentioned issues.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KALIKESH NARAYAN SINGH DEO
June 29, 2017.
7

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to constitute a Local Advisory Committee for each sanctuary.
Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Regulatory Authority to
oversee the functioning of the National Tiger Conservation Authority. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a recurring expenditure of about rupees hundred crore would involve per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involves.
8

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972
38-O. (1) The Tiger Conservation Authority shall have the following powers and
perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) * * * *
(b)* * * *
(c) lay down normative standards for tourism activities and guidelines for project
tiger from time to time for tiger conservation in the buffer and core area of tiger reserves
and ensure their due compliance;
(d) provide for management focus and measures for addressing conflicts of men
and wild animals and to emphasis on co-existence in forest areas outside the National
parks, sanctuaries or tiger reserve, in the working plan code;
(e) provide information on protection measures including future conservation
plan, estimation of population of tiger and its natural prey species, status of habitats,
disease surveillance, mortality survey, patrolling, reports on untoward happenings and
such other management aspects as it may deem fit including future plan conservation;
* * * *
(k) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the purposes
of this Act with regard to conservation of tigers and their habitat.
******
38U.( 1)* * * *
(2) The Steering Committee shall consists of—
(a) the Chief Minister — Chairperson;
(b) the Minister in-charge of Wild Life — Vice-Chairperson;
(c) such number of official members not exceeding five including at least two
Field Directors of tiger reserve or Director of National Park and one from the State
Government's Departments dealing with tribal affairs;
(d) three experts or professionals having qualifications and experience in
conservation of wild life of which at least one shall be from the field of tribal
development;
(e) two members from the State's Tribal Advisory Council;
(f) one representative each from State Government's Departments dealing with
Panchayati Raj and Social Justice and Empowerment;
(g) Chief Wild Life Warden of the State shall be the Member-Secretary, ex officio,
to be notified by the State Government, in the Official Gazette.
******
38X.( 1)* * * *
(2) The Tiger Conservation Foundation shall, inter alia, have the following objectives:—
(a) to facilitate ecological, economic, social and cultural development in the tiger
reserves;
(b) to promote eco-tourism with the involvement of local stakeholder communities
and provide support to safeguard the natural environment in the tiger  reserves;
Powers and
function of
Tiger
Conservation
Authority.
Constitution of
Steering
Committee.
Establishment
of Tiger
Conservation
Foundation.
9

10
(c) to facilitate the creation of, and or maintenance of, such assets as may be
necessary for fulfilling the above said objectives;
(d) to solicit technical, financial, social, legal and other support required for the
activities of the Foundation for achieving the above said objectives;
(e) to augment and mobilise financial resources including recycling of entry and
such other fees received in a tiger reserve, to foster stakeholder development and eco-
tourism;
(f) to support research, environmental education and training in the above related
fields.
* * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—986LS(S3)—27-07-2017.