Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
  
Bill No. 160 of  2024
THE INDIGENOUS COW AND COW PROGENY 
PROTECTION BOARD BILL, 2024
By 
Sඁඋං Lඎආൻൺ Rൺආ, M.P.
ൺ 
BILL
to provide for constituting up of a Board for the protection of indigenous 
cow and cow progeny and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Indigenous Cow and Cow Progeny Protection 
Board Act, 2024.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.

5
  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “Board” means the Indigenous Cow and Cow Progeny Protection Board 
constituted under section 3;
(b) “gaushala” means a shelter home or building with facilities of fodder, 
water shed and medical aid for cows;
(c) “indigenous cow” means cow of indigenous breeds but does not include 
cows of foreign breeds; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
 3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Board to be known as the Indigenous Cow and Cow Progeny 
Protection Board for protection of indigenous cow and its progeny.
  ( 2) The headquarter of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
 (3) The Board shall have its offices in the capital of each State and Union 
territory.
 (4) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff as may be deemed necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.
 (5) The salary and allowances payable to  and other terms and conditions 
of service of the officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
 4. The Board shall–
(a) construct gaushalas in every village, tehsil and district for protection 
of indigenous cows;
(b) provide funds to farmers to run individual gaushalas;
(c) encourage farmers to rear indigenous cows and their progeny and 
provide financial assistance to farmers on the basis of number of indigenous 
cows reared by them; 
(d) promote the therapeutic use of medicines based on cow milk, gobar and 
gomutra;
(e) promote the manufacturing of fertilizers and insecticides with the use of 
gobar and gomutra, aak, neem and tulsi;
(f) link gaushalas in the villages to the mid day meal scheme for supply 
of milk and milk-made products to school students in order to overcome the 
problem of malnutrition;
(g) promote the use of gobar gas in generation of electricity;
(h)   promote bullock driven agro processing industry;
(i) link the setting up of gaushalas with Mahatama Gandhi  National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act 2005; and
2
Definitions.
Constitution 
of Indigenous 
Cow Protection 
Board.
Functions of 
the Board.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40 42 of 2005

 (j) undertake such other steps as may be assigned to it by the Central 
Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to carry out the 
purposes of this Act. 
 6. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
  ( 2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
3
Central 
Government to 
provide requisite 
funds.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The cow is the most beloved animal of rural Indian families. Cow has been an 
integral part of our religion, culture and economy for centuries. But according to an 
estimate, the next decade is going to pose a danger for existence of cows pertaining 
to Indian Cow breeds. Traditionally, there are various breeds of cows in India. On 
one hand, there is the Sahiwal breed of cow which provides milk even in dry days, 
while on the other hand, cows of different types have been the backbone of rural 
economy of the country. Scientists have considered and found that Indian cow’s 
milk is a complete diet. One pound of cow milk gives so much strength that if a 
person consumes only cow’s milk, then his body and life will not only run smoothly 
but will also become stronger and disease resistant as compare to any other person. 
It contains all the nutrients necessary for the human body. Indigenous cow’s milk 
contains vitamin A-2 which has cancer resistant properties. Multiple uses of 
cow’s urine have been mentioned in Ayurveda. The urine of the indigenous cow is 
considered to be antidote, chemical and tridosha destroyer. On chemical analysis 
of cow’s urine, scientists have found that it contains 24 elements which have the 
ability to cure various diseases of the body. About 108 diseases are cured by cow’s 
urine and excellent organic pesticide can be made by adding boiling aak, neem and 
basil and adequate water in cow’s urine. The milk and ghee of the indigenous cow 
have the ability to fight incurable diseases. Organic fertilizers are made up from the 
dung of the indigenous cow. The fertility of the land increases with the fertilizer 
made from the dung of the indigenous cow. In this regard, the role of indigenous 
cows in the country’s economy cannot be denied.
 Hence, this bill. 
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                          LUMBA RAM
July 23, 2024
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Board for the protection 
of indigenous cow and its progeny.  Clause 4 provides that the Board shall set up 
gaushalas in every village, tehsil and district. Clause 6 provides that the Central 
Government shall provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India.  It is estimated that a recurring expenditure 
of rupees one thousand crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated 
Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to 
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
  Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
Bill
to provide for setting up of a Board for the protection of indigenous 
cow and cow progeny and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Lumba Ram,  M.P .)