THE  CHILDREN  PROTECTION  BILL,  2014
By
SHRIMATI S UPRIYA S ULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of children from exploitation, domestic violence,
trafficking for prostitution, corporal punishment and kidnapping and for
matters connected therewith
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Children Protection  Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “child” means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 160 of  2014
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(c) “children home” means an institution or home established or certified as
such by the appropriate government for the purposes of this Act;
(d) “street children” means children with unknown parentage or abandoned or
vagabond children including neglected and destitute children who generally live on
pavements or in hutments or slums or at railway platforms or bus stop; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed  by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every child shall have the right to—
(a) adequate means of livelihood;
(b) protection and security of life against exploitation and physical and mental
violence;
(c) free education and vocational training;
(d) access to means of free and fair development of personality; and
(e) free access to highest standard of health and nutrition.
4. The appropriate Government shall conduct yearly survey of street children in the
area under its jurisdiction.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish or cause to be established such
number of children homes as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Children homes established under sub-section (1) shall provide free of cost
boarding and lodging and such other facilities to the street children, as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up Special Police Posts to deal exclusively
with the cases of missing children and crimes against children including exploitation,
domestic violence, trafficking for prostitution, corporal punishment, sale or kidnapping.
(2) The number of Special Police Posts shall be set up in accordance with the population
of a State and in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall maintain a record of complaints regarding the
missing, kidnapped and abducted children in the area under its jurisdiction.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Special Courts, as
may be necessary, for efficient disposal of cases of crimes against children.
(2) The Special Court shall dispose of a case within a period of six months from the date
of filing of the case.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide such sums of money to the State Governments, as may be necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Rights of a
Child.
Annual Survey
of street
children.
Establishment
of children
Homes.
Setting up of
Special Police
Posts.
Maintenance
of records.
Establishment
of Special
Courts.
Central
Government
to provide
moneys to
the State
Govenments.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35

3
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children are the future of any country. It is the duty of the State to provide a healthy
environment to ensure that every child is able to live a dignified life. Unfortunately, in our
country there have been numerous cases of ill treatment and exploitation of children. This
situation worsens when a child does not have any guardian to take care of him. The gruesome
Nithari serial killings case calls for concerted action on the part of the Government to prevent
such crime against the children. There is a need for concerted effort to be made by the
Government as well as society to have in place a faster action-oriented police machinery,
vigilant media and speedy exemplary punishment to the offenders by the Courts to deter the
offender from committing offences against children.
The Human Rights Commission in one of its reports have stated that nearly 45,000
children go missing every year in the country. Of these, majority cases missing children
remain untraceable for the reason they are either pushed in trafficking or engaged as bonded
labour. Therefore, a proper coordination among the Government agencies, police and non-
governmental organizations working for protection of children is urgently required in order
to tackle the growing crimes against children.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for—
(i) securing certain basic rights to children;
(ii) conducting of an yearly survey of homeless and street children;
(iii) establishment of children homes for homeless and street children with all
basic facilities;
(iv) setting up of Special Police Posts to deal exclusively with the cases of
missing children and crimes against children; and
(v) establish Special Courts for speedy disposal of cases of crimes against
children.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
November 12, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for an yearly survey of street children. Clause 5 provides
for establishment of children homes with all basic facilities for street children. Clause 6
provides for setting up of Special Police Posts to deal exclusively with the cases of crimes
against the children. Clause 8 provides for establishment of special courts for speedy disposal
of cases of crimes against the children. Clause 9 provides for Central Government to provide
moneys to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill therefore,
if enacted will involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of India. It is likely to involve
the recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—2874LS(S3)—04.12.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of children from exploitation, domestic violence,
trafficking for prostitution, corporal punishment and kidnapping and for
matters connected therewith
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)