As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No.  160 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Ms. S. Jothimani,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend  the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.
5

2. In article 15 of the Constitution,—
(i) in the marginal heading, after the words, “religion, race, caste, sex”, the word 
“disability” shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause (1), after the words, “religion, race, caste, sex”, the word “disability” 
shall be inserted;
(iii) in clause (2), after the words, “religion, race, caste, sex”, the word “disability” 
shall be inserted.
(iv) in clause (4), after the words ‘‘the Scheduled Tribes’’, the words ‘‘or the persons 
with disabilities’’ shall be inserted.
(v) in clause (5), after the words ‘‘the Scheduled Tribes’’, the words ‘‘or for persons 
with disabilities’’ shall be inserted.
3. In clause (2) of article 16 of the Constitution, after the words, "religion, race, caste, 
sex, descent", the word "disability" shall be inserted.
4. In article 80 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following proviso shall be 
inserted,:
“Provided that amongst the person nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) 
of clause (1) at least one person shall be a person with disability.”.
5. In article 171 of the Constitution, after clause (5) the following proviso shall be 
inserted,:
“Provided that amongst the person nominated by the Governor under  
sub-section (e) of clause (3) at least one person shall be a person with disability.”.
    
Amendment of 
article 15.
2
Amendment of 
article 16.
Amendment of 
article 80.
Amendment of 
article 171.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Persons with disabilities make up the world’s largest minority community. 
According to the 2011 Census of India, they comprised 2.21% of the Indian population. 
However, this estimate was based on just seven disabilities that were recognised at the time. 
After the enactment of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act (RPwDA), 2016, there 
are now 21 recognised disabilities, and hence the number of persons with disabilities is 
significantly higher than estimated in the 2011 Census. In recognition of the exclusion faced 
by the disabled community, India promptly ratified the UNCRPD in 2007. The UNCRPD 
marked a shift in viewing disability from a social – rather than a medical – lens. This was 
followed by the enactment of the RPwDA, 2016. Despite these important steps, persons with 
disabilities continue to face barriers in access to resources, opportunities and public goods. 
They are routinely discriminated against and lack representation in high offices, preventing 
their meaningful participation in society. 
 Given India’s contentious history with discrimination, the anti-discrimination law 
was enshrined in the Constitution as a fundamental right by our founding fathers. Professor 
K.T. Shah, in the Constituent Assembly debates, had said that all public places must be made 
open and accessible to all citizens of the country. The underlying motivation behind anti-
discrimination laws was to provide safeguards to marginalised groups, and allow for their 
social and economic integration into society. While India’s anti-discrimination provisions 
account for discrimination based on the grounds of horizontal inequalities such as religion, 
race, caste etc., it strikingly misses discrimination based on disability. Profiling persons with 
disabilities and/or denying them access to public places, infrastructure, and transport by 
design, stands in contravention to our constitutional values.
 Those who are subject to horizontal, status-based inequalities are also more likely 
to be represented among those living in poverty. In the case of persons with disabilities, their 
lack of access to education and employment further limits them to this eventuality. According 
to the World Report on Disability, 2011, the share of disabled children not enrolled in school 
at more than five times the national rate. A report by MOSPI in 2018 stated that among 
persons with disabilities of age 15 years and above, Labour Force Participation Rate in usual 
status was 23.8 per cent, significantly lower than the able-bodied population. This, despite 
the fact that the RPwDA provides for reservations in education and employment. In the State 
of Kerala v. Leesamma Joseph, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that that achieving the 
purpose of the RPwDA requires taking affirmative action. As it stands today, this position 
has not been reflected in the Constitution. 
 The disability rights movement was spearheaded by the reverberating sentiment of 
“nothing about us, without us”. To truly realise this sentiment, it is imperative to increase 
political representation of persons with disabilities such that they can set the agenda for their 
own empowerment. Persons with disabilities have displayed excellence in all professions, 
and deserve an equitable chance at displaying their prowess in political offices as well. In 
recognition of this, the Baharul Islam Committee report of 1988 recommended that the 
Constitution be amended to provide for reservation of disabled people in Parliament.As a 
first step to achieving this, the Constitution must mandate their inclusion in the league of 
nominated members to the Upper Houses of the Central and State Legislatures. 
3

 The curb cut effect posits that laws designed to help persons with disabilities 
can have a ripple effect in terms of benefiting society at large. We cannot achieve our 
constitutional goal of social justice while leaving them behind. While it is true that some 
of these provisions have been accounted for through statute and interpretations of the law, 
it is important that they are also reflected in the letter of our Constitution. This is because 
our constitutional text informs and influences the social fabric of our country. Amending 
the Constitution to this effect will fulfil our international obligations, as well as foster our 
Constitutional spirit.
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;               S. JOTHIMANI
November 8,  2024.
4

ANNEXURE 
[Extracts from the Constitution of India]
 *     *          *                *                 *
 15(1).   *  *  *  * 
  ( 2)       *  *  *  *
  ( 3)    *  *  *  *
  ( 4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State 
from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
 *     *          *                *                 *
 16.(1)  *  *  *  *
  ( 2)    *  *  *  *
  ( 3)     *  *  *  *
  ( 4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the 
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in 
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
 *     *          *                *                 *
 80.(1) The Council of States shall consist of—
  ( 3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of  
clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in 
respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
  Literature, science, art and social service.
 *     *          *                *                 *
 171. (5) The members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (e) of 
clause (3) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in 
respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
  Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service.
 *     *          *                *                 *
 
 
5
Prohibition of 
discrimination 
on grounds of 
religion, race, 
caste, sex or 
place of birth.
Equality of 
opportunity in 
matters of public 
employment.
Composition of 
the Council of 
States.
Composition of 
the Legislative 
Councils.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend  the Constitution of India.
————
(Ms. S. Jothimani, M.P.)