THE COMPANIES AMENDMENT BILL, 2019
By
SHRI HIBI EDEN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013, in sub-section (5), for the words “at least
two per cent.", the words "at least five per cent." shall be substituted.
Short title
and
commencement.
18 of 2013. Amendment
of section
135.
Bill  No. 160 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) provision in the Companies Act, 2013
requires companies to spend at least two per cent. of their average net profit made in
the preceding three years on CSR. Some Indian companies  already spend more than
two per cent. on CSR programmes.
The Companies Act, 2013 expects business to spend two per cent. of their three year
average profits on social initiatives. Even before the Act was put in place companies
recognized they need to think about more than just profits and did so. However, the need is
to increase the percentage earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility funding by the
companies.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 with a view
to increase the existing Corporate Social Responsibility funding by the Companies from two
per cent. to five per cent to—
(a) increase the services that are made available through Corporate Social
Responsibility;
(b) reduce the burden of Government in selected sectors; and
(c) manage the development needs of the rural India.
N
EW DELHI; HIBI  EDEN
June 26, 2019
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013
(18 OF 2013)
* * * * *
135. (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more, or
turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees five crore or more
during the immediate preceding financial year shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility
Committee of the Board consisting of three or more directors, out of which at least one
director shall be an independent director:
Provided that where a company is not required to appoint an independent director
under sub-section (4) of section 149, it shall have in its Corporate Social Responsibility
Committee two or more directors.
(2) * * * *
(3) * * * *
(4) * * * *
(5) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall ensure that the
company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent. of the average net profit of the
company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of its
Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:
Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and areas around it
where it operates, for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility
activities:
Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the Board shall, in its
report made under clause (o) of sub-section (3) of section 134, specify the reasons for not
spending the amount.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section "net profit"shall not include such
sums as may be prescribed, and shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of
section 198.
* * * * *
Corporate
Social
Responsibility.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
————
(Shri Hibi Eden, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1185LS(S3)—09-07-2019.