1
Bill No. 161 of  2017
THE DATA PRIVACY AND PROTECTION BILL, 2017
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish an effective regime to protect the right to privacy of data all natural
person; to set out conditions of surveillance and interception of communications
of natural persons; and to constitute a Privacy Commission and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the right to privacy is an inalienable right of all persons;
AND WHEREAS the need to protect privacy has increased in the digital age with the
emergence of big data analytics;
AND WHEREAS the delivery of goods and provision of services requires the collection,
storage, processing and disclosure including international transfers of personal data;
AND WHEREAS good governance requires that all interceptions of communications
and surveillance must be conducted in a systematic and transparent manner subservient to
the rule of law;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to harmonise any conflicting interests and competing
legislations;
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
NOW, THEREFORE, it is expedient to provide for an enforceable means to protect the
privacy of persons;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Data Privacy And Protection Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it
shall also apply to any offence or contravention hereunder committed outside India by
any person.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “anonymise” means, in relation to personal data, the encryption or removal
of all data that may, whether directly or indirectly in conjunction with any other data,
be used to identify a natural person or data subject;
(b) “appropriate government” means, in relation to the Central Government or a
Union territory Administration, the Central Government; in relation to a State
Government, that Government of that State; and, in relation to a public authority which
is established, constituted, owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds
provided directly or indirectly:
(i) by the Central Government or a Union Territory Administration, the
Central Government;
(ii) by a State Government, the Government of that State;
(c) “armed force” means any body raised or constituted pursuant to or in
connection with, or presently governed by, the Army Act, 1950, the Indian Reserve
Forces Act, 1888, the Territorial Army Act, 1948, the Navy Act, 1957, the Air Force Act,
1950, the Reserve and Auxiliary Air Forces Act, 1952, the Coast Guard Act, 1978 or the
Assam Rifles Act, 2006;
(d) “authorised officer” means a Gazetted Officer of an All India Service or a
Central Civil Service, as the case may be, who is empowered by the Central Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, to intercept a communication of another person
or carry out surveillance of another person under the provisions of this Act;
(e) “biometric data” means any data relating to the physical, physiological or
behavioural characteristics of a natural person which allow their unique identification
including, but not restricted to, facial images, fingerprints, hand prints, foot prints, iris
recognition, hand writing, typing dynamics, gait analysis and speech recognition;
(f) “Chief Privacy Commissioner” and “Privacy Commissioner” mean the
Chief Privacy Commissioner and Privacy Commissioner, respectively appointed under
section 33;
(g) “collect", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means, in
relation to personal data, any action or activity that results in a data controller, police
force, armed force, intelligence organisation, public authority, company, person, State
or other entity (natural or otherwise) obtaining, or coming into the knowledge or
possession of, any personal data of another person;
(h) “communication” means words, signs, gestures, spoken, written or indicated,
in any form, manner or language, encrypted or unencrypted, meaningful or otherwise,
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
and includes visual representations of words, ideas, symbols and images, and the
meta data in relation whether transmitted or not transmitted and, if transmitted,
irrespective of the medium of transmission;
(i) “competent organisation” means an organisation or public authority listed
under Schedule to this Act;
(j) “consent” means an unambiguous indication of a data subject's agreement to
the collection, processing, use or dissemination of personal data relating to him or her.
(k) “data controller” means a person who, either solely, or jointly or in combination
with other persons, determines the purposes for which and the manner in which any
personal data is processed;
(1) “data processor” means a person who processes any personal data on behalf
of a data controller;
(m) “data subject” means a natural person who is the subject of personal data;
(n) “deoxyribonucleic acid data” means all data, of whatever type, concerning
the characteristics of a natural person that are inherited or acquired during early prenatal
development;
(o) “destroy", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means,
in relation to personal data, to cease the existence of, by deletion, erasure or otherwise,
any personal data;
(p) “disclose", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means,
in relation to personal data, any action or activity that results in a person coming into
the knowledge or possession of any personal data of another person;
(q) “intelligence organisation” means an intelligence organisation under the
Intelligence Organisations (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1985 and includes the National
Investigation Agency constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the National
Investigation Agency Act, 2008 and the Central Bureau of Investigation constituted
under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946;
(r) “interception” or “intercept” means any activity intended to capture, read,
listen to or understand the communication of a person;
(s) “officer-in-charge of a police station” shall have the meaning ascribed to it
under clause (o) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(t) “person” means and includes a natural person, a company, a firm, an
association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not;
(u) “personal data” means any data which relates to a natural person if that
person can, whether directly or indirectly in conjunction with any other data, be identified
from it and includes sensitive personal data:
Provided that the term “personal data” shall not include data which is a
matter of public record except details of victims in cases of sexual assault,
kidnapping or abduction.
(v) “police force” means—
(i) anybody raised or constituted by the appropriate government for the
preservation of law and order and enforcement of laws related to customs,
revenue, foreign exchange, excise, income tax and narcotics;
(ii) the bodies raised or constituted pursuant to or in connection with, or
presently governed by, the Police Act, 1861, the Central Reserve Police Force
Act, 1949, the Border Security Force Act, 1968, the Indo-Tibetan Border Police
Force Act, 1992, the Sashastra Seema Bal Act, 2007, the Central Industrial Security
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Force Act, 1968, the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 and the National Security
Guard Act, 1986; or
(iii) the bodies raised or constituted pursuant to or in connection with, or
presently governed by, the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946, the
Income Tax Act, 1961, the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 and the
Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003; or
(iv) any police forces raised or constituted by the States, armed or
otherwise;
(w) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(x) “Privacy Commission” means the Privacy Commission constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 33;
(y) “Privacy Officer” means the Privacy Officer designated under sub-section
(3) of section 22 and sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 30.
(z) “process", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means,
in relation to personal data, any action or operation which is performed upon personal
data of another person, whether or not by automated means including, but not restricted
to, organisation, structuring, adaptation, modification, retrieval, consultation, use,
alignment or destruction;
(za) “public authority” shall have the meaning ascribed to it under clause (h) of
section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005;
(zb) “receive", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means,
in relation to personal data, to come into the knowledge or possession of any personal
data of another person;
(zc) “sensitive personal data” means personal data or metadata including—
(i) biometric data;
(ii) deoxyribonucleic acid data;
(iii) sexual preferences and practices;
(iv) medical history and health;
(v) political affiliation;
(vi) ethnicity, religion, race or caste; and
(vii) financial and credit information, including financial history and
transactions.
(zd) “store", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means, in
relation to personal data, to retain, in any form or manner and for any purpose or
reason, any personal data of another person; and
(ze) “surveillance” means any activity, directly or indirectly intended to watch,
monitor, record or collect, or to enhance the ability to watch, record or collect, any
information, images, signals, data, movement, behaviour or actions, of a person, a
group of persons, a place or an object, for the purpose of obtaining information of a
person, but does not include collection of personal data under sections 7 and 8 of this
Act.
(2) All other expressions used herein shall have the meanings assigned to them
under the General Clauses Act, 1897 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as the case
may be.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
Principles
applicable to
protecting
privacy.
Right to
privacy.
Exemptions.
Effective
consent from
a data subject.
3. In exercising the powers conferred by this Act, regard shall be had to the following
considerations, namely: —
(a) that personal data with its attributes belongs solely to the person to whom it
pertains;
(b) that personal data is required by Governments and commercial service
providers and others to enable good governance and the delivery of goods and
provision of services without undue delay which may be provided by a meaningful,
revocable notice and consent framework;
(c) that the right to privacy is recognised as a fundamental human right by
various international treaties to which India is a party;
(d) that intrusions into privacy need always be measured by principles of necessity
and proportionality;
(e) that the right to privacy is a fundamental right essential to the maintenance of
a democratic society; and
(f) that privacy must be upheld by a competent authority that is independent,
impartial, well resourced and free from unwarranted influence.
CHAPTER II
R
IGHT TO PRIV ACY
4. (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained herein, all natural
persons shall have a right to privacy which shall be implemented subject to provisions of
section 3.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1) no person shall collect, store, process, disclose
or otherwise handle any personal data of a natural person, intercept any communication of
another person, or carry out surveillance of another person except in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
5. Nothing in this Act shall apply to—
(a) the collection, storage or processing by a person of their own personal data
for personal or family use; or
(b) surveillance by a resident of their own residential property.
CHAPTER III
P
ROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA
6. A data subject may be said to have given effective consent only when it is—
(1) free, in the terms of section 14 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872;
(2) obtained prior to all data collection, except in the cases expressly excluded by
section 8;
(3) voluntarily given through an express and affirmative act and is recorded in
writing:
Provided that effective consent shall only be said to have been obtained where:
(i) a conspicuous means for its withdrawal is made available to the data
subject; and
(ii) the means for its withdrawal may be employed with the same ease as
the means by which it was obtained.
(4) obtained after the data subject has been duly informed, in language that a
reasonable person may comprehend, of the matters enumerated in sub-section (3) of
section 7 or sub-section (3) of section 13 as the case may be, and:
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
Collection of
personal data.
Provided that, in case of any dispute, ambiguities in the terms of the notice
and of any privacy policies that apply will be resolved in favour of the data
subject;
(5) specific and limited as to the purpose and duration.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this section consent shall be deemed to be
limited only if it is obtained in respect of the purposes and duration strictly necessary to
provide the product or service in relation to which personal data is sought to be collected,
processed or disclosed;
Explanation 2.— When the purposes for which personal data was collected are
materially altered or expanded subsequent to its collection, consent shall be deemed to be
specific only if it is obtained afresh in respect of that alteration or expansion—
(i) after duly informing the data subject of the alteration or expansion in purpose,
and
(ii) prior to any use of that data for the expanded purposes.
7. (1) No person, including a data controller and data processor, shall collect any
personal data without obtaining the effective consent of the data subject to whom it pertains.
(2) Subject to sub-section ( 1), no person shall collect any personal data that is not
necessary for the achievement of a purpose that is connected to a stated function of the
person seeking its collection.
(3) A person seeking to collect any personal data shall, prior to its collection and as
notified by the Privacy Commission, inform the data subject free of any charges, direct or
indirect, to whom it pertains of the following details in respect of their personal data, namely—
(a) when it shall be collected;
(b) its content and nature;
(c) the purpose of its collection;
(d) the purpose and manner in which it shall be used;
(e) the persons to whom it shall be made available;
(f) the duration for which it shall be stored;
(g) the manner in which it may be accessed, checked and modified;
(h) the security practices and other safeguards, if any, to which it shall be
subject;
(i) the privacy policies and other policies, if any, that shall protect it;
(j) whether, and the conditions and procedure upon which, it may be disclosed
to others;
(k) the time and manner in which it shall be destroyed, or the criteria used to
determine that time period;
(l) the procedure for recourse in case of any grievance in relation to it; and
(m) the identity and contact details of the data collector and data processor.
(4) The personal data collected in pursuance of a grant of consent by the data subject
to whom it pertains shall, if that consent is subsequently withdrawn for any reason, be
destroyed forthwith:
Provided that the person who collected the personal data in respect of which
consent is subsequently withdrawn may, only if the personal data is necessary for the
delivery of any good or the provision of any service, or the fulfillment of a lawful
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
Collection of
personal data
without prior
consent.
Storage and
destruction of
personal data.
Processing of
personal data.
contract, not deliver that good or deny that service or fulfil that contract to the data
subject who withdrew the grant of consent easily and at any point during the duration
of a service.
8. Personal data may be collected without the prior consent of the data subject if it
is—
(a) necessary for the provision of an emergency medical service to the data subject;
(b) required for the establishment of the identity of the data subject and the collection
is authorised by a law in this regard; and
(c) necessary to prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence.
9. (1) No person, including a data controller and a data processor, shall  store any
personal data for a period longer than is necessary to achieve the purpose for which it was
collected or received, or, if that purpose is achieved or ceases to exist for any reason, for any
period following such achievement or cessation.
(2) Save as provided in sub-section ( 3), any personal data collected or received in
relation to the achievement of a purpose shall, if that purpose is achieved or ceases to exist
for any reason, be destroyed forthwith.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any personal data may be
stored for a period longer than is necessary to achieve the purpose for which it was collected
or received, or, if that purpose has been achieved or ceases to exist for any reason, for any
period following such achievement or cessation, if —
(a) the data subject to whom it pertains grants their effective consent to such
storage prior to the purpose for which it was collected or received being achieved or
ceasing to exist; or
(b) it is adduced for an evidentiary purpose in a legal proceeding; or
(c) it is required to be stored for historical, statistical or research purposes under
the provisions of an Act of Parliament:
Provided that only such amount of personal data that is necessary to
achieve the purpose of storage under this sub-section shall be stored and any
personal data that is not required to be stored for such purpose shall be destroyed
forthwith:
Provided further that any personal data stored under this sub-section
shall, to the extent possible, be anonymised.
10. (1) No person shall process any personal data that is not necessary for the
achievement of the purpose for which it was collected or received.
(2) Save as provided in sub-section ( 3), no personal data shall be processed for any
purpose other than the purpose for which it was collected or received.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any personal data may be
processed for a purpose other than the purpose for which it was collected or received if the
data subject grants their effective consent to such processing and only that amount of
personal data that is necessary to achieve the other purpose is processed.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any personal data may be
processed for a purpose other than the purpose for which it was collected or received if —
(a) the data subject grants his/her effective consent to the processing and only
that amount of personal data that is necessary to achieve the other purpose is
processed;
(b) it is necessary to perform a contractual duty to the data subject;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
Security of
personal data
and duty of
confidentiality.
Transfer of
personal data
for processing.
Disclosure of
personal data.
(c) it is necessary to prevent a reasonable threat to security of the State or public
order; or
(d) it is necessary to prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence.
11. (1) No person shall collect, receive, store, process or otherwise handle any personal
data without implementing measures, including, but not restricted to, technological, physical
and administrative measures, adequate to secure its confidentiality, secrecy, integrity and
safety, including from theft, loss, damage or destruction.
(2) Any person who collects, receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any
personal data shall be subject to a duty of confidentiality and secrecy in respect of it.
(3) The data controllers and data processors shall be subject to a duty of confidentiality
and secrecy in respect of personal data in their possession or control.
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of this section, any person who collects,
receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any personal data shall, if its confidentiality,
secrecy, integrity or safety is violated by theft, loss, negligence, damage or destruction, or as
a result of any collection, processing or disclosure contrary to the provisions of this Act, or
for any other reason whatsoever, as soon as he or she becomes aware of such violation,
notify the person to whom it pertains, the Privacy Commission and any other agencies whom
the Central Government notifies for this purpose, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed, forthwith. Further, any persons, who collects, receives, stores, processes, or
otherwise handles any personal data shall report all breaches of provisions of this Chapter III
to the Privacy Commission, that are brought to its notice, or are reasonably expected to be
known to such persons.
12. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, personal data that has been collected
in conformity with this Act may be transferred by a data controller for to a data processor,
whether located in India or otherwise, if the transfer is pursuant to an agreement that explicitly
binds the data processor to same or stronger measures in respect of the storage, processing,
destruction, disclosure and other handling of the personal data as are contained in this Act.
(2) No data processor shall process any personal data transferred under this section
except to achieve the purpose for which it was collected.
(3) A data controller that transfers personal data under this section shall remain liable
to the data subject for the actions of the data processor.
13. (1) Save as provided in this section, no person shall disclose, or otherwise cause
any other person to receive, the content or nature of any personal data, including any other
details in respect thereof, except to the person to whom it pertains.
(2) No person shall disclose any personal data without obtaining the prior effective
consent of the data subject and such effective consent may be obtained in any manner, and
through any medium, but shall not be obtained as a result of a threat, duress, denial of
service or coercion.
(3) For the purpose of sub-section (2), a person seeking to disclose any personal data
shall, prior to its disclosure, inform the data subject of the following details in respect of their
personal data, namely: —
(a) when it shall be disclosed;
(b) the purpose of its disclosure;
(c) the security practices and other safeguards, if any, to which it shall be subject
to;
(d) the privacy policies and other policies, if any, that shall protect it; and
(e) the procedure for recourse in case of any grievance in relation to it.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
Quality and
accuracy of
personal data.
Special
provisions for
sensitive
personal data.
Special
provisions for
intelligence
organisations.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any person who collects,
receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any personal data may disclose it to a
person other than the data subject, whether located in India or otherwise, for the purpose
only of processing it to achieve the purpose for which it was collected if such a disclosure is
pursuant to an agreement that explicitly binds the person receiving it to same or stronger
measures in respect of its storage, processing, destruction, disclosure or other handling as
are contained in this Act.
14. (1) Any person who collects, receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any
personal data shall, to the extent possible, ensure that it is accurate and, where necessary, is
kept up to date.
(2) No person who collects, receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any
personal data shall deny, to the data subject, the opportunity to review and obtain a copy of
such data and, where necessary, rectify anything that is inaccurate or not up to date.
(3) Any person to whom any personal data collected, received, stored, processed or
otherwise handled under this Act pertains may, if it is not necessary to achieve the purpose
of its collection, reception, storage, processing or other handling, demand its destruction,
and the person so collecting, receiving, storing, processing or otherwise handling that
personal data shall destroy it forthwith.
15. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the provisions of any other
law for the time being in force—
(a) no person shall collect sensitive personal data without explicit effective
consent from the data subject;
(b) no person shall store sensitive personal data for a period longer than is
necessary to achieve the purpose for which it was collected or received, or, if that
purpose has been achieved or ceases to exist for any reason, for any period following
such achievement or cessation;
(c) no person shall process sensitive personal data for a purpose other than the
purpose for which it was collected or received; and
(d) no person shall disclose sensitive personal data to another person, or
otherwise cause any other person to come into the knowledge or possession of, the
content or nature of any sensitive personal data, including any other details in respect
thereof, except the data subject.
16. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of sections 6,
7, 8, sub-section (4) of section 10 and section 11 shall not apply in respect of an intelligence
organisation.
(2) Any intelligence organisation seeking to collect any personal data shall prefer an
application, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, to the Chief Privacy Commissioner
or any other person authorised by him in this behalf.
(3) The Chief Privacy Commissioner, or any other person authorised by him in this
behalf, may, if he is satisfied that the collection of the personal data is necessary to prevent
a reasonable threat to security of the state or public order, or prevent, investigate or prosecute
a cognisable offence, order the collection of the personal data by recording reasons in
writing within a period of fourteen days from the receipt of an application under sub-section
(2).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) and subsection (3), if the
Central Government is satisfied that a serious threat to the security of the State or public
order exists, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, which shall include the reason for
not getting an order under sub-section (3), order the collection of any personal data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
Bar against
interception
of
communications.
Prior
authorisation
by the Chief
Privacy
Commissioner.
Authorisation
by Home
Secretary in
emergent
circumstances.
(5) Before the expiry of a period of seven days from the date of an order for collection
of personal data made under sub-section (4), the intelligence organisation that collected the
personal data shall notify the Chief Privacy Commissioner of the fact of such collection, the
name and address of the person to whom the personal data pertains and shall furnish a copy
of the order of the Central Government authorising the collection of the personal data.
(6) No intelligence organisation shall process or store any personal data without
implementing measures to secure that the number of persons within that intelligence
organisation to whom it is made available, and the extent to which it is copied, is limited to the
minimum that is necessary to fulfill the purpose for which it is processed or stored, as the
case may be.
(7) Any intelligence organisation that processes or stores personal data shall, before
the expiry of a period of seven days from the date of the processing or storage, as the case
may be, notify the Chief Privacy Commissioner of the fact of such processing or storage and
the name and address of the person to whom the personal data pertains.
(8) Any intelligence organisation that processes or stores personal data shall have to
comply with the provisions of section 10 with respect to such data.
CHAPTER IV
I
NTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but save as provided in this chapter, no person shall intercept, or cause to be intercepted,
any communication of another person save in pursuance of an order by the Chief Privacy
Commissioner or any other person authorised by him in this behalf.
(2) No interception of any communication shall be ordered or carried out that is not
necessary to achieve the purpose for which the interception is sought.
18. (1) Any authorised officer seeking to intercept any communication of another
person shall prefer an application, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, to the
Chief Privacy Commissioner or any other person authorised by him in this behalf.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner, or any other person authorised by him in this
behalf, may, if he is satisfied that the interception is necessary to prevent a reasonable threat
to security of the state or public order, or prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable
offence, order the interception of communications by recording reasons in writing within a
period of fourteen days from the receipt of an application under sub-section (1).
(3) The Chief Privacy Commissioner, or any other person authorised by him in this
behalf, shall prior to issuing an order for interception of any communication, satisfy himself
that all other lawful means to acquire the information sought to be intercepted have been
exhausted and that the proposed interception is reasonable, proportionate and not excessive.
(4) Any interception of any communication ordered, authorised or carried out prior to
the commencement of this Act shall, immediately upon the constitution of the Privacy
Commission, be reported to the Chief Privacy Commissioner.
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, if the Home Secretary of the
appropriate government is satisfied that an imminent serious threat to the security of the
State or public order exists, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, order the interception
of any communication.
(2) No order for interception of any communication made under this section shall be
valid upon the expiry of a period of seven days from the date of the order.
(3) Before the expiry of a period of seven days from the date of an order for interception
made under this section, the person who carried out the interception of communication shall
notify the Chief Privacy Commissioner of the fact of such interception, the name and address
of the person whose communication is being intercepted, and the duration of the interception
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
Duration of
interception.
Duty to
inform the
person
concerned.
Security and
duty of
confidentiality
and secrecy.
Disclosure of
intercepted
communications.
and, furthermore, shall furnish a copy of the order of the Home Secretary authorising the
interception.
20. (1) An order for interception of any communication shall specify the period of its
validity and, upon the expiry of the validity of the order, all interception carried out in relation
to that order shall cease forthwith:
Provided that no order for interception of any communication shall be valid
upon the expiry of a period of sixty days from the date of such order.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner, or any other person authorised by him in this
behalf, may, upon receipt of an application from an authorised officer in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, renew any order for interception of any communication if he is
satisfied that the conditions upon which the original order was issued continue to exist.
21. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), before the expiry of a period of sixty days from the
conclusion of any interception of communication ordered or  carried out under this Act, the
authorised officer who carried out the interception of communication shall, in writing in such
form and manner as may be prescribed, notify, with reference to the relevant order of the
Chief Privacy Commissioner, each person whose communication was intercepted of the fact
of such interception and duration thereof.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner may, on an application made by an authorised
officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed, if he is satisfied that the notification
under sub-section (1) may reasonably present a reasonable threat to the security of the state
or public order, or adversely affect the prevention, investigation or prosecution of a cognisable
offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing addressed to the authorised officer, order that
the person whose communication was intercepted not be notified of the fact of such
interception or the duration thereof:
Provided any orders passed preventing disclosure of interception under section
(2) shall not operate in infinity and shall record reasons in writing with the period till
when the reasonable threat is anticipated to extend, on whose cessation the duty to
inform under sub-section (1) shall operate.
22. (1) No person shall intercept any communication of another person without
implementing measures, including, but not restricted to, technological, physical and
administrative measures, to secure the confidentiality and secrecy of all information obtained
as a result of an interception of communication, including from theft, negligence, loss or
unauthorised disclosure.
(2) Any person who carries out any interception of any communication, or who obtains
any information, including personal data, as a result of an interception of communication,
shall be subject to a duty of confidentiality and secrecy in respect of it.
(3) Every competent organisation shall, before the expiry of a period of one hundred
days from the date of enactment of this Act, designate as many officers as it deems fit as
Privacy Officers who shall be administratively responsible for administration of all
interceptions of communications carried out by that competent organisation.
23. (1) Save as provided in this section, no person shall disclose to any other person,
or otherwise cause any other person to come into the knowledge or possession of, the
content or nature of any information, including personal data, obtained as a result of an
interception of any communication including the fact that the interception of communication
was carried out.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the disclosure of any
information, including personal data, obtained as a result of an interception of any
communication is necessary to prevent a reasonable threat to the security of the state or
public order, or prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence, an authorised
officer may disclose the information, including personal data, obtained as a result of the
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

12
Storage of
intercepted
communications.
Bar against
surveillance.
Surveillance
by the State.
interception of any communication to any authorised officer of any other competent
organization:
Provided that no authorised officer shall disclose any information, including
personal data, obtained as a result of the interception of any communication that is not
necessary to achieve the purpose for which the disclosure is sought.
24. (1) Subject to sub-section ( 2), no person shall store any information, including
personal data, obtained as a result of an interception of any communication for a period
longer than one hundred and eighty days from the date on which the last order for interception
of the communication to which the obtained information pertains expired.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner may, on an application made in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, if he is satisfied that it is necessary to prevent a reasonable
threat to the security of the state or public order, or to prevent, investigate or prosecute a
cognizable offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing, order that any information, including
personal data, obtained as a result of an interception of any communication may be stored
for a period longer than one hundred and eighty days from the date on which the last order
for interception of the communication to which the obtained information pertains expired.
(3) Any data obtained as a result of interception of any communication shall be stored
in a manner that complies with the provisions of section 9 with respect to such data.
CHAPTER V
S
URVEILLANCE
25. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
but save as provided in this chapter, no person shall order or carry out, or cause or assist the
ordering or carrying out of, any surveillance of another person:
Provided that there shall be an absolute bar to the subjection of persons to
indiscriminate monitoring through any methods of mass or bulk surveillance given
that it is neither necessary or proportionate to any stated purpose including but not
limited to the security of state, interests of public order or to prevent, investigate or
prosecute a commission of a cognizable offence.
26. (1) No member of a police force, armed force, intelligence organisation, public
authority or the State shall order or carry out, or cause to be ordered or carried out, any
surveillance of another person save in pursuance of an order by the Chief Privacy
Commissioner or any other person authorised by him in this behalf.
(2) No surveillance shall be ordered or carried out that is not necessary to achieve the
purpose for which the surveillance is sought.
(3) Any authorised officer seeking to carry out any surveillance of another person
shall prefer an application, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, to the Chief
Privacy Commissioner or any other person authorised by him in this behalf.
(4) The Chief Privacy Commissioner, or any other person authorised by him this behalf,
may, if he is satisfied that the surveillance is necessary to prevent a reasonable threat to the
security of the state or public order, or to prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognizable
offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing addressed to the authorised officer, order the
surveillance.
(5) Prior to issuing an order for surveillance, the Chief Privacy Commissioner, or any
other person authorised by him in this behalf, shall satisfy himself that all other lawful means
to acquire the information sought to be obtained as a result of the proposed surveillance
have been exhausted and that the proposed surveillance is reasonable, proportionate and
not excessive.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
Surveillance
by private
persons or
entities.
Duration of
surveillance.
Duty to
inform the
person
concerned.
Security and
duty of
confidentiality
and secrecy.
27. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, and without prejudice to the provisions of section 25, no person who is not a member
of a police force, armed force, intelligence organisation, public authority or the State shall
carry out, or cause to be carried out, any surveillance in any public place or in any property
or premises that is not in his possession.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), any person who carries out any surveillance
under this section shall be subject to a duty to inform, in such manner as may be prescribed,
members of the public of such surveillance.
28. (1) An order for surveillance shall specify the period of its validity and,  upon the
expiry of the validity of the order, all surveillance carried out in relation to that order shall
cease forthwith:
Provided that no order for surveillance shall be valid upon the expiry of a period
of sixty days from the date of the order.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner, or any other person authorised by him in this
behalf, may, upon receipt of an application from an authorised officer in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, renew any order for surveillance if he is satisfied that the
conditions upon which the original order was issued continue to exist.
29. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), before the expiry of a period of sixty days from the
conclusion of any surveillance ordered or carried out under this Act, the authorised officer
who carried out the surveillance shall, in writing in such form and manner as may be prescribed,
notify, with reference to the relevant order of the Chief Privacy Commissioner, each person in
respect of whom surveillance was carried out of the fact of such surveillance and duration
thereof.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner may, on an application made by an authorised
officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed, if he is satisfied that the notification
under sub-section (1) may present a reasonable threat to the security of the State or public
order, or adversely affect the prevention, investigation or prosecution of a cognizable offence,
for reasons to be recorded in writing addressed to the authorised officer, order that the
person not be notified of the fact of such surveillance or the duration thereof:
Provided that any order passed which prevent disclosure of surveillance under
Sub-section (2) shall not operate in infinity and the Chief Privacy Commissioner shall
record reasons in writing with the period till when the reasonable threat is anticipated
to extend, on whose cessation the duty to inform under sub-section (1) shall operate.
30. (1) No person shall carry out any surveillance of another person without
implementing measures, including, but not restricted to, technological, physical and
administrative measures, to secure the confidentiality and secrecy of all information obtained
as a result of surveillance, including from theft, loss or unauthorised disclosure.
(2) Any person who carries out any surveillance, or who obtains any information,
including personal data, as a result of surveillance, shall be subject to a duty of confidentiality
and secrecy in respect of it.
(3) Every police force, armed force, intelligence organisation, public authority or State
shall, before the expiry of a period of one hundred days from the enactment of this Act,
designate as many officers as it deems fit as Privacy Officers who shall be administratively
responsible for all surveillance carried out:
Provided that a public authority that does not order or carry out surveillance
shall not be required to designate any Privacy Officers under this sub-section.
(4) Every person who is not a member of a police force, armed force, intelligence
organisation, public authority or State and who seeks to carry out any surveillance shall, at
least seven days before the surveillance is first carried out, designate or appoint as many
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
Disclosure of
surveillance.
Storage of
surveillance
data.
Constitution
of the Privacy
Commission.
persons as it deems fit as Privacy Officers who shall be responsible for all surveillance
carried out:
Provided that where surveillance is carried out by a single person, that person
shall be deemed to be a Privacy Officer.
31. (1) Save as provided in this section, no person shall disclose to any other person,
or otherwise cause any other person to come into the knowledge or possession of, the
content or nature of any information, including personal data, obtained as a result of any
surveillance including the fact that the surveillance was carried out.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the disclosure of any
information, including personal data, obtained as a result of surveillance is necessary to
prevent a reasonable threat to the security of the State or public order, or prevent, investigate
or prosecute a cognizable offence, that information, including personal data, obtained as a
result of surveillance may be disclosed to a police force, armed force, intelligence organisation,
public authority or State only:
Provided that no person shall disclose any information, including personal data,
obtained as a result of surveillance that is not necessary to achieve the purpose for
which the disclosure is sought.
32. (1) Subject to sub-section ( 2), no person shall store any information, including
personal data, obtained as a result of surveillance for a period longer than one hundred and
eighty days from the date on which the surveillance to which the obtained information
pertains ceased.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner may, on an application made in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, if he is satisfied that it is necessary to prevent a reasonable
threat to the security of the state or public order, or to prevent, investigate or prosecute a
cognizable offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing, order that any information, including
personal data, obtained as a result of surveillance may be stored for a period longer than one
hundred and eighty days from the date on which the last order for surveillance to which the
obtained information pertains expired.
(3) Any data obtained as a result of surveillance shall be stored in a manner that
complies with the provisions of section 9 with respect to such data.
CHAPTER VI
T
HE PRIV ACY COMMISSION
33. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute, with effect from
such date as may be specified therein, a body to be called the Privacy Commission consisting
of a Chief Privacy Commissioner and not more than six other Privacy Commissioners, to be
appointed by the President, by warrant under its hand and seal, to exercise the jurisdiction
and powers and discharge the functions and duties conferred or imposed upon them by or
under this Act.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner shall be a person who has been a Judge of the
Supreme Court of India.
(3) One Privacy Commissioner shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of a High
Court.
(4) One Privacy Commissioner shall be a person of ability, integrity and standing who
has a special knowledge of, and professional experience of not less than ten years in privacy
law and policy.
(5) The other Privacy Commissioners shall be persons with technical expertise and
knowledge in the fields of data collection and storage practices, or data protection and
ethics, or big data analytics and technologies or information technology while one Privacy
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
Term of
office,
conditions of
service, etc. of
Chief Privacy
Commissioner
and Privacy
Commissioners.
Commissioner should be an ordinary citizen representing the interests of the public who
are consumers of data.
(6) The headquarters of the Privacy Commission shall be at New Delhi:
Provided that the Central Government shall, in consultation with the Chief
Privacy Commissioners may establish its offices at such other places at it deems fit.
(7) The office of the Privacy Commission shall be a body corporate by the name of
aforesaid, autonomous, independent, and free from external interference and shall be the
said name, sue or be sued.
(8)The office of the Privacy Commission shall be provided with sufficient operational
resources including human, technical, and financial for the effective discharge of its duties
and exercise of its powers:
Provided that such powers shall be subject to audit by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.
(9) The Central Government shall issue a public advertisement inviting applications to
fill all vacancies in the Privacy Commission.
(10) For the purpose of filling vacancies under sub-section (8) the Privacy
Commissioner shall constitute a selection committee which shall consist of the Chief
Justice of India, the Law Minister, the Leader of the Opposition from the House of the
People or of the single largest Opposition party being one with the greatest numerical
strength in the House of the People, one eminent person representing the private sector
and one eminent person representing the civil society to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(11) Every proceeding of the selection committee shall constitute as a public record.
Explanation. For the purpose of this section, the term “Civil society” shall mean
the aggregate of non-Governmental and non-profit organisations that perform activities
for the general upliftment and interests of the people in the field of privacy and is
independent of government funding, interference or influence.
34. ( 1) The President shall before appointing any person as the Chief Privacy
Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner, as the case may be, satisfy himself that the person
does not, and shall not, have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially their functions as such Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner
as the case may be.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner and every Privacy Commissioner shall hold office
for such period, not exceeding five years, as may be specified by the President in the order of
his appointment and be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chief Privacy Commissioner or
Privacy Commissioner for more than two terms;
Provided further that no person shall hold office as the Chief Privacy
Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner after they have attained the age of seventy-
five years.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Chief Privacy
Commissioner or any Privacy Commissioner may—
(a) by writing under his hand and addressed to the President resign his office at
any time; or
(b) be removed from office in accordance with the provisions of section 35.
(4) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal of the Chief Privacy Commissioner
or Privacy Commissioner under sub-section (3) shall be filled by fresh appointment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
Removal of
Chief Privacy
Commissioner
and Privacy
Commissioners
from office in
certain
circumstances.
Functions of
the Privacy
Commission.
(5) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the Chief Privacy
Commissioner, the President may, by notification, authorise in his behalf, one of the Privacy
Commissioners as the Chief Privacy Commissioner till the date on which a new Chief Privacy
Commissioner, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act, enters upon his
office.
(6) When the Chief Privacy Commissioner is unable to discharge his functions owing
to absence, illness or any other cause, such one of the Privacy Commissioners as the Chief
Privacy Commissioner may authorise in writing in this behalf shall discharge the functions of
the Chief Privacy Commissioner, till the date on which the Chief Privacy Commissioner
resumes his duties.
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief  Privacy Commissioner and Privacy Commissioners shall be such as
may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions
of service of the Chief Privacy Commissioner and any Privacy Commissioner shall be
varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
(8) The Chief Privacy Commissioner and Privacy Commissioners ceasing to hold office
as such shall not hold any appointment under the Government of India or under the Government
of any State for a period of five years from the date on which they cease to hold such office.
35. (1) The President may remove from office the Chief Privacy Commissioner or any
Privacy Commissioner, who —
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties
of his office; or
(c) is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(e) is convicted for an offence which in the opinion of the President involves
moral turpitude; or
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner, or cause
some conflict of interest including benefits directly or indirectly to relatives or family
members, or
(g) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in offence prejudicial
to the public interest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), neither the Chief Privacy
Commissioner nor any Privacy Commissioner shall be removed from his office on the
ground specified in clause ( f) or clause (g) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court
on a reference being made to it in this behalf by the President, has on an inquiry held by
it in accordance with such procedure as it may specify in this behalf, reported that the
Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner ought, on such grounds, to be
removed.
36. (1) The Privacy Commission may, through decisions arrived at by a simple majority
of its members present and voting as set out in Section 44(1) of this Act, authorise, review,
investigate, make an inquiry, and/or  monitor, suo moto or on a petition presented to it by any
person or by someone acting on his behalf, the implementation and application of this Act
and give such directions or pass such orders as are necessary for reasons to be recorded in
writing.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Privacy
Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely—
(a) review the safeguards provided under this Act and under other laws for the
time being in force for the protection of personal data and recommend measures for
their effective implementation or amendment, as may be necessary from time to time;
(b) authorise, review, investigate, make an inquiry, and/or monitor any measures
taken by any competent organisation, police force, armed force, intelligence
organisation, public authority, company, person or other entity for the protection of
privacy and take such further action is it deems fit;
(c) authorise, review, investigate, make an inquiry, and/or monitor any action,
code, certification, policy or procedure of any competent organisation, police force,
armed force, intelligence organisation, public authority , company, person or other
entity to ensure compliance with this Act and any rules made hereunder;
(d) Investigate and direct data controllers and processors to do or cease to do
any act in order to address activity which is in contravention of the provisions of this
Act;
(e) formulate through public consultation with experts, other stakeholders, and
the general public, norms for the effective protection of privacy by competent
organisations, police forces, armed forces, intelligence organisations, public authorities,
companies, persons or other entities;
(f) promote awareness and knowledge of personal data protection through any
means necessary and to all stakeholders including providing information to any data
subject regarding their rights under this Act as requested ;
(g) undertake and promote research in the field of protection of personal data
and privacy;
(h) encourage the efforts of non-governmental organisations and institutions
working in the field of personal data protection and privacy;
(i) publish periodic reports concerning the incidence of compliance including
violations of this Act and data breaches as reported under sub-section (4) of  section 11
of this Act, collection, processing, storage, disclosure and other handling of personal
data, interception of communications and surveillance;
(j) hear and decide applications for interception and surveillance under Chapters
IV and V of this Act;
(k) exercise its powers under section 28, to ensure the speedy and efficient
redressal of all complaints whose cause of action arises from this Act; and
(l) such other functions as it may consider necessary for the protection of
privacy, personal data, and enforcement of this Act.
(3) The Periodic Reports published by the Privacy Commission, stipulated in sub-
section (2) of section 36, shall be tabled by the Central Government before the House of the
People during the Parliamentary Session that succeeds the publication of such Periodic
Report.
(4) The Chief Privacy Commissioner and the Privacy Commissioners shall appear
before an ad hoc Committee, constituted by the Speaker of the House of the People and
comprising of members from both the governing and the opposition parties from both
houses of Parliament to be nominated by presiding officers of the House concerned, on an
annual basis, in such manner as may be prescribed which shall,—
(i) review the functioning of the Privacy Commission, and may ask the Chief
Privacy Commissioner and the Privacy Commissioners any questions in this regard;
and
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
Secretary,
officers and
other
employees of
the Privacy
Commission.
Vacancies, etc.
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
the Privacy
Commission.
Chief Privacy
Commissioner,
Privacy
Commissioners
and employees
of the Privacy
Commission
to be public
servants.
Procedure to
be followed by
the Privacy
Commission.
Power relating
to inquiries.
(ii) present periodic reports to both houses of Parliament in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(5) Subject to the provisions of any rules prescribed in this behalf by the Central
Government, the Privacy Commission shall have the power to review any decision, judgement,
decree or order made by it.
(6) In the exercise of its functions under this Act, the Privacy Commission shall give
such directions or pass such orders as are necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.
37. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Privacy Commission
to exercise and perform, under the control of the Chief Privacy Commissioner such powers
and duties as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may provide the Privacy Commission with such other
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions
of the Privacy Commission.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the conditions of service of the Secretary
and other officers and employees of the Privacy Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
38. No act or proceedings of the Privacy Commission shall be questioned on the
ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Privacy
Commission or any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chief Privacy
Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner.
39. The Chief Privacy Commissioner and Privacy Commissioners and other employees
of the Privacy Commission shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
40. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Privacy Commission shall have
powers to regulate —
(a) the procedure and conduct of its business; and
(b) the delegation to one or more Privacy Commissioners of such powers or
functions as the Chief Privacy Commissioner may specify.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the powers of the Privacy Commission shall include the power to determine the extent to
which persons interested or claiming to be interested in the subject-matter of any proceeding
before it may be allowed to be present or to be heard, either by themselves or by their
representatives or to cross-examine witnesses or otherwise take part in the proceedings:
Provided that any such procedure as may be prescribed or followed shall be
guided by the principles of natural justice.
41. (1) The Privacy Commission shall, for the purposes of any inquiry or for any other
purpose under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying suits in respect of the following matters, namely—
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object
producible as evidence;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
Decisions of
the Privacy
Commission.
Proceedings
before the
Privacy
Commission
to be judicial
proceedings.
Appeal.
Jurisdiction.
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavit;
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office;
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The Privacy Commission shall have power to require any person, subject to any
privilege which may be claimed by that person under any law for the time being in force, to
furnish information on such points or matters as, in the opinion of the Privacy Commission,
may be useful for, or relevant to, the subject matter of an inquiry and any person so required
shall be deemed to be legally bound to furnish such information within the meaning of
sections 176 and 177 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(3) The Privacy Commission or any Gazetted Officer, specially authorised in this behalf
by the Privacy Commission may enter any building or place where the Privacy Commission
has reason to believe that any document relating to the subject matter of the inquiry may be
found, and may seize any such document or take extracts or copies therefrom subject to the
provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in so far as it may be
applicable.
(4) The Privacy Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court and when any offence
as is described in section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 is committed in the view or presence of the Privacy Commission, the
Privacy Commission may, after recording the facts constituting the offence and the statement
of the accused as provided for in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, forward the case to
a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and the Magistrate to whom any such case
is forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the accused as if the case had been
forwarded to him under section 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
42. (1) The decisions of the Privacy Commission shall be taken by majority of the
member present and voting and be binding and enforceable as a decree of a court as per the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) In its decisions, the Privacy Commission shall have the power to—
(a) require a competent organisation, police force, armed force, intelligence
organisation, public authority, company, person or other entity to take such steps as
may be necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of this Act;
(b) require a competent organisation, police force, armed force, intelligence
organisation,public authority, company, person or other entity to compensate any
person for any loss or detriment suffered; and
(c) impose any of the penalties provided under this Act.
43. The Privacy Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and every proceeding
before the Privacy Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning
of section 193 and section 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860.
44. No order passed under this Act shall be appealable except as provided therein and
no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Privacy Commission
is empowered by, or under, this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Act
45. On and from the appointed day, no court or authority shall have, or be entitled to
exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority, except the Supreme Court and a High Court
exercising powers under articles 32, 226 and 227 of the Constitution, in relation to matters
over which the Privacy Commission has jurisdiction.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
Co-regulation
by Data
Controllers
and the
Privacy
Commission.
Self-regulation
by data
controllers.
Co-regulation
and Self-
regulation
without
prejudice to
other
remedies.
Punishment
for offences
related to
personal data.
Punishment
for offences
related to
interception
of
communication.
Punishment
for offences
related to
surveillance.
CHAPTER VII
REGULATION BY DATA CONTROLLERS AND DATA PROCESSORS
46. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section
36, the Privacy Commission may, after a public consultation, formulate codes of conduct for
the collection, storage, processing, disclosure or other handling of any personal data.
(2) No code of conduct formulated under sub-section (1) shall be binding on a data
controller unless—
(a) it has received the written approval of the Chief Privacy Commissioner and at
least two Privacy Commissioners; and
(b) it has received the approval, by signature of a director or  authorised signatory,
of the data controller.
47. (1) The Privacy Commission may encourage data controllers and data processors
to formulate professional codes of conduct to establish rules for the collection, storage,
processing, disclosure or other handling of any personal data.
(2) No code of conduct formulated under sub-section (1) shall be effective unless it is
registered, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, by the Privacy Commission.
(3) The Privacy Commission shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, not register
any code of conduct formulated under sub-section (1) that is not adequate to protect personal
data.
48. Any code of conduct formulated under this chapter shall be without prejudice to
the jurisdiction, powers and functions of the Privacy Commission.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
49. (1) Whoever, except in conformity with the provisions of this Act,  collects, receives,
stores, processes, discloses or otherwise handles any personal data shall be liable to fine
which may extend to one crore rupees:
Provided that if the person commits the offence either intentionally, or with
reckless disregard, he shall be liable for a term of imprisonment which may extend upto
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, except in conformity with the provisions of this Act, collects, receives,
stores, processes, discloses or otherwise handles any sensitive personal data shall be liable
to fine which may extend upto ten crore rupees:
Provided that if the person committs the offence either intentionally, or with
reckless disregard, he shall be liable for a term of imprisonment which may extend upto
five years and shall also be liable to fine.
50. Whoever, except in conformity with the provisions of this Act, intercepts, or
causes the interception of, any communication of another person shall be liable to a fine
which may extend upto one crore rupees:
Provided that if the person commits the offence either intentionally, or with
reckless disregard, he shall be liable for a term of imprisonment extending upto three
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
51. Whoever, except in conformity with the provisions of this Act, orders or carries
out, or causes the ordering or carrying out, of any surveillance of another person shall be
liable to a fine which may extend to ten crore rupees:
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

21
Abetment and
repeat
offenders.
Offences by
companies.
Cognizance.
General
penalty.
Punishment to
be without
prejudice to
any other
action.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Provided that if the person commits the offence either intentionally, or with
reckless disregard, shall be liable for a term of imprisonment extending upto five years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
52. Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall, if the act abetted is
committed in consequence of the abetment, be punishable with the punishment provided for
that offence.
53. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time of the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence, and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
54. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
offences under this chapter shall be treated as cognizable and non-bailable.
55. Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this Act, fails
to comply with any notice or order issued under any provisions thereof, including an order
of the Chief Privacy Commissioner or otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this
Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one crore rupees, and, in the case of
a continuing failure or contravention, with an additional fine which may extend upto ten lakh
rupees for every day after the first during which he has persisted in such failure or
contravention.
56. The award of punishment for an offence under this Act shall be without prejudice
to any other action which has been or which may be taken under this Act with respect to
such contravention.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
57. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, State
Government, Privacy Commission, Chief Privacy Commissioner, Privacy Commissioner or
any person acting under the direction either of the Central Government, State Government,
Privacy Commission, Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of
any rules or any order made thereunder.
58. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
a period of three years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of  Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
Overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
59. Subject to the provisions of the Schedule to this Act, the provisions of this Act
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other
law for the time being in force.
60. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official  Gazette, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for—
(a) the notification of theft, loss or damage under sub-section (4) of section 11;
(b) the notification of disclosure under sub-section (4) of section 13;
(c) the application by an intelligence organisation under sub-section (2) of section
15;
(d) the application to intercept a communication under sub-section ( 1) of
section 18;
(e) the application to renew an interception of communication under
sub-section (2) of section 20;
(f) the notification of an interception of communication under sub-section (1) of
section 21;
(g) the application to not inform under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(h) the application to store information obtained as a result of any interception
of communication under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(i) the application to carry out surveillance under sub-section (3) of section 26;
(j) notification to the general public under sub-section (2) of section 27;
(k) the application to renew surveillance under sub-section (2) of section 28;
(l) the notification of surveillance under sub-section (1) of section 29;
(m) the application to not inform under sub-section (2) of section 29;
(n) the application to store information obtained as a result of surveillance under
sub-section (2) of section 32;
(o) salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief
Privacy Commissioner, Privacy Commissioners, Secretaries and other members, staff
and employees of the Privacy Commission;
(p) procedure to be followed by the Privacy Commission;
(q
) powers and duties of Secretaries, officers and other employees of the Privacy
Commission;
(r) the effective implementation of this Act.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule shuold not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such mofidied form or be of no effect, as the case
may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

THE SCHEDULE
1. Statutes, provisions whereof, shall have to comply with the requirements of this
Act—
(a) Sections 43A, 69, 69B, 72 and 72A of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
(b) Sections 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and 33 of the AADHAAR (Targeted Delivery of
Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.
(c) Section 5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885.
(d) Section 21 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
(e) The Census Act, 1948.
2. Statutes, provisions whereof shall not be required to comply with the provisions of
this Act—
(a) The Representation of the People Act, 1951.
(b) The Right to Information Act, 2005.
23

24
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is at the threshold of a new technological revolution, marrying welfare
with programmes of digitization for the quick and effective delivery of government services
and benefits from various schemes. For this process, ranging from electronic banking to the
transfer of subsidies, vast amounts of data are collected from our citizens, the integrity of
which must be protected. This data can be used for seemingly innocuous purposes such as
targeted advertising but also for provision of essential services such as ration, credit,
insurance, and more, while unprotected and in the wrong hands, it could also cause damage
to the interests of the individual.
Beyond its commercial exploitation there is also an inherent equation of power when a
person or entity possesses data and information concerning another individual or groups of
individuals. Today, most such interactions are unregulated and put the users of internet and
technological services at risk, and this risk will only grow with more and more digitization and
as technological involvement in the delivery of services to citizens develops.
Many concerns arise from the absence of a comprehensive data protection and privacy
statute which provides rights to individuals in a data governed world. This has been
recognized by past efforts of the Government of India notably by the Report of the Group of
Experts on Privacy chaired by Justice A.P. Shah, Former Chief Justice, Delhi High Court.
Drawing on the recommendations of this expert group, global best practices and also the
unique factors that exist locally, this Data Privacy And Protection Bill aims to provide a
comprehensive law to protect privacy and data collected from our citizens.
This bill puts a person in control of his/her own data and further permits them to make
an informed choice concerning its use. The Bill further provides an industry friendly model
of co-regulation that aims to foster a higher degree of certainty for the private sector. The
concerns of government are also sought to be addressed with a balanced provision for
interception and access, making special provisions to safeguard the security of the State.
The aims and objectives of the bill are sought to be implemented by an autonomous privacy
commission.
The Data Privacy and Protection Bill, 2017 aims to protect and promote our constitutional
ideals in a networked, increasingly digitized society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
July 2, 2017

25
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 33 of this Bill provides for establishment of the Privacy Commission. It also
provides for appointment of a Select Committee to fill vacancies in the Privacy Commission.
Clause 34 provides for salaries and allowances payable to the Chief Privacy Commissioner
and allowances or remuneration payable to the Privacy Commissioners. Clause 36 provides
for constitution of an adhoc Committee to serve the functions of the Privacy Commission.
Clause 37 provides for the appointment of a secretary, officers and other employees of the
Privacy Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees six
hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred and twenty five crore is also
likely to be involved.

26
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 60 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish an effective regime to protect the right to privacy of data all natural person;
to set out conditions of surveillance and interception of communications of natural
persons; and to constitute a Privacy Commission and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1121LS(S3)—28.07.2017.