Short title and
commencement.
THE HANDLOOM WEAVERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2016
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of and welfare measures for handloom weavers and workers
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Handloom Weavers (Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 161 of 2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Definitions.
2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the National Handloom Weavers Welfare Authority
constituted under section 3;
(c) "Fund" means the Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund constituted under
section 5;
(d) "handloom" means any loom used for production of cloth other than the
powerloom as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "weaver" means a person engaged in the production of cloth on a handloom
and includes a person who owns, works or operates on a handloom for the production
of cloth; and
(g) "worker" means a handloom worker engaged by a weaver and who earns
wages on daily or any other basis by working on handloom.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in Official
Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the National Handloom Weavers Welfare
Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience in
handloom sector;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed;
(c) three members to represent handloom cooperatives;
(d) three members to represent the handloom weavers;
(e) four members to represent the Union Ministries of Finance, Planning, Labour
and Employment and Textiles,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(f) five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
shall be from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective
Houses; and
(g) four members to be nominated by the Government of the States on rotation
basis in alphabetical order.
(3) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(4) The term of Office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(7) The Authority may establish its offices at such other places, as it may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Constitution
of the
National
Handloom
Weavers
Welfare
Authority.
63 of 1948.
5
10
15
20
25 
30 
35 
40 

3
(8) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such Officers and members of staff
and with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall, in coordination with the State Governments take, steps for
the overall welfare of weavers including, removal of poverty and indebtedness, raising the
standard of living, modernizing the looms and making easy availability of raw materials at
affordable prices and marketing of handloom cloth.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall,—
(a) formulate and implement welfare policy for the handloom weavers and workers;
(b) maintain a district-wise register of handlooms, handloom weavers and
workers with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) regulate the service conditions of workers in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) fix minimum wages for handloom workers from time to time;
(e) ensure modernization of old handlooms;
(f) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to handloom weavers
cooperatives;
(g) organise exhibitions, melas and such other activities to promote handloom
sector in different parts of the country;
(h) make suitable arrangements for purchase of handloom cloth by Government
agencies on cash and carry basis;
(i) encourage export of handloom cloth and handloom garments; and
(j) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by way
of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals and organisations.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—
(a)  providing interest free consumption loans to handloom weavers and workers;
(b) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved families
of handloom weavers who die in harness;
(c) providing loans at nominal rate of interest for purchasing cotton yarn and
other necessary raw materials to the handloom weavers;
(d) providing insurance cover to handlooms, handloom weavers and workers;
(e) providing healthcare facilities to the handloom weavers and workers and
their dependent family members;
(f) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of weavers
and workers; and
(g) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
Functions of
the Authority.
Constitution
of the
Handloom
Weavers
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25 
30 
35 
40 

6.  (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure regular supply of yarn
to the handloom weavers at affordable and subsidized rates.
(2) It shall be compulsory for all Ministries, Departments, subordinate Offices under
the appropriate Government and Public Sector Enterprises to purchase their entire cloth
requirements exclusively from the primary handloom weavers.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take steps to minimize the export of cotton and
cotton yarn.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide to the Authority such sums as may consider necessary for the
efficient functioning of the Authority.
8. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the report submitted to it under
sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
11.  (1) The Central Government may,  by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to ensure
regular supply
of yarn.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
Annual
Report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for time being
in force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25 
30 
35 
4

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Handloom industry, the largest segment in the unorganized sector, has a unique place
in our economy. This sector has sustained by transferring skills from one generation to
another. The strength of the sector lies in its uniqueness, flexibility of production, openness
to innovations, adaptability to the supplier's requirement and the wealth of its tradition.
Adoption of modern techniques and economic laberalization, however, has had a serious
impact on the handloom sector. Competition from powerlooms and mill sector, availability of
cheaper imported fabrics, changing consumer preferences and alternative employment
opportunities have threatened the vibrancy of the handloom sector. The sector provides
employment to 43.31 lakh persons engaged in about 23.77 lakh handlooms.
There are multiple problems that dog handlooms. The sector is not doing very well and
it is on the verge of collapse and extinction. The foremost reason for this is non-availability
of cotton yarn at affordable prices and non-availability of loans at low interest rate from
banks and other financial institutions to handloom weavers for purchasing of raw material
and other necessary items. The most disturbing and sad part is that most of the handloom
weavers are in debt and committing suicides because of their indebtedness and poverty. The
problem is further compounded by powerful lobbying from the powerloom barons. Handloom
weavers have been at the negative end of the changes wrought in by globalization, consequent
Government policies and transient socio-economic conditions. For decades, most handloom
weavers never had any access to various policies and schemes meant for their growth and
benefit. On the other hand, Government departments and implementing agencies do not
have adequate information and data that would have helped in increasing the reach of such
programmes and policies. There is widening gap between policy formulation and
implementation.
It has, therefore, been proposed to constitute a National Handloom Weavers Authority
to take steps for welfare and overall development of weavers and workers engaged in handloom
sector and for promotion and effective implementation of policies of handloom sector in the
country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
 April 25, 2016.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Handloom Weavers Welfare
Authority. Clause 4 provides for certain steps to be taken by the Authority for welfare of
handloom weavers and workers. Clause 5 provides for the constitution of the Handloom
Weavers Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall ensure supply
of yarn to handloom weavers at subsidized rates. Clause 7 provides that the Central
Government shall  provide Funds to the Authority.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of and welfare measures for handloom weavers and workers and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1046LS(S3)—11-07-2016.