It of 
1957. 
J '. I 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
BIB No. 161 of 1985 
THE RAILWAY PROTECTION FORCE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Rvzilway Protection Force Act, 1957. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the RepubUe 
of India 81 follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Railway Protection Force (Amend- Short 
ment) Act. 1985. title' and 
5 (2) It sbal1. come into force on such date as the Central Government commence-
ment. 
fO 
may, by' notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957, (hereinafter referred to 
os the principal Act), for long title, the following long title shall be 
substit':lted~ namely:-
loAn Act to provide fot the constitution and regulation of an 
armed force of the Union for the better protection and security . of 
taUway property and fot matters connected therewith.". 
3. Section 2. of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-leetion 
: (1) thereot, and,-
,(a) in sub-6ection (1) as so renumbered-
(it) for clause (b), the f<mowing clauses shall be substi-
. tuted, namely:-
o (b) "Director-General" means the Director-General of 
the Force appointed under sUb-section (1) of section 4; 
(ba) "enrolled member of the Force" means any 
subordinate ofBcer, under officer or any other member of the 
Force of a rank lower than that of under ofBcer; 
Amend. 
ment of 
10111 title. 
Am_~" 
meat of 
lection 2. 

Amend-
ment of 
MCtIon S. 
Amend-
ment of 
leet10n 4. 
Omillion 
of 
aection 6. 
Subutt-
tutioBof 
new 'Ie-'tionfor 
,ect1on •. 
Appoint-
mentot 
member. 
of the 
Porce. 
(bb) "Force custody" means the arrest or confinement 
of a member of the Force in .accordance with rules made 
under thii.Act;'j " 
(ti) in clause (e), the words "other than the superior officer" 
shall be omitted; 5 
, (iii) afttr claU'se (e) the following clause shall be inserted, 
i~; . namely:-
._ ..... 
. 1/ 
, (ea) "subordinate. officer" means a person appointed to 
the Force as an Inspector, a Sub-Inspector or an Assistant 
Sub-Inspector;'j 
(iv) after clause <f), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(fa) "under officer" means a person appointed to the 
10 
.) . Force as a Head Constable or Naikj'; 
t7 
,-
(v) after sub-section (1) as to renumbered, the follOwing 15 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not 
in forC'<! in any area shall, in relation to that area, be cons-
trued as a reference to the corresponding law, jf any, in 
force in that area.". 
4.' In section 3 of the principal Act,-
(a) in SUb-section (1), for the words "a Force", the words "an 
arnitki force of the Union" shall be substituted; 
20 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "superior officers and mem-
bers", the words "superior officers, subordinate officers, under officers 25 
and other enrol1ed members" shall be substituted. 
S. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following 'sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(1) The Central Government may appoint a person to be 30 
the Director-General of the Force and may appoint other persons 
to be Inspectors-General, Additional Inspecto.rs-General, Deputy 
Inspectors-General, Assistant Inspectors-General, Senior Com-
mandants, Commandants or Assistant Commandants of the 
Force."; 35 
f' '(b) in sub-section (2), for the expression "Inspector-General", 
,the expression "Director-General" shall be substituted. ' 
-I. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
7. For section ti of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
tubstituted, namely: - 40 
.:~ . .... "6. The appointment of enrolled members of the Force shall rest 
with the Inspector-General, Additional Inspector-Gene.ral or Deputy 
Inspector-General, who shall exercise that power in accordance witli 
rules made under this Act: ' 

5, 
10 
3 
,. Provided that the power of appointment under this section may 
also be exercised by other superior o~er as the Inspector-General. 
Additional Inspector-General or Deputy' Inspector.General concerned 
.. may, by order, specify in this behalf.".' ' 
8. III section 7 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Chief Security Officer", at 
both the places where they occur, the words "Inspector. General, 
Additional Inspector-Gen~ral or Deputy Inspector-General'" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), the words "and on h;q ceasing to be a 
member of the Force' !thall be forthwith surrendered by him to any 
>superior 6fficer empowered to receive the same" shall be omitted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 
9. For section 8 of the princIpal Act, the following section shall be Substi-
substituted, namely; _ tution of 
new sec. 
tion for 
section 8. 
15 
-
'20 
35 
45' .' 
"8. (1) T1:Je superintendence of the Force shall vest in the Cen-
tral Government, and subject. thereto and to the provisions of this 
Act and of any rules made thereunder, the command, supervision 
and administration 'of the Force sha!l vest in the Director-General. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the administra-
tion of the Force, within 9uch local limits in relation to a railway 
as may be prescribed shall be carried on by an Inspector-General, 
,an Additional Inspector-General or a Deputy Inspector-General in 
ac~rdance with. the provisions of this Act and of any rules made 
thereunder and they shall, :1ubjcct to any direction that may be given 
by the Central Government or the Director-General in this behalf 
discharge his function": uncler the general supervision of the General 
Manager of the Railway.". 
10. In section 9 of the principal Act,- I 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word "member", at beth the 
. places where it occurs, the words "enrolled member" shall be substi-
tuted; 
'(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
",(2) Any enrolled mtmher of the Force aggrieved by an 
order made under sub-section (1) may, withtn 'thirty days from 
the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an 
appeal again~t the order to mlch authority as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the prescribed authority may entertain the 
appeal after the expiry of the said period of tbirty days if it is 
satisfied that the appel!..gnt was prevented by sufficient caus~ 
from. filing the appeal in tittle. 
(3) In disposing of the appeal, the 'PrescI:i,bed authority 
shall faHow such p1'O<."Ctdure IlS ma~; 1:le' prescribed: 
Provifled that nf) ordf.'r imposin,:! an enhAnced penalty under 
sub-section (2) shall be made unless a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard has bpe'l ,~iven to the per!lon affeded by such order.". 
Super-
inten-
deuce 
and ad-
minis-
tration 
of the 
Force. 
Amend-
ment of 
section •. 

Substi. 
tution 
oln • .,., 
.ection 
for sec-
tion 12. 
Power to 
arrest 
without 
warr.nt. 
.......... t.rt. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
lI. 
lnaert:¥m 
of new 
lection 
15A. 
"Beatrie:-
toDa rea-
peetlna 
rllthttn 
fonn .... 
lociation, 
etc. 
-1 
,11. For section 12 of the principal ACt, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"12. Any member of the Force may, without ~ Ol'Cler 'frcnn a:. 
Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest---. 
u, 
(.i) any person who voluntarily causes hurt to, or attempt. 5 
voluntarily to cause hurt to, or wrongfully restrains or attempts 
wrongfully to restrain, or assaults, threatens to assault, or uses, 
or threatens or attempts to use, criminal force to him or any 
other member of the Force in the execution of his d\lty as such 
member, or with intent to prevent or to. deter him from discli,arg. 10 
ing his duty as such member, or in consequence of anything 
done or attempted to be done by him in the lawful disobarge of 
his duty as such member; or; 
'(ii) any person who has been concerned in, or against whom 
a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been concerned in, 15 
or who is found taking precautions to conceal his presence under 
circumstances which afford reason to believe that he is taking 
such precautions with a view to committing a cognizable offence 
which relates to railway property; or 
(iii) any person found taking precautions to conceal his ~o 
presence within the railway limits under circumstances which 
afford reason to believe that he is taking such precautions with 
a view to committing theft of, or damage to, railway property.r 
or 
(iv)" any person who commits or attempts to commit a cog- ~5 
nimble offence which involves or which is likely to involve im-
minent danger to the life of any person engaged in carrying 0" 
any work relating to railway property.", 
In section 15 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following 8ub-section shall 68 substfw 30 
tuted, namely:-
"(1) Every member of the Force shall, for the purposes of 
this Act, be considered to be always on duty, and shall, at any 
time, be liable to be employed at any place within India."; 
. (b) in sub-section (2), the words "suptrior ofllce.r or" shall tie 35 
omitted. I 
13. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:- •... ! 
"15A. (1) No :trlember of the Force shall, wiUiout the previous 
sanction in writing of the Central Government or of the prescribed 40 
authority,-
(4) be.a member of, or be associated in any 'way with, any 
trade union, labour union, political association or' with any CIals 
. of trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or 

to 
ThE RAILWAY PROTECrION IDBOE (AMBIDMEJII') BILL, 1985 
(TC' be/As introduced in !.ok Sa'bha) 
1. Page 2, line S,_ 
.1bl: "afttr" ~ "after"! 
2. Page 3, llna 34,-
m "mtmbor n l:.ti.d "memb er" 
3. pag e 4, line 35',-
.!b.r "sup trior " ~ "superior" 
4. Page 4,-. 
• / 
"' . \ , \ 
i 
in the aarginal h~g to p~p'o-sed section 1i~'-~ 
,;Ou: . ''Restri ctons" I.If!I1. 'Restri.~Ji1on·s" 
., 
5. pags 5,. Une 30,-
4 ." 
!o.l: ''hun~ered'' ~_ "hundred" 
6. Page 5, in the narg;+nal heading ito clause 15,-
!a..t. "sect:f.on 11" ~ "section 17" 
7. Page 6, Ii-e 35,-
\ 
.rlu: "or ~('+'..,rie~" ~ "or the liB.ctOries" 
8. Pa.ge 8, line 29,-111 column (2),-
" Traning " ~ "Training" 
9. Page 10, line ~,- I 
ru 1"existenec" , ~ "existence" 
10. Page 16, in the llBrginal heading to sect100 21,-
.!iU: rrF l) wer s " t.mUl ''Po war If 
NEW DmHI; 
August 1~ 1985' 
Sravam , "1907 (salta) 

5 
5 , 
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way witli, any 
other society, institution, association or organisation that is not 
recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely social, 
recreational or religious nature; or 
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be 
published any book, letter or other document except where such 
communication or publication is in the bona fide discharge of 
his duties or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character 
or is of a prescribed nature. 
10 Explanation.-.:..If any question arises as to whether any society, 
15 
20 
25 
institution, association or organisation is of a purely social. recrea-
tional or religi9US nature under clause (b) of this sub-section, the 
deCIsion of the' Central Government thereon shall be final. 
(2) No member of the Force shall participate in, or address, any 
meeting or take part in any demonstration organised by anS' body of 
persons for any politic~l purposes or for such other purposes as may 
be prescribed.". 
14. After section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:- . ~:J~';~I'1ir~' 
"I6A. (1) Every person who for any re~on cea¥s to be a mem-
ber of the Force, shall forthwith 'surrender to any superior . officer 
empowered to receive the same, his certificate of appointment. the 
arms, accoutrements, clothing and other articles which have been 
furnished. to him for the performance of his duties as a memoer of 
the Force. 
(2) Any person who wilfully neglects o~ r.efuses to surrender his 
certificate of appointment, the arms, accoutrements, clothing and 
other articles furnished to him. as required by sub-section (1), shall, 
on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
30 extend to one month or with fine which may extend to two hundered 
rupees, or with both. 
(3) Nothing in this s~ction shall be deemed to apply to any 
article which, under the 'orders of the Director-General,. has become 
the property of the person to whom tlie same was furnished .... 
35 15. For section 17 of tlie principal Act, the following section shall be 
45 
substituted, namely:-
"17. "(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained tn sectionl 
9, every enrolled member of the Force who shall be J~uilty of any 
violation of duty or wilful breach or neglect of any rulp or lawful 
order made by a superior officer, er who shall withdraw from duties 
of hi~ office without permission, Or who, bcin~nbs(!nt on. Ie:tv~. fails. 
without reasonable cause, to rePort himself fo!" duty ·on the expira-
tion of the leave, or who engages himself without authorit,y fo!" any 
employment other than his duty as an enro~led member of the Force, 
or who shall be guilty of cowardice may be taken intDForcE" custody 
and s-hall, on conviction, be plinished \vith imprisonment which may 
extend to one year.· . 
"' 
Inser-
tion of 
new 
section 
leA. 
Surren_ 
der 'of 
certifi-
cate, 
arms, 
etc., by 
persons 
ceasing 
to be 
members 
of the 
Force. 
Substi..;; 
flutionot 
DeW lec-
itoftfor 
section 11. 
Penal-
ties for 
neglect 
otduty, 
etc. 

Substi-
tutionof 
new 
section 
forsec_ 
tion 19. 
Certalft 
Acta 
not to 
apply to 
membll'l " 
otItb~ 
Foree •. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
U. 
6 
'(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, an ofrence punishable under this section shall be 
cognizable and non-bailable. 
~of 1974. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. the Central Government may invest Assistant 5 2 of 1974. 
Inspector-General, Senior Commandant or Commandant with the 
powers of a Magistrate of any class for the purpose of inquiring into 
or trying any offence committed by an enroned member of the Force 
and punishable under this Act, or any offence committed by an 
enrolled member of the Force against the person or property of 10 
another member of the Force: 
Provided that-
(i) when the offender i8 on leave or absent from duty; or 
(ii) when the offence is not connected with the offender's 
duties as an enrolled member of the Force; or 15 
(iii) when it is a petty offence even if connected with the 
offender's duties as '8Jl enrolled member of the Force; or 
'(iv) when, for reasons to be recorded in writing, it is not 
practicable for the Commandant invested with the powers of a 
Magistrate to inquire into or to try the offence, 20 
the offence may, if the prescribed authority within the limits of 
whose jurisdiction the offence bas been committed so requires, be 
inquired into or tried by an ordinary criminal court having juris-
diction in the matter. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to pre- 25 
vent any enrolled member of the Force from being prosecuted under 
any other law for any offence made punishable by that Jaw, or for 
being liable under any such law tet any other or higher penalty or 
punishment than is provided for such offence by this section: 
Provided that no person shall be punished ,twice for the same :l0 
offence. tt. 
16. For section 19 of the principal Act, the follOWing section shall be 
IUbstituted, namely:-
\ 
'" 
"19. Nothing contained in the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, or 40f 1936. 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or Factorie9 Act, 1948, or any cor- 35 119~~~ 
responding laW' relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 63 of 
dispute in force in a State shall apply to members of the Force.". 1948. 
17". In section 21 of the principal Act,-
(a) in su}).section (2) ,-
(i)" in clauses (a), (b) and (c), the words "superior officers 40 
and" shall be omitted; 
(ii)" for cla1lSeB (c:l) and (e),. the follO'Wing clauses.. shall be 
~bltittited, namely: ~ 
"(d) . prescribing the description and' quantity of arms;' 
accoutrements, clothing and other necessary artieles to be 45 
furnished to. thf'! members of the Fq:rc;-e; 

5 
10 
15 
, 
(e) prescribing the places of residence of the member 
of the Force; 
<f) institution, management and regulation of any fund 
for. any purpose connected with the administration of the 
Force; 
(g) regulating the punishments and prescribing autho-
rities to whom appeal shall be preferred from orders of 
punishment, or remission of fines, or other punishments and 
the procedure to be followed for the disposal of such appeals; 
(h) regulating matters with respect to Force custody, 
under this Act, including the procedure to be followed for 
taking persons into such custody; 
(i) regulating matters with respect to disposal of cases 
relating to offences under this Act and specifying the places 
in which persons convicted under this Act may be confined; 
(j) any othe.r matter which has to be, or may be, iinpos-
ed, or in respect of which rules are required to be made 
under this Act;"; -
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(3), Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon 81 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be eo.zn.. 
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, aDd 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall therealter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.". 
18. The amendments directed in the Schedule (being -amendments of 
a consequential nature) shall be made in t~e pr~ncipal Act. 
35 19. (1) The Force constituted under the principal Act as functioning 
immediately before the commencement of this Act (hereafter in this 
;:;ection referred to as the existing Force) shall, on such commencement, 
be deemed to be the Force constituted under the principal Act as amend· 
~d by this Act, and every member of the existing Force holding imme-
40 diately before auch commencement an oftlce mentioned in column (1) 
of the Table below shall, on such co~ncement, be deemed to have 
been appointed to the office meptioned in the corresponding entry - in 
column (2) of the said Table. -
Tw 
45 ( I) 
f. Director-General Director-General 
-
Conae .. 
quential 
amend. 
menta. 
Provil .. 
:lons as 
to exist. 
inc Foree. 

8 
<~) 
2. Inspcctor-General-cum-CbiefSecurity Ofli- Inspcctor-Oc1Icrat; 
ccr. 
I 
3~ ·Additional. In'lpector-General-cum-Chief Additional Inspecloi-Gt-neral. 
Security Officer. 
4· 
5· 
Additional I mpector-General 
Deputy Inspcctur-Gcnctal-cum-Cbicf I 
Security Officer. 
6. Deputy Inspector-General 
" , 
Additional Inspector-General. 
Deputy Inspector-General. 
• Deputy Inspector-General. 
Principal, Training College. 
• Assistant Inspector .. Gen~ra1. 
" 
7. Principal, Training College 
8.: A,sistant Inspector-General • 
g. Dep,uty Chief, Security Officer • Senior CODUnandant : Headquar • 
ters. 
10. Senior Security Officer • Senior CommandaDt. 
II.,,' Security Officer. ". • Commandant. 
12'. Staff Officer to Chief Security Officer • Comrnandant-cum~Staff Offi-
cer to,Chief Security Officer. 
13.' Security Officer (Small Anns) • Commandant (Small Anns). 
14. Com~lUldant • Commandant. 
15.; r :A~sistant Security Officer • Assistant Commandant. 
5 
10 
16. P(:no.n~ Assist~t to' Chief 
Officer. 
SCCIlrity A'Ssistant Commandant-cum-Per_ 20 
son'!l A'Jsistant to Chief Security 
Officer. 
17. Adjutant A'ISistant .Commandant Adjutanfi 
18. A'Jsistant COlilmandant •. Assista.nt CoInDlaJidant. 
I,. ' , 
19. Principal, Training Sc~ool .. J\"mtant Commandant-cum-
Principal, Trainiug School. ,. 
20. Vice.Principal, R.P.f.. Training College, .;' Assistant Commandant-cum .. 
Vice-Principal, R.P.F. Thaning' " .• . College. 
t 121.' Inspector Inspector. 
22 •. ;.' Sub-Inspector 
23 •• Auistant Sub·lnsp.:ctor 
24. . Head Rakshak 
25. . Battalion Havildar Major 
26. Coy. Havildar Major 
27. 'Senior Rakshak 
~8. Raksbak 
. . ' 
• ' Sub-InspectoJ;'. 
A,sistant Sub-Inspector. 
Head Constable-. 
Head Constable. 
Head Constable. 
Naik 
· ConstaWe. 
(2) Notwithstanding an~thing contained in sub·section (1), any, 
35 
member of the existing I,'orc:e may, wi~ thirty days from the com" 
,mencement of this Act, exei'cise his option by notice in writing to the 40 
Director-General-
(a) if such member has been on deputation to the existing Force 
from any other f.ervice, to revert to such other service, and • 
(b) in any other case, to retire from service, and an option 80 
exercised shall be final, and a member exercising such option shall 45 

50f 1198. 
9 
be' permitted, within thirty days from the date on which he exercilel 
Buch option to revert to the servit'~ from which be had been on 
deputation or, as the case may be, to retire from service. 
Explctnlltion.--P·or the purposes of this section, ihe expression "mem-
5 ber" includes an officer, and th(; expression "Director-General" aball have 
the ,same, meaning as in the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
10 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 18) 
CONSEQt1L~TIAL AMENDMENTS 
1. Section IG-For "the lnfipector-General and f!Very other superior 
officer and every member of the Force", suoltitute "Director-General 
and every member of the F'OTt'e". 
2. Section 13-(a) in sub-section (1), omit "any superior office" or". 
15 (b) in sub-section (2), for "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", 
2 of 1974. stLbstitute "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973". 
3. Section 14-0mit "superior officer or". 
4. Section 2~mjt "t;Uperiol' officer or", wherever they occur. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Railway Protection Ii'orce has been constituted under the Railway 
ProteeUon Force Act, 1957 for ensuring better protection and security 
of railway property. This Force has now been in existenec for a period 
of about 28 years. During tbir. period the sanctioned strength of the 
Force has con!liderably increased. The responsibilities of the Force have 
also grown jn magnitude as well as in compleXity. 
2. The uninterrupted and secure movement of goods including essen-
tial commodities and passenger~ on the railways is of vital strategic 
importance. The :;.'allways not only playa very important and crucial 
role in the economic and industrial growth but also in the security and 
defence of the country. The Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 in its 
present form is cons;dered inade-quate to meet requirements of the 
Force in the present day context especially in view of the emerging 
n'~nsibilitie8 which Railway Protection Force now perform and which 
may devolve on it in the days tc come. It is, therefore, proposed to 
amend the Railway Protection F'orce Act, 1957 as to make this Force an 
Armed Force of the Union ~,nd tc make it a more efficient and effective 
instrument fOl" discharging it:; responsibilities. 
~t The' following are the principal features of the Bill:-
(a) Declaring the Railway ~otection Force an Armed Force 
of the Union and conR!quential changes in the nomenclature of. diffe-
rent ranks in the Force in consonance with its changed character 
as an Armed Force. 
(b) Conferment of additional powers on the members of the 
Force such as to arrest without warrant, to restrain misbehaviour on 
the part of the members of the Force, to effectively intervene for 
preventing imminent danger to the life of a person concerned with 
carrying on the work (If the railways for the better protection of the 
railway property. 
(c) Restrictions have been proposed on the right to form asso-
ciation on the lines of similar restrictions in other Armed Forces of 
the Union (clause 13 oi the Bill). 
(d) Conferment of add;tional powers on the superior officers of 
the Force for enforcement of diSCipline, imposition of penalties for 
various offences, l'cgulatin~ procedure for Force custody. 
4. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th Auqust, 1985. BANSI LAL. 
10 
• 

F'INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeJts to Slibstitute for sub-section (1) of section 4 
of the Railway Protection F.'oree Act, 1957. a new sub-section which pro-
vides for the appointment of a Direetor-General, Inspectors-General. Addi-
tional Inspectors-General,Deputy Inspectors-GeneraJ. Assistant Inspectors-
General, Senior Commandant.!.Z/Commandants and Assistant Commandants 
of the Force. The intention is not to create any post and it is only propOsed 
to redesignate 1he existing ['osts. In view thereof, the provisions of the 
Bill. if enacted and brought into· operation, would not involve any 
expenditure from the Consolidated i\md of India. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATI<m 
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 of the Act which 
relates to the rule ~ng power of the Central Government. By pro-
posed amendments it i'S sought to empower the Central Government to 
make rules on the following, among other matters:-
(a) the deSCription and quantity of arms, accoutrements, 
clothing, etc., to the members of the Force; 
(b) authorities under sub-section (3) of section 17; , 
(c) prescribing the places of l'esidence of the members of the 
Force; 
(d) institution, management and regulation of any fund for any 
purpose connected with the administration of Force; 
(e) regulating the punishment and the authorities to whom 
appeal shall be preferred from orders of punishment, etc.; 
(I) matte.rs with respect to Force custody; 
(g) disposal of cases relating to offences under the Railway Pro-
tection Force Act and place of confinement of persons convicted 
under the said Act. 
2. The above matters pertain to matters of procedure or administra.: 
tive detail and as such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
charactel'. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RAILWAY PROTECTION FORCE ACT, 195i 
(23 OF 1957) 
• II< • • * 
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of a Force called 
the Railway Prorection Force for the better protection and security of 
railway property. 
• • • * • 
.2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• * 
II< • 
(b) "Inspector-General" means the Inspector-General of the 
Force appointed under section 4; 
(c') ''member of the For~e" means a $)erson a!Jpointed to the Force 
under this Act other than a superior officer; 
II< 
'" • • • 
3. (1) There 'Shall be constituted and maintained by the Central 
Government a Force to be called the Railway Protection Force for the 
better protection and security of railway property. 
(2) The Force shall be constituted. in such manner, shall consist of 
such number of superior officers and members of the Force and shall 
receive sUch pay and other remuneration as may be p~cribed. 
4. (1) The Central Government may appoint a person to be the In-
spector-General of the Farce and may appoint other person'S to be Chief 
Security Officers, Security Officers or Assistant Security Officers of the 
Force. 
(2) The Inspector-General and every other superior' office.r SO 
appointed .shall POSj3eSS and exercise such powers and authority.over the 
members of the Force under their respective commands as is provided 
by or under this Act. 
5. There shall ~ the following classes of officers and other ranks 
among the members of the. Force, who shall take rank in the order 
mentioned, namely:-
A. Classes of officers-
(i) Inspector, 
(ii) Sub-Inspector, 
(iii) Assistant Sub-Inspector. 
B. Classes of other ranks-
(i) Head Rakshak, 
(it) Senior Rakshak, 
(iii) Rakshak. 
13 
Definitions. 
Consti-
tution 
of the 
Force. 
Appoint-
ment 
and 
poweraof 
superior 
o1!lcel'l!. 
Classes 
and ranks 
among 
members 
of the 
Force. 

Appoint-
mentof 
members 
of the 
Foree. 
Certi-
ficates 
tomem-
bers of 
the Force. 
Super-
inten-
dence 
and 
admin-
istration 
of the 
Force. 
Dis-
missal, 
removal, 
etc. of 
llembem 
oUbe 
J'oree. 
6. The appointment of members of the Force shall rest with the Chief 
Security Officers who shall exercise that power in accordance with rules 
made under this Act: 
Provided that the power of appointment under this section may also 
be exercised by such other superior ofBcer as the Chief Security Officer 
concerned may by order specify in this behalf. 
7. (U Every member o( the Force shall receive on his appointment 
a certificate in the form specified in the Schedule, under the seal of the 
Chief Security Officer or such other sup.:!rior ofticer as the Chief Security 
Ofticer may specify in this behalf, by virtue of which the persOn hold-
ing such certificate shall be vested with the powers of a member of the 
Force. 
(2) Such certificate shall cease to have effect whenever the person 
named in it ceases for any reasdn to be a member of the Force, and, on 
his ceasing to be a member of the Force, shall be forthwith surrendered 
by him to any superior officer empowered to receive the same. 
8. (1) The superintendence of the Force shall vest in the Central 
Government, and subject thereto the administration of the Force shall 
\"est in the Inspector-General and shall be carried on by him in accord-
ance with the provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (l). the admini~tration 
of the Force within such local limits in relation to a railway as may be 
prescribed shall he carried on by the Chief Security Offtcer in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, and 
he shall discharge his functions unde,r the general supervision of the 
Gen-eral Manager of the Railway. 
9. (l) Subject to the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution and 
to such rules as the Central Government may make under this Act, 
any superior officer may-
(i) dismiss, suspend or reduce in rank any member of the Force 
whom he shall think remiss or negligent in the discharge of ~s 
duty, or unfit for the same; or 
(ii) award any one or more of the following puni&hments to 
any member of the Force who discharps his' duty' 'in a careless or 
negligent manner, or who by any act of his own renders himself 
unfit for the discharge thereof, nam.ely:-
(a) fine to any amount not exceed'ing seven days' payor 
reduction in pay scale; , 
(b) confinement to quarters for a period not exceeding 
fourteen days ,with or without punishment,' drill, extra guard, 
fatigue or other duty; 
(e) removal from any office of distinction or deprivation of 
any special emolument. 
(2) Any member of the Force aggrieved by an order JlUlde under 
&ub-section (1) may appeal against the order, to such authority as may be 
prescribed, and the decision of the s'aid authority thereon shall be final. 

9 of 1890. 
5 of 1898. 
10. The Inspector-General and every other superior officer and every 
member of the Force shall for all purposes be regarded as railway ser-
vants 'within t~e meaning of the Indian Railways Act. 1890. other than 
Chaptur'VIA thereof, and shall be entitled to exercise the powers con-
ferred on railway servants by or under that Act. 
... ... ... 
12. Any superior officer or member of the Force may, without an order 
from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest-
(a) any person who has, been concerned in an offence relating to 
railway property punishable with imprisonment for a term exceed-
ing six months, or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists of 
his having been so concerned; or 
(b) any person found taking precautions to conceal his presell'Ce 
within railway limits under circumstan(;es which afford reason to 
believe that he is taking such precautions with a view to commit-
ting theft of. or damage to, railway property. 
13, (1) Whenever any superior officer or any member of the Force, 
not below the rank of a Seniol' Rakshak, has reason to believe that any 
such offence as is referred to in section 12 has been or is being committed 
and that a search-warrant cannot be obtained without affording the 
offender an opportunity of escaping or of concealing evidence of the 
offence. he may detain him and search his person and belongings forth-
with and, if he think~ proper. aITest any person whom he has reason 
to believe to have committed the offence. 
(2) The pro\'isions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18&8, relating 
to sea~es under that Code shall. so far as may be apply to searches 
Ul1ch.!l' this section. 
14. Any superior officer or member of the Force making an arrest 
under this Act. shall, without unnecessary delay, make over theperson 
so arrested to a police officer. or. in the absence of 'a police officer, take 
I'llch pt!rson or cause him to be taken to the nearest. police station. 
15. (1) Every superior officer and member of the Force shaU, for the 
purpose of this Act. be considered to be always on duty. and shall, at 
any time. be liable to be employed in any part of the railways through-
out India. I 
(2) No superior officer or member of the Force shall engage himself 
in any employment or office other than his duties under this Act. , 
'" '" '" * ... 
Ofticers 
and 
membel's 
otthe' 
Force 
tbbe 
deemed 
to be 
railway 
servants. 
POWer 
to arrest 
without 
warrant. 
Power to 
search 
without 
warrant. 
Proce-
dure to be 
followed 
'after 
arrest. 
Oftlcel'S 
andmem-
bersof 
the Force 
to be con_ 
sidered 
aIwa;yu 
on duty 
andlia_ 
b1etohe 
employ-
edinany 
part of 
the !tail. 
ways. 

Penalties 
for neg-
lectof 
duty, etc. 
Certain 
Acts 
not to 
apply to 
members 
of the 
~orce. 
Protec-
tion of 
acts 01-
members 
oUbe 
Force. 
Powers 
to make 
rG 
17. (l)Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 9, 
every member of the Force who ~hall be guilty of any violation 01 duty 
or wilful breach or neglect of any rule or regulation of lawful order 
made by a superior officer, or who shall withdraw from the duties of 
his office Without permission, or who, being absent on leave, fails, with-
out reasonable cause, to report himself for duty on the expiration' of the 
leave, or who engages himself without authority in any employment' 
other than his duty as a member of the Force, or who shall be guilty of 
cowardice, shall be liable, on convict~on before a Magistrate, to imprison-
men t for a period not exceeding six months. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 'Criminal Pro-
cedure. 1898. an offence punishable under this section snall be cognizable. 6 of 1888 . 
... ... ... ... ... 
19. Nothing contained in the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, or the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or the Factbries Act, 1948, shall apply to 
members of the Force. 
ZOo (l) In any suit or proceeding against any superior officer or mem-
ber of the Force for any act done by him in ~ discharge of his duties, 
it shall be lawful for him. to plead that such act was done by 'hiin. under 
the orders of a competent authority. 
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of 1tte' order 
directing the act, and if it is so proved, the superior officer or member 
of the Force shall thereupon be discharged from any liability in respecl 
of the act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction" 
of the authority which issued such order. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, any legal proceeding, whether civil or criminal, 
which may lawfully be brought against any superior officer or member 
of the Force for anything done !>r intended to be done under the powers 
conferred by, Or in pursuance of any provision of this Act or the rules 
thereunder shall be commenced within three months after the act com-
plained of shall have been committed and not otherwise; and notice in 
writing of such proceeding and 'Of the cause thereof shall be givr,n to the 
person concerned and his superior officer at least one month before th~ 
commencement of such proceeding. 
21. (1) ... ... ... ... • 
4 of 1936. 
14 of 
IM'1. 
68 of 
1H8. 
rules. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going powers. such rules may provide fot:-
(a) regulating the classes and grades and the pay and remunera-
tion of superior officers and members of the' Force and their condi-
tions of service in the Force; 
(b) regulating the powers and duties of superior o.ftice.rs and 
members of the Force authorised to exercise any fUnctions by or 
under this' Act; 

(c) fixing the period of service for superior officers and members 
of t.he Force; 
td) regulating the punishm.ents ahd providing for appeals from, 
or the revisien of, orders of punishment, or the remission of fines or 
other punishments; 
("e) any other matter which has to be. or may be prescrihed. 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less than 
thirty days' before both Houses ef Parliament as soon as possible after 
they are made and shall be subject to· such modificatioBs as Parliament 
may make during the session in which they are se laid .. the session _-
mediately following. 
• • • • ,·c 

J. 
LOK SABHA 
A 
Bu"L 
to amend the Railway Protection Force Act, 1857. 
(SIaJi BaM LeU, 
MifLiBter of RmlwGlIs.) 