1
THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PERMANENT BENCH AT JABALPUR) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court of India at Jabalpur.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Supreme Court of India (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Jabalpur) Act, 2015.
Short title.
Bill No. 161of 2015
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of India at
Jabalpur and such number of Judges of the Supreme Court, being not less than nine in
number, as the Chief Justice of India may from time to time nominate, shall sit at Jabalpur
in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in the Supreme
Court in respect of cases arising in the State of Madhya Pradesh and such other territories
as may be notified by the Central Government with the approval of the Chief Justice of
India from time to time.
Establishment
of a Permanent
Bench of
Supreme Court
at Jabalpur.
5

STA TEMENT OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 130 of the Constitution provides that the Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in
such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India, may, with the approval of the
President, from time to time, appoint. It is proposed that a permanent Bench of the Supreme
Court with not less than nine Judges be established at Jabalpur in the State of Madhya
Pradesh. The city of Jabalpur is centrally located in the heart of India. Considering the
increasing pendency of cases before the Supreme Court as well as the distance of New Delhi
from southern and eastern parts of India, establishment of a permanent Bench in central
India would not only reduce the burden of cases before the Supreme Court but also reduce
the cost of litigation. The ultimate purpose of establishing any Court is to enable access to
justice which has been recognized by the Supreme Court as a Fundamental Right. The
establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court at Jabalpur would greatly ease the
trouble of litigants living in Central, Eastern as well as Southern parts of India and would also
decentralize the work of the Supreme Court.
The present Bill, therefore, seeks to establish a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court
at Jabalpur with a view to:—
(a) decentralize the work of the Supreme Court;
(b) ensure speedy justice for backward and rural parts of India;
(c) reduce cost of litigation; and
(d) reduce pendency of cases before the Supreme Court.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH
March 16, 2015
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND 117(3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
______
[Copy of Letter No. K-15019/5/2015-US. 1 dated 1 July, 2015 from Shri D.V. Sadananda
Gowda, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Supreme Court
(Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Jabalpur) Bill, 2015 by Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P.,
recommends the introduction of the Bill under article 117(1) and consideration under article
117(3) of the Constitution, in Lok Sabha.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme
Court of India at Jabalpur. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to estimate, at
this stage, the exact amount of expenditure that will be involved.
However, a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five crore is likely to be
involved per annum for the purpose of payment of allowance to the Judges of the Bench and
payment of salaries to the Court servants.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore may be involved for
the construction of building of the Court, etc. and appointment of staff members.
4

GMGIPMRND—1438LS(S3)—17-07-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court of India  at Jabalpur
————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P.)