97 200!

As inrropuced In Lok SABHA

oo

ce epreen ree

oma

Bill No. 161 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suet Susopx Moutre, M.P.
A
RIL.
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
| notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After Part XXI of the Constitution, the following new Part and articles thereunder
shall be inserted. namely:—
“PART XXIA.
CO-OPERATIVE SECTOR

10 392A. In this Part, the expression ‘co-operative sector’ means co-operatives
formed and run by farmers, farm labour, persons engaged in rural industries and
‘consumers.

Short title and
commence-
ment,

Insertion of

new Part
XXIA,
Definition of

co-operative
sector


Persons who
form co-opera-
tives shall elect a
body to rum the
affairs of co-op-
eratives.

Amendment of
Seventh Sche-
dule.

392B. The persons who form the co-operatives in the co-operative sector shall
elect a body, which shall consist of a President, a Vice-President and other members:

to run the affairs of the co-operatives and they shall hold office for a period of one
year.”.

3. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List Ill-Concurrent List,
afier entry 47, the following entry shall be added, namel

“48. Co-operative sector, which shall comprise co-operatives formed and run
by farmers, farm labour, persons engaged in rural industries and consumers.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There is no provision in the Constitution{io protect and expand the scope of
co-operatives in private and public sectors JThe big industrial houses under private sector
exploit the situation and the farmers and producers have to sell their produce at throwaway
prices as the farmers have no means to process their produce which could be used for
self-consumption and sale at remunerative prices. There is, therefore, considerable scope
to develop this sector and improve the rural economy of the country.

By developing co-operative sector, the actual producers and the local people will
have opportunity to establish rural industries which will gain them maximum benefit in
terms of employment and temuncrative prices for their produce,

For financing the setting up of such co-operatives and proper utilisation of rural raw
materials, no separate funds are required. A large number of public sector banks are
already operatin; and they provide loans to farmers and workers for setting
up industries.

The Government should come forward for creation of a co-operative sector and also
give it proper place in the Constitution.

Hence this BIll.

New DELHI, SUBODH MOHITE
November 6, 2000.

Cooperatives e
COpherahen 7