AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 161 of 2024
THE LEGITIMA TE ASYLUM TO REFUGEES  BILL, 2024
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for, in the interest of upholding the values ofinternational human rights, an appropriate legalframework to process matters relating to forced
migration in respect of determination of refugee
status, protection from refoulement and
treatment during stay and for matters
connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Legitimate Asylum to Refugees Act,
2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Declaration.
2
5
10
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the main objects of
this Act are:—
(a) to establish an appropriate legal framework to process matters
relating to forced migration in respect of determination of refugee status,
protection from refoulement and treatment during stay;
(b)  to do the same in a way that:
(i) it is in adherence with articles 37 and 253 of the
Constitution of India, which provide an administrative system
free from arbitrariness and guarantee equality, fairness and due
process of law;
(ii) it maintains India’s commitment to upholding
international human rights principles through accession to all major
human rights treaties, and adoption of appropriate legislative steps
to implement them; and
(iii) to ensure that the grant of refugee status shall be
considered a peaceful and humanitarian act and will not imply
any judgment on the country of origin of the refugee.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) ‘asylum seeker’ means a person who seeks recognition and
protection as a refugee;
(b) ‘Commissioner’ means the Commissioner of Refugees
appointed under section 7;
(c) ‘country of origin’ means the refugee’s country of nationality
or if he or she has no nationality, his or her country of former habitual
residence;
(d) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules under this Act.
(e) ‘refugee’ means—
(i) any person who is outside his or her country of origin,
and who is unable or unwilling to return to, and is unable or
unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country
because of a well-founded fear of persecution on account of
race, religion, sex, nationality, ethnic identity, membership or
particular social group or political opinion; or
(ii) any person who owing to external aggression,
occupation, foreign domination, serious violation of human rights
or other events seriously disrupting public order in either part or
whole of his or her country of origin, is compelled to leave his or
her place of habitual residence in order to seek refuge in another
place out his or her country or origin.
Explanation.—In the case of a person who has several
nationalities, the term “his or her country of origin” shall mean each
of the countries of which he or she is a national, and a person shall not
be deemed to be lacking the protection of the country of which he or
she is a national, if without any valid reason based on well-founded
Definitions.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

fear, he or she has not availed himself of the protection of one or
more of the countries of which he or she is a national.
(f) ‘Refugee Committee’ means the Committee referred to in
section 7 as an Appellate Board; and
(g) ‘refugee children’ means children below the age of eighteen
years who are seeking refuge or where protection is extended by the
State to children under article 22 of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, 1989.
4. A person shall be excluded from refugee status for the purpose of this
Act if:
(a) there are serious reasons to believe that he or she has
committed acts of a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against
humanity, in accordance with the applicable principles and rules of
International Law and Conventions, including the SAARC Regional
Convention on Suppression of Terrorism, 1987; or
(b) there are serious reasons to believe that he or she has
committed a serious non-political crime contrary to the applicable
principles and rules of the SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression
of Terrorism, 1987, prior to his or her admission into India as a refugee.
5. (1) No refugeee or asylum seeker shall be expelled or returned in any
manner whatsoever to a place in which there are sufficient reasons or well-
founded fears to believe that his or her life or freedom may be under threat on
account of race, religion, sex, nationality, ethnic identity, membership or
particular social group or political opinion.
(2) Where an asylum seeker or refugee has been convicted by a final
judgement of a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity
and constitutes a danger to the community, or there are reasonable grounds to
believe that an asylum seeker or refugee is a threat to the sovereignty and
integrity of the country, such an asylum seeker or refugee shall be excluded
from the protection provided under this Act.
6. (1) Where an application is made by or on behalf of, or in relation to an
asylum seeker, for the recognition of the said asylum seeker as a refugee,
either at the point of entry or subsequently, the applicant shall, in accordance
with the principle laid down in section 5 be directed and assisted to apply to
the Commissioner of Refugees in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where an application under sub-section (1) is made by or on behalf
of, or in relation to an asylum seeker, for the determination of refugee status,
pending determination of such status, certain restrictions shall be imposed on
the asylum seeker as are considered necessary in the interests of sovereignty
and integrity or public order of the country as may be prescribed.
(3) Application under this section may be made within such reasonable
time as may be prescribed.
(4) Where an application for refugee status is made by or on behalf of,
or in relation to a child, or where a refugee child is found within the territory of
country; he or she shall receive immediate and appropriate protection and
humanitarian assistance in accordance with the existing policy and legal
framework of the country.
Persons
who shall
be excluded
from
refugee
status.
Principle of
Non
Refoulement.
Application
for
recognition
of refugee.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(5) The requirement of filing an application form on behalf of a child
may be entrusted to a local Legal Service Authority or their representatives or
any other recognised non-Governmental Organisation involved in the welfare
of children in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the President shall—
(a) appoint the Commissioner of Refugees and Deputy
Commissioners of Refugees as may be necessary on the basis
of the eligibility requirements and procedures laid down in
section 8;
(b) appoint other officers as may be necessary after
consultation with the Commissioner of Refugees; and
(c) constitute Refugee Committee consisting of
Chairperson and such other Members as he deem fit.
(2) The Chairperson of the Refugee Committee shall appoint
the staff of the Committee.
(3) The salary and allowances Payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner,
Chairperson, Members and Secretarial staff of the Refugee Committee
shall be such as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Commissioner of Refugees shall be a sitting or retired
High Court Judge and shall be appointed after consultation with the Chief
Justice of India, for a period of three years in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner shall be appointed from amongst persons
who is qualified to be appointed as a High Court Judge, and shall be appointed
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, for a period of three years in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson of the Refugee Committee shall be a retired
Supreme Court Judge and shall be appointed by the President in consultation
with the Chief Justice of India for a period of three years in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(4) The Refugee Committee shall consist of a sitting or retired
High Court Judge, appointed by the President in consultation with
the Chief Justice of India, and two independent members with
knowledge and experience of refugee issues and refugee law, who
shall hold office for a period of three years from the date of their
appointment.
(5) The decision of the Commissioner of Refugees shall be final and
any appeal against such decision shall lie only with the Refugee Committee,
as the Appellate Board for reconsideration of the decision.
(6) The functions of the Commissioner of Refugees and the Refugee
Committee shall be as laid down under sections 9 and 11.
(7) The Commissioner of Refugees may assign his functions as may
be necessary to the Deputy Commissioner of Refugees appointed under this
Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
9. (1) An asylum seeker who wishes to claim refugee status shall be
heard by the Commissioner of Refugees before the determination of his or
her status in such manner as may be prescribed.
4
Appointment
and
functions of
the
authorities.
Determination
of the refugee
status.
Constitution
of the
Authorities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(2) the asylum seeker shall during the refugee determination interview,
be provided necessary facilities by the Commissioner of Refugees, including
the service of a competent interpreter where required, and a reasonable
opportunity to present evidence in support of his or her case in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) The asylum seeker, if he or she wishes, shall be given an opportunity,
of which he or she should be duly informed, to contact a representative of
United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), as facilitated by
the Commissioner of Refugees.
(4) The asylum seeker, if he or she wishes, shall be entitled to be assisted
in the determination of the status by a person of his or her choice, including a
legal practitioner.
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (4), a list of competent legal
practitioners, who are conversant with refugee law, shall be provided by the
Central Government to the asylum seeker:
Provided that if the asylum seeker is not recognised as a refugee, he or
she shall be given such reasonable time as may be prescribed, to appeal to the
Refugee Committee.
(6) Where an application by the asylum seeker is rejected, the
Commissioner of Refugees shall give reasons for the order in writing and
furnish a copy of it to the asylum seeker in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that if the asylum seeker is recognised as a refugee, he shall
be informed accordingly and issued with documentation, certifying his refugee
status in such manner as may be prescribed.
 10. (1) The findings as well as the orders of the Commissioner of
Refugees, the Refugee Committee and other authorities established
under this Act shall be published by them periodically in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Commissioner of Refugees and the Refugee Committee
shall publish, every year, a report of their work which shall be made
public in such manner as may be prescribed.
11. (1) The Refugee Committee shall receive and consider appeals made
by asylum seekers against the decision of the Commissioner of Refugees in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Committee may also consider applications for the refugee status
suo motto.
12. A person shall cease to be a refugee if—
(a) he voluntarily re-avails himself of the protection of the country
of his origin; or
(b) he becomes a citizen of India; or
(c) he has acquires the nationality of some other country and
enjoys the protection of that country; or
(d) he has voluntarily re-established himself in the country which
he left, or outside which he remained owing to fear of persecution; or
(e) he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection
with which he was regcognised as a refugee have ceased to exist,
Publication
of findings
and
decision.
Appellate
procedure.
Persons
who shall
cease to be
refugees.
5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the country of his
nationality.
Exception:—A person shall not cease to be a refugee for the
purpose of this Act if he shows compelling reasons, arising out of
previous persecution, for refusing to avail himself of the protection of
the country of his nationality, such as incidences of previous persecution
by any individual or groups, State or non-State actors.
13. (1) Every refugee and asylum-seeker, so long as he remains within
India, shall have the right to fair and due treatment without discrimination on
grounds of race, religion, sex, nationality, ethnic identity, membership of a
particular social group or political group.
(2) Every refugee, so long as he remains within India, shall have the
right to:—
(a) receive the same treatment as is generally accorded under
the Constitution or any other laws and privileges as may be granted;
(b) be provided means to seek a livelihood for himself, and for
those dependent on them;
(c) in the case of refugee women and children, be given special
consideration to ensure their protection and material well being;
(d) choose his place of residence and move freely within the
territory of India, subject to any regulation applicable to refugees
generally in the same circumstances;
(e) be issued identity documents;
(f) be issued travel documents for the purpose of travel outside
and back to the territory of India unless compelling reasons of national
security or public order otherwise require; and
(g) access to education, health and other related services.
14. (1) The Central Government may, in appropriate cases where there
is large-scale influx of asylum seekers, issue an order permitting them to reside
in India without requiring their individual status to be determined under section
until such time as the reasons for departure from the country of origin have
ceased to exist, or the Government decides that their status should be
determined on an individual basis under this Act.
(2) Asylum seekers who have been permitted to reside in the country
under this section may be subject to reasonable restrictions with respect to
their location and movement, in the interests of public health and order, so,
however, they shall normally have the same rights as refugees under this Act.
(3) Women and children asylum seekers in mass influx shall be given
special consideration as to their protection and material well being in such
manner as may be prescribed.
15. The Central Government shall not impose penalties on refugees who,
coming directly from a place where their life or freedom was threatened,
enter or are present in India without authorisation, provided they present
themselves without delay to the authorities and are able to show good cause
for their illegal entry or presence.
Rights and
duties of
refugees.
Situations of
mass influx.
Refugees
Unlawfully in
India.
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16. (1) The repatriation of refugees shall take place at their free volition
expressed in writing or other appropriate means, before the Commissioner of
Refugees in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The voluntary and individual character of repatriation of refugees
shall be carried out under conditions of transparency and safety to the country
of origin.
(3) The voluntary repatriation of refugees shall take place in accordance
with such guidelines, as may be prescribed.
17. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the
Refugee Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Voluntary
Repatriation.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
7
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Articles 37 and 253 of the Constitution provide an administrative
system free from arbitrariness and guarantee equality, fairness and due
process of law. Moreover, India is also committed to upholding
International Human Rights principles through accession to all major
human rights treaties, and adoption of appropriate legislative steps to
implement them.
While India is still not a signatory to the United Nations Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees, 1951 or the 1967 protocol relating to
the status of refugees but India does provide protection to a steady
influx of refugees every year. As per the records of the Government of
India, about 10340 Afghan refugees, 4621 refugees from Myanmar,
80806 refugees from Sri Lanka and 1,01,148 stateless refugees including
Tibetan refugees are staying in India.
Hence, in light of the current global scenario and the European
refugee crisis, it is believed that India needs its own legal framework in
the form of a uniform law in order to process matters relating to forced
migration in respect of determination of refugee status, protection from
refoulement and treatment during stay of refugees.
The Bill seeks to address the above issues by establishing the posts
of the Commissioner of Refugees, the Deputy Commissioners of
Refugees and the Refugee Committee. The Bill also assigns roles and
responsibilities to the above-mentioned authorities in order to ensure
that refugees in India are meted out uniform rights and privileges during
their stay and are justly repatriated.
Hence this Bill.
  NEW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
July 29, 2024
8

9
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide for the appointment of Refugee
Committee. It also provides for the appointment of officers and staff
for the Committee. Clause 10 provides for periodical publication of
findings of the Commission of the Refugees and Refugee Committee.
Clause 17 provides that Central Government shall provide adquate funds
to the Refugee Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be incurred from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore
would also be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
10

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for, in the interest of upholding the values of international human
rights, an appropriate legal framework to process matters relating to
forced migration in respect of determination of refugee status,
protection from refoulement and treatment during stay and
for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)