1
THE SNOW AND GLACIERS AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2016
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of Snow and Glaciers Authority of India to conserve Himalayan
glaciers which are receding at a fast rate and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Snow and Glaciers Authority of India Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 162 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Snow and Glaciers Authority of India constituted
under section 3; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the Snow and Glaciers Authority of India to study the impact of
climate change on glaciers in Himalayan States and suggest measures for their protection
and conservation.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister of Environment, Forests and Climate Change—
Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) the Union Minister of Science and Technology—Vice Chairperson;
(c) the Chief Ministers of the Himalayan States of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Assam, Nagaland and Sikkim—members; and
(d) not more than twenty persons to be nominated by the Central Government
having experience and expertise in the field of conservation of ecology, protection of
environment and natural resources—members.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of appointment
of the nominated members shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. ( 1) The Central Government shall appoint the Secretary and the Chief Accounts
Officer, respectively, of the Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary and the Chief Accounts Officer shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties as may be specified by the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Authority as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. ( 1) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Dehradun.
(2) The Authority shall have its offices at such other places in Himalayan States as it
may deem fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of its business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
7. No Act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid by reason of any vacancy in
the Authority.
8. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Conservation of Snow and Glaciers in Himalayan States Fund.
(2) The Authority shall administer the Fund.
(3) The Central  Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, credit requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
9. The Fund shall be utilized for—
(i) promotion of research in the field of Himalayan Geology and to suggest
measures for protection of snow and glaciers in Himalayan region;
Definitions.
Constitution
of Snow and
Glaciers
Authority of
India.
Appointment
of Secretary,
Chief
Accounts
Officer and
staff of the
Authority.
Headquarter
and other
offices of the
Authority.
Meetings and
procedure of
the Authority.
Vacancies not
to invalidate
proceedings of
the Authority.
Constitution
of
Conservation
of snow and
glaciers in
Himalayan
States Fund.
Utilization of
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(ii) grant-in-aid to non-Governmental Organisations working in the field of
protection of ecology in the Himalayan region;
(iii)  meeting the administrative expenditure of the authority; and
(iv) any expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be defrayed
from the Fund.
10. The Authority shall—
(i) study the impact of climate change on glaciers in Himalayan States;
(ii) create National Glacier Inventory in respect of glaciers and periglacial
landforms which act as freshwater reserves;
(iii) identify research areas alongwith pertaining information necessary for
protection, control, monitoring and conservation of snow and glaciers in Himalayan
States;
(iv) prohibit or restrict activities which affect natural condition of snow and
glaciers;
(v) co-ordinate with other organisations working in the fields of Himalayan
Geology, snow and avalanche and space research to share data and research related to
glaciers and climate change.
(vi) take such other measures as are necessary for protection and conservation
of snow and glaciers and ecology and better management of water resources in
Himalayan States; and
(vii) frame guidelines for ensuring protection of glaciers in Himalayan States as
strategic freshwater reserves for human consumption, for agriculture and as sources
for watershed recharge.
11. The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue such directions to the
Authority,  as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
12. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance-sheet in such form as may be
prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the Authority  shall be audited at such intervals as may be specified
by the Central Government.
13. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year an annual report in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, giving a full account of its activities
during the previous year, and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central
Government.
(2) A copy of the report forwarded under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
14. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Authority or
any member, officer or other emplyees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
15. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Vice-
Chairperson or any member, officer of the Authority or any other person subject to such
conditions, if any as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under
this Act, as it may deem necessary.
Functions of
the Authority.
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Accounts and
audits.
Annual
Report.
Power to
delegate.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
16. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in the making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10
15

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is well-known that snow and glaciers are vital to human beings as they make our
rivers perennial which have been source of our civilization and livelihood.
The glaciers of the Himalayas have the largest concentration of fresh water. These
glaciers are unique as they are located outside the polar regions. These glaciers are major
source of water to the rivers originating from the Himalayas. However, the potential of water
available from glaciers have not been exploited in proper manner for the reason that we have
failed to understand and monitor the sustainability of glaciers in view of changing global
scenarios of climate. In recent past, some efforts have been made to carry out important
study covering entire Himalayan Glaciers. However, there is an urgent need to address a
large number of questions about the health and state of glaciers.
It is, therefore, necessary to constitute an independent authority to coordinate with
organizations working in the field of natural resources of fresh water in the form of snow and
glaciers and suggest measures to conserve these natural resources by developing methods
of extraction and dissemination of reliable and quick information from remote sensing data
pertaining to snow and glaciers of the Himalayas and to save snow cover and glaciers of the
Himalayan region.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’
May 13, 2016.
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of an authority to be known as the Snow
and Glaciers Authority of India to suggest measures for conservation of glaciers in Himalayan
States. It also provides for payment of salary and allowances to the nominated members of
the Authority. Clause 4 provides for appointment of the Secretary, Chief Accounts Officer
and other officers and staff of the Authority. Clause 5 provides that the Authority shall have
its headquarters at Dehradun and other regional offices at such other places in Himalayan
States as it may deem fit. Clause 8 provides for constitution of the Conservation of Snow and
Glaciers in Himalayan States Fund. It also provides that the Central Government shall credit
requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees five hundred crore would be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
6

7
MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of Snow and Glaciers Authority of India to conserve Himalayan
glaciers which are receding at a fast rate and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1146LS—11-07-2016.