As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABBA ON 
Bill No. 162 of 1985 , 
THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC -Sui3STANCES- V 
BILL, 1985 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CUUSI!'S 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Power to add or to omit from the list of psychotropic substances. 
CHAPTER II 
AUTHORITIES AND OFFICERS 
4. Central Government to take measures for preventing and com-
bating abuse of and illicit traffic in narcotic drugs, etc. 
5. Officers of the CeDtral Government. 
6. The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Consultative 
Committee. 
7. Offic.:rs of State Government. 
CHAPTER III 
PROHIBITION CONTROL AND REGULATION 
8. Prohibition of certain operations. 
9. Power of Central Government to permit, control and regulate. 
10. Power to State Government to permit, control and regulate. 
11. Narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, etc., not liable to 
distress or attachment. 
12. Restrictions over external dealings in narcotic drugs and psycho-
tropic substances. 
13. Special provisions relating to coca plant and coca leaves for use 
in the preparation of flavouring agent. 
14. Special provision relating to cannabis. 
CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
15. Punishment for contravention in·. relation to poppy straw. 
16. Punishment for contravention in relation to COCil plant and coca 
. leaves. 
17. Punishment for contravention in relation to prepared opium. 

.......... ',' '. (ii) 
CLAUSES 
r 
18. Punishment for contravention in 
opium. 
relation to opium poppy and 
19. Punishment for embezzlement of opium b): cultivator. 
20. Punishment for contravention in relation to cannabis plant and 
cannabis. 
21. Punishment for contravention in relation to manufactured drugs 
and preparations. 
22. Punishment for contravention in relation to psychotropic sub-
stances. 
23. Punishment for illegal import. into India, export from India or 
transhipment 'of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. 
24. Puniflhment for external dealings in narcotic drugs and psycho-
tropic substances in contravention of section 12. 
25. Punishment for allowing premises, etc .. to be used for commission 
of an offence. 
26. Punishment for certain acts by licensee or his servants. 
27. Punishment for illegal possession in small quantity for personal 
con~umption of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or 
consumption of such drug or substance. 
28. Punishment for attempts to commit offences. 
29. Punishment for abetment and criminal conspirucy. 
30. Pt'eparation. 
31. Enhanced punishment for certain offences after previous conviction. 
32. Punishment for offence for which no punishment is provided. 
33. Application of section 360 of the Code' of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
and of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958. 
34. Security for ~lJstaining from ('ommissiCln of ofJ'.>Jlc·e. 
35. Prt-sumption of (:ulpablt' llltmtal state. 
:U;. Offences to hE' Uifo(j llummbrily. 
:n. Otren(;t'S to be cognizabk 
:m. Offences by companies. 
39. Power of court to release certain offenders on probation. 
40. Power of court to publish names, place of business, etc.; of certain 
offenders. 
CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE 
41. Power to issue warrant and authorisation. 
42. Power of entr~', ~ear('h. ~~('izur.E' und arrest without warrant or 
authorisation. 
43. Power of seizure aud arrest in public places. 

(iii) 
44. Power of enh·y. search, seizure and arrest in relating to coca 
plant, opium poppy and cannabis plant. 
45. Procedure where sei~ure of goods liable to confiscation not practi-
cable. 
46. Duty of land holder to give information of illegal cultivation. 
47. Duty ot certain officers to give information of illegal cultivation. 
48. Power of attachment of crop illegally cultivated. 
49. Power '~ stop and search conveyance. 
!lO. Condition~ under whi<:h se~Jr(.'h of persons shall he (.~ondHcted. 
51. Provisions of the Code of ~rilIlinal. Pr()cl~dl.lrc, H17:l tn apply to war-
rant/'!. arrJ'sts. s.,arC'hps ilnd sei:mrf's. 
52. Disposal of pc:'l'linnS arrested and art ic\('s ~l'il'.rrJ. 
53. Power to invest oHicers Qr certain d(~partments with pow(>rs of 
an officer-in-charge of a poHce station. 
54. Presumption from possession of illicit articles. 
55. Police to take charge of articles seized and delivered. 
56. Obligation of officers to assist each other. 
57. Report of arrest and seizure. 
58. Punishment for vexatious entry, search. seizure or arrest. 
59. Failure of officer in duty or his connivance at the contravention 
of the provisions of this Act. 
GO. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants, articles and convey-
ances to confiscation. 
61. Confiscation of goods used for concealing illicit drugs or substances. 
62. Confiscation of sale proceeds of illicit drugs or substances. 
63. Procedure in making confiscations. 
64. Power to tender immunity from prosecution. 
(i5. Power to make rules regulating disposal of confiscated articles and 
rewards. 
66. Presumption as to do('uments in certain CflReS. 
67. Power to (':III fol' information. f't<'. 
68. Information as to commij;sion (,f ofl'enl'l's. 
CHAIYfEH VI 
MTsCnLANEOtTS 
69. Protection of action tClkE"n in goorl faith. 
70. Central GovCml11('Tlt nmi State Gm-ernmf'n1,: tn hove Tf'!FlrO to 
intemational conventions while making rules. 
" 

(iv) 
.- -- . ., 
CLAUSES 
71. Power of Government to establish centres for identification, t1'eat-
ment, etc., of addicts and for supply of narcotic drugs and psycho .. 
tropic substances. 
'12. Recovery of sums due to Government. 
73. Bar of jurisCiiction. 
74. Transitional provisions. 
75. Power to delegate. 
76. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
77. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament. 
78. Power of State Government to make rules. 
79. Application of the Customs Act, 1962. 
80. Application of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 not barred. 
81. Saving of State and special laws. 
82. Repeal and savings. 
83. Power to remove difficulties. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. 162 of 1185 
THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES 
BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to narcotic drugs, to m4ke 
stringent provisions for the control and regulation Of operations Nlat-
ing to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and for mlltter, 
C'onnected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be cal1ed the Narcotic Drug! and Psychotropic 
Substances' Act, 1985. 
(2) It extends to the Whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates 
10 may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for different 
States and any reference in n~'I:;' :·~u~h prOVIsion to the commencement 
. '. of· this Act .shall be construed in: relation to any State as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision in that State . 
. ' .. 2. In this Act,. unless the context ot:lCrw:o;e requires,-
15:" '(i) "addict" means a person addicted to any narcotic drug or 
psychotropiC tubltance; 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Defini-
tiona. 

(ii) "Board" means the Central Board of Exci8e and Customs 
constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1863; 
(iii) "cannabis (hemp) ,t means-
(a) charas, that is, the separated resin, in whatever form, 
whether crude or purified, obtained from the cannabis plant and 5 
also includes concentrated preparation and resift mown as 
hashish oil or liquid hashish; 
(b) gan;a, that is, the flowering or fruiting tops of the can-
nabis plant (excluding the seeds and leaves when not accom-
panied by the tops), by whatever name they may be known or 10 
designated; and 
(e) any mixtun' with or without :my neutral material, of 
any of the abnve fOl'ns of cannabis or Ilny drink prepared tnere-
from; 
(iv) "cannabIS plant" means any plant r:1f the genus CannabiS; 15 
(1') "coca derivative" means· 
(a) crude cocaine, that Is, any extract of coca leaf which 
can be used, directly or indirectly, for the manufacture of cocaine; 
(b) ecgonine and aU the derivatives of ecgonine from which 
it can be recovered; 20 
(e) cocaine, that is, methyl ester of benzoyl-ecgonine and 
its salts; and 
(d) all preparations containing more than 0.1 per cent. of 
cocaine; 
(vi) "coca lear' meanl'l-
(a) the leaf of the coca plant except a leaf from which ;d' 
ecgonine, cocaine and any other ecgonine alkaloids have bc:!n 
removed; 
(b) any mixture thereof with or without any neutral ma-
.,-
- I 
terial. go 
but does not include any preparation ront.ainin,::-not m<lre than n.t 
per cent. of cocaine.: 
(vii) "coca plant" mf'anl'l the plant tlf any l'lpecieR tlf the ~nus 
Erythroxylon: 
(viii) "conveyance" means a conveyance of any' d8seription 35 
whRtlt!lever Rnti includel'l Jlny niT~,.nft. vrhiclr. or ve!'l!'lel: 
(ix) ·'International. ('onvpnti~t1" nlf'!lns-·· 
(a) the Single convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 adopted 
by the United Nations Conference at New York in March, l~; 
(b) the Protocol, amending the Convention mentioned. in.foG 
sub-clause (a), adopted by the United Nations Conference at 
Geneva in March, 1972; J. 

10 
3 
(c) the Convention on Psychotropic Sl:bstances, 1971 adopt-
ed by the United Nations CoQ,ference at Vienna in February, 
1971; and 
(d) any other international convention, Or protocol or other 
iDatrument amending an international convention, relating to 
narcotic drugs or psychotropic su bstances which may be ratified 
or acceded to by India after the commencement of this Act; 
(x) "manufacture", in relation to norcotic drugs or psychotropic 
substances. includes-
(1) all processes other than production by which such drugs 
or substances may be obtained; 
(2) refining of such drugs or substances; 
(3) transformation of such drugs or substances; and 
(4) making of preparation (ot~rwise than in a pharmacy 
1.1 on prescription) with or containing such drugs or substances; 
(~) "manufactured drug" means-
(a) all coca derivatives, medicinal cannabis, opium tleriva-
tives and pappy straw concentrate; 
(b) any other narcotic substance or preparation Which the 
~o Central Government may, having regard to the available infor-
mation as to its nature, or to a decision, if any, under any Inter-
national Convention, by notification· in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be a manufactured drug, 
but dOt!s not include any narotic substanre or preparation which the 
:.t5 Central Government may, huving regard to the available information 
as to its nature,. or to a deciSion, if any, under any International 
Convention, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare not to be 
a manufactured drug, 
(~i) "medicinal cannabis", that is, medicinal hemp, means any 
:iO extract or tincture of cannabis (hemp) ; 
(~ii) "Narcotics Commissioner" means the Narcotics Commis-
sioner appointed under section 5; 
(a..iv) "narcotic drug" means coca leaf, cannabis (hemp), opium, 
poppy straw and includes all manufactured drugs; 
35 (;l"1') "opium" meuns- .. · 
45 
(II) the coagulated juice of the opium poppy; and 
(b) any mixture, with or without any neutral material, of 
the coagulated juice of the opium poppy, 
but does not include any preparation containing not more than 0.2 
per cent. of morphine; 
(x1,i) "opium deri.vaUve" mean~-· 
(a) medicinal opjum, that is, opium which has undergone 
the processes necessary to adapt it for medicinal use in aC(f)rd-
unce with the requirements of the Indian Pharmacopoeia or any 
other pharmacopoeia notified in this behalf by the Central Gov-
ernment, whether in powder form or granulated or otherwise or 
mixed with neutral materials; 

4-
(b) prepared opium, that is, any product of opium Qbtained 
, .... 1Iy .ap.y Jlerles 01 operatio~J designed to .~ansfol'Jl} ~pi~ in~, an 
extract suitable for smoking and the dross or other residue re-
maining after opium is smoked; 
(c) phenanthrene alkaloids, namely, morphine, codeine, 5 
thebaine and their salts; 
(d) diacetylmorphine. that is, the alkaloid also known as 
dia-morphine or heroin and its salts; and 
(e) all preparations containing more thaQ. 0.2 per cent. of 
morphine or containing any diacetylmorphine; JO 
(xvii.) "opium poppy" means-
(a) the plant of the species Papaver somniferum L.; and 
(b) the plant of any other species of Papaver from which 
opium or any phenanthrene alkaloid can be extracted and 
which the Central Government may, by notification in the 15 
Official Gazette, declare to be opium poppy for the purposes 
of this Act; 
(xviii) "poppy straw" means all parts (except the seeds) of the 
opium poppy after harvesting whether in their original form or cut, 
crushed or powdered and whether or not juice has been extracted 20 
therefrom; 
r (xix) "poppy straw co~centrate" means the material arising 
when poppy straw has entered into a process for the concentration of 
its alkaloids; 
(xx) "preparation", in relation to a narcotic drug or psychotropic 25 
substance, means anyone or more such drugs or substances in dosage 
form or any solution O~ mixture, in whatever physical state, contain-
ing one or more such drugs or substances; 
(xxi) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; ~ 30 
(xxii) "production" means the separation of opium, poppy straw, 
coca leaves or cannabis from the plants from which they are obtained; 
(xxiii) "psychotropic substance" means any substance, natural 
or synthetic, or any natural material or any salt or preparation of 
such substance or materlal included in the list of psychotropic sub- 5 
stances specified in the Schedule; 3. 
(xxiv) "to import inter-State" means to bring into a State or 
Union territory in India from another State or Union territory in 
India; 
,. (xxv) "to import into India", ·with its grammatical variati.ons 4.() 
and cognate expressions, means to bring into India from a place out-
side India and includes the bringing into any port or airport or place 
in India of a narcotic drug or a psychotropic substance intended to 
betaken out of India without being removed from the vessel, aircraft, 
v~hlc:le or any other ('Qnveyance in which it is being carried. 45 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause and clause (xxvi), 
"India" includes the territorial waters of India; 
.. ~ 

2 of 1974. 
5 
IO 
(=m) "to export from India", with jts grammatical variatiaal 
and cOlnate expressions, means to take out of India to a place outside 
fJldia; 
(xxvii) "to export inter-State" means to take out of a -State or 
Union territory in India to another State or Union territory in India; 
(:r:.l:Viii) "to transport" means to take from one place to another 
witmn tbesame State or Union territory. 
(xxix) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 have the meanings 
reape~iJ.vely asaigned to them in that Code. 
E~ticm.-For the purposes of clauses (v), (vi), (n) and (m), 
tthe percentaaes in the case ,of liquid preparations shall be calculated on 
the basis that a preparation containing one per cent. of a substance, means 
a preparation in which one gram of substance, if solid, or one mililitre of 
Ilubstance, if liquid, is contained in everyone hundred mililitre of the 
15 preparation and so on in proportion for any greater or less percentage: 
20 
30 
Provided that the Central Government may, having regard to the 
developments in the field of methods of calculating percentages h ]jquid 
preparations prescribe, by rules, any other basis which it may deem 
appropriate for such calculation. 
3. The Central GoverIlment may, if satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do on the basis of-
(a) the information and evidence which has become available 
to it with respect to the nature and effects of, and the abuse or the 
scope for abuse of, any substance (natural· or synthetic) or natural 
material or any salt or preparation of such substance or material; 
and 
(b) the modifications or provisions (if any) which have been 
made to, or in, any International Convention with respect to such 
substance, natural material or salt or preparation of such substance 
or material, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the caSe may be. 
omit from, the list of psychotropic substances specified in the Schedule 
luch substance or natural material or salt or preparation of such sub-
35 .tance or material. 
CHAPrER II 
AUTHORITIES AND OFFICERS 
4. (1) SUbject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Govern-
menl shall take all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient 
40 for the purpose of preventing and combating abuse of narcotic drugs 
and psychotropic substances and the illicit traffic therein. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the pro-
viaions of sub-section (1), the measures which the Central Govenament 
-may take under that sub-seetion include measu.res with respect to aJa or 
45.any of the following matters, namely:-
50 
(6) coordination of actions by various ofticers, State Governments 
·ad· -other autborltiel-
(i) under thil Act, or 
(ii~ under any other law for the time being in force in 
connection with the enforcement of the provisions of thiv Actj 
Power to 
add to or 
omit 
from the 
list of 
psycho-
tropic 
aubl· 
taDCel. 
Central 
Govern-
meat to 
take 
meuurea 
for pre-
v_tiDe 
and com-
batiag 
abWleof 
and Wi-
clt ... c 
in_-
cotfc 
drup,etc. 

ofticen 
of 
Cent.ral 
Govern-
ment. 
TheNar-
eotic 
!)ru15 
and 
Psycho-
troPic 
subs-
tances. 
Colwul-
tatlw 
CoIDlBlt-
tee •. 
8 
(b) obligations under the International Conventions; 
(c) assistance to the concerned authorities in foreign countries 
and concerned international organisations with a view to facilitating 
coo.rrunation and universal action for prevention and suppression of 
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances; 5 
(d) identification, trea~ent, education, after care, rehabilitation 
and social re-integration of addicts; 
(e) such other matters as the Central Government deems neceS-
sary or expedient for the purpose of securing the effective implemen-
tation of the provisions of this Act and preventing and combating the 10 
abuse of narcotic drugs and psYchotropic substances and illicit trafli.c 
therein. 
(3) The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary or ex-
pedient so to do for the purposes of tbis Act, by order, published in the 
. ot&cial Gazette, constitute an authority or a hierarchy of authorities by 15 
such name or names as may be spedfied In 1IIe order for the purpose of 
exercisiD, such of the powers and funct;ons of the Central Government 
UDder this Act and for taking measures with respect to such of the 
matters referred to lin sub-section (2) as may be mentioned in the order, 
and subject to the supervision and control of the Central Government and 20 
the provisions of such order, such authority or authorities may exercise 
the powers and take the measures so mentioned in the order as if .mch 
authority or authorities had been empowered by this Ad to exercise those 
powers and take such measures. 
5. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3) of 'Section :r 
4, the Central Government shall appoint a Narcotics Commissioner and .J 
may also appoint such other officers with such designations as it thinks 
fit for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Narcotics Commissione.r shall, either by himself or through 
officers subordinate to him, e)rercise all powers and perform all functions 
relating to the superintendence of the cultivation of the opium poPPy and 30 
production of opium and shall also exercise and perform such other 
powers and functions a's may be entrusted to him by the Central Gov-
ernment. 
(3) The officers appointed under sub-section (1) shall be subject to 
the general control and direction of the Central Goven;tment, or, if so 35 
directed by that Government, also of the Board or any other authority 
or o~cer. . 
6. (1) The Central Government m,ay constitute, by notification in the 
Heal Gazette, an advisory committee to be 'called ''The Narcotic Drugs 
and .Psychotropic Substances Consultative Committee" (hereinafter in this 40 
eection referred to as the Committee) ·to advise the Central Government 
on such matters relating to the administration of this Act as are referred 
to it by that Govenunent from time to time. 
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such other mem-
bers, not exceeding twenty, as may be appointed by the CeDtral Govern- 45 
mment. ! 
(3) The Committee shall meet when required to do so by the Central 
Government and shall have power t~ regulate its own procedure. 

, 
(4), The Committee may, if it deems it neeessary so to do for tbe 
efficient discharge of any of its 'functions, constitute one or more sub-
committees and may appoiDt to any such sub-C'Ommittee, whether 
generally or for the consideration of any particular matter, any person 
I: (including a non-official) who is 'not a member of the Committee. :J 
(5) The term of oftice of, the manner of filling 'casual vacancies in 
the oftices of and 'the allowances, i' ~ any, payable to, the Chairman and 
other members of the Committee, and the condWons and restrictions su),. 
jed to which the Committee may appoint a person who is not a member 
10 of the Committee as a member of any of its sub-eommittees, shan be 
such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Gov~rnment. 
7. (1) The State Government may appoint such officers with such 
designations as it thinks fit for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The officers appointed under sub-section (1) shall be subject to 
'5 the general control and direction of the State Government, or, if so 
directed by that Government, also of any other authority or officer. 
20 
CHAPTER ITI 
PROHIBITION, CONTROL AND REGULATION 
8. No person. shall-
(a) cultivate any coca plant or gather any portion of coca plant; 
or 
(b) cultivate the opium poppy or any cannabis plant; or 
(c) produce, manufacture, possess, sell, purchase, transport, ware-
house, use, consume, import inter-State, export inter-State, import 
into India, export from India or tranship any narcotic drug or psy-
,chotropic substance, 
except for medical or 'Scientific purposes and in the manner and to the 
extent provided by the provisions of this Act or the rules or orders made 
thereunder and in a case where any such provison, imposes any require-
:~I) ment by way of licen~e, permit or authorisation, also in accordance with 
the terms and conditions of such licence, pennit or authorisation: 
ProVided that, and subject to the other provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder, the prohibition against the cultivation of the 
cannabis plant for the production of ganja or the production, possession-' 
35 uS~J consumption, purchase, sale, transport, warehousing, import inter-
State and export inter-State of ganja for any purpose other than medi-
cal and scientific purpose shall take effect only from the date which 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf. 
40 9. (1) Subject to the proviSions of section 8, the Central Gove1'l'lment 
.ma~, by rules-
45, -
«(1) permit and regulate-
(i) the cultivation, or gathering of any portion (such culti-
vation or gathering being only on account of the Central 
Government) of coca plant, or the production, possession. sale, 
purchase, transport, import Inter-State, export inter-State, use 
pr consumption of coca leaves; 
Oftlcera 
of State 
Govern-
ment. 
Prohibl-
tionof 
certain 
opera-
tions. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
permit, 
control 
andre-
,u1ate. 

8 
(ii) the cultivation (such cultivation being only on account 
of Central Government) of the opium poppy; 
(iii) the productiQn and manufacture of opium and production 
of poppy straw; 
(iv) the sale of opium and opium derivatives from theCeIltr.al 5 
Government factories fo.r export from India or sale to St&ttt Gov-
ernment or to manufacturing chemists; 
(v) the manufacture of manufactured drugs (other than pre-
pared opium) but not including manufacture of medicinal opium 
or any preparation containing any manufactured drug from 10 
materials which the maker is lawfully ezatitled to posaesIj 
(vi) the manufacture, possession, transport, import inter-
State, export inter-State, sale, purchase, consumption or use of 
psychotropic substances; 
(vii) the import into India and export from India and tran- 15 
shipment of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances; 
(b) prescribe any other matter .requisite to render effective the 
control of the Central Government over any of the matters specified 
in clause (4). 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- gO 
going power, such rules may-
(a) empower the Central Government to fix from time to time 
the limits within which licences may be given for the cultivation of 
the opium poppy; 
(b) require that all opium, the produce of land cultivated with 25 
the opium poppy, shall be delivered by the cultivators to the offtcers 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government; 
(c) prescribe the forms and conditions of licences for cultivatiOll 
of the opium poppy and for production and manufacture of opium; 
the fees that may be charged. therefor; the authorities by which such 30 
licences may be granted, withheld, refused or cancelled and the au-
thorities before which appeals against the orden of withholding, re-
fusal or cancellation of licences shall lie; 
(d) prescribe that opium shall be weighed, examined and classi-
fied according to its quality and consistence by the officers authorised 35 
in this behalf by the Central Government in the presence of the cul-
tivator at the time of delivery by the cultivator; 
(e) empower the Central Government to ft" from time to time 
the price to be paid to the cultiva~rs for the opium delivered; 
(f) provide for the weighment, examination and classification, 40 
according to the qU'aUty and consistence, of the opium received at the 
factory and the deductions from or additions (if any) to the stan-
dat'd price to be made in accordance with the result of such examina-
tion; and the authorities by which'the decisions with regard to the 
weighment, examination, classification, deductions or addttions shall 45 
be made and the authorities before which appeals aplnst such de--
cisiclDs shall lie; 

r t 
(g) l'8qulm that opiwn delivered.. by a cwtiv.atDr, if foUlld u • 
1'8Ult of exallli.nMion in. the Central GoverJUl18l1t factory to be. adul-
terated, ~ be conftacated by the officers authorised in this behalf; 
(h) prescribe the forms and conditions of HCences for the manu-
5 factu~ of manufaet1U"ed dfougs, the authoritiei by whim sueh licen-
ces may be granted and the fees that may charged therefer; 
. 
(i) prescribe the forms and conditions of licences or permits for 
the manufacture, possession, transport, import inter-State, export 
inter-.State, sale. purchase, consumption or use of psychotropic sub-
Ia staaees, the- lWtboritiee by which such licences or per-mits may be 
a,ranted. and the fees that may be Clharged theretor; . 
(j) prescribe the ports and otbe!' places at which any kind of 
nal'COtic drugs 01" psychotropic substances may be· imported into India 
or exported from India or transhipped~ the forms and conditions of 
15 certificates, authorisations or permits, as the case may be, for such 
import, export or transhipment; the authorities by which such certi-
fiea_, authorisations or permits may be granted and the feU! that 
may be charged therefor. 
10. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 8, the State Government 
20 may, by ru1ee--
(G') permit and regulate-
(~) the possession, transport, import inter-State, export inter-
State, warehousing, sale, pu.n:hase, consumption and use of poppy 
straw; 
25 (ii) the possession, transport, import inter-State,_ export 
inter-State, sale, purchase, consumption and use of opium; 
(iii) the cultivation of any cannabis plant, production, manu-
facture, possession, transport, import inter-State, expori inter-
State, sale, purchase, consumption or Ul& of cannabis (excluding 
30 Cha1'(8) ; 
35 
(iv) the manufacture of medicinal opium or any preparation 
containing any manufactured drug from materials which the 
maker is lawfully entitled· to possess; 
(v) the possession, tZ'ansport, purchase, sale, import inter-
. State. export inter-State, use or consumption of manufactured 
drugs other than prepeNi opium aDd of coca leaf and any pre-
paration containing any manufactured drug; 
(vi) the manufacture and possession of prepareti opium 
from opium lawfully possessed by an addict registered with the 
State Government on medical advice for W. penonal conlUmp. 
tion: 
Provided that save in so far as may be expressly provided in the 
rules made under sub-clauses (iv) and (v), nothing in section 8 
shall apply to the import int ~r-State, export inter-State, transport, 
possession, purchase, sale, use or consumption of manufactured drugs 
wh1~ Jl'e th~ pro~rt~ an~ in ~ pOBS~Qn of the Govemment: 
Power of 
State 
Govern-
mentto 
permit, 
control 
and regu-
late. 

Narcotic 
clrugsand 
psycho-
tropic 
substan-
ces, etc., 
not 
liable to 
distress 
or at-
tacb-
.... 
10 
Provided further that such drugs as are referred. to in the pre-
ceding provisO shall not be 'sold or otherwise delivered to any person 
who, under the rules made by the State Government under the 
aforesaid sub-clauses, is not entitled to their l?Ossession; 
(b) prescribe any other matter requisite to render effective the 5 
control of the State Government over any of the matters specified 
in clause (a). 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may-
(a) empower the State Government to declare any place to be 10 
a warehouse wherein it shall be the duty of the owners to deposit 
all such poppy straw as is legally imported inter-State and is intend-
ed for export inter-State or export from India; to regulate the safe 
custody of such poppy straw warehoused and the removal of such 
poppy straw for sale or export inter-State Or export from India; to 15 
levy fees for such warehousing and to prescribe the manner in which 
and the period after which the poppy straw warehoused shall be 
disposed of in default of payment of fees; 
(b) provide that the limits within which licences may be given 
for the cultivation of any cannabis plant shall be fixed from time to 20 
time by or under the orders of the State Government; 
(c) provide that only the cultivators licenced by the prescribed 
authority of the State Government shall be authorised to engage in 
cultivation of any cannabis plant; 
(d) require that all cannabis, the produce of land cultivated with 25 
cannabis plant, shall be delivered by the cultivators to the officers of 
the State Government authorised in this behalf; 
(e) empower the State Government of fix from time to time, the 
price to be paid to the cultlvato.rs for the cannabis delivered; 
(f> prescribe the forms and conditions of licences or permits for 30 
the purposes specified in sub-clauses (i) to (vi) of clause (a) of sub-
section (1) and the authorities by' 'lYhich such licences or permits 
may be granted and the fees that 'may be charged therefor. 
11. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law 
or contract, no narcotic drug, psychotropic substance, coca plant, the 35 
opium poppy or cannabis plant shall be liable ~o be distrained gr attached 
by any person for the recovery of any money under any order or degree " 
of any court or authority, or otherwise. 

II 
12. No Person shall engage in or. control any trade whereby a nar- Restric-
cotic drug or psychotropic substance is obtained outside India and sup- tions over 
plied to any person outside India save with the previous authorisation external 
of' the Central Government and subject to such conditions as may be dealings 
in narco-5 imposed by "that Government in this behalf. tic drugs 
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 8, the Central 
Government may permit, with or without conditions, and on behalf of 
Government, the cultivation of any coca plant or gathering of any portion 
thereof or the production, possession, sale, purchase, transport, import 
10 inter-State, export inter-State or import into India of coca leaves for 
use in the preparation of any flavouring agent which shall not contain 
any alkaloid and to the extent necessary for such use. 
and 
psycho-
tropic 
subs-
tances. 
Special 
provi-
sions re-
lating to 
coca 
plant 
and coca 
leaves 
for use 
in the 
prepara-
tionof 
ftavour-
illl agent. 
14. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 8, Government special 
provision 
may, by general or special order and subject to such conditions as may relatinl 
15 be specified in such order, allow cultivation of any cannabis plant for 
industrial purposes only of obtaining fibre or seed or for horticultural 
purpOses. 
20 
CHAPTER IV 
0Fn:Na:s AND PBNAL'lDS 
15. Whoever, in contrav~ntion of any provision of this Act or any 
rule or order made Or condition of a licence granted thereunder, pro-
duces, possesses, transports, imports inter-State, exports inter-State, 
&ells, purchases, uses or omits to warehouse poppy straw or removes or 
. does any act in respect of warehoused poppy straw, shall be punishable 
25 with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten 
years but which may extend to twenty years and shall also be liable to 
fine whi~b shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend 
to two 1a1& rupees: 
. Provided that the court may, for reasons to be reeorded in the judg-
30 ment, impose a fine exceeding two lakh rupees. 
to canna-
bis. 
Punish-
mentfor 
contra-
vention 
inrela-
tion to 
poppy 
straw. 

pUllliftl-
~tfor 
contra-
ftSltion 
inrela-
tion to 
coca 
plant and 
coca 
leaves. 
Punish-
mentfor 
contra-
vention 
in relitttan 
to·pre-
pared 
opium. 
Punish-
mentfor 
contra-
vention 
in rela-
tion to 
opium 
poppy 
and 
opium\ 
Put*h-
mentfor 
embez-
zlementof 
opium 
by culti-
vator. 
tt 
,1 •. wa ....... .m 1tontraventiea afany .poWiion ,01. 4bis 1lator any 
rwle or order made or condition of lic:eace gramed tbeJeunder, alttvates 
any -coca plant or gathers any portion of a coca plant or pI'Odaees. 
poSle8leS. &aIls. purchases. transports, imports inter.sta.te, exports 'inter-
State or uses coca leaves,. shall be punishable with !'iIcm>us imprtIcm.. 5 
ment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may 
extend to twenty years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not 
be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg-
ment. impJ~ a fine exceeding two lakh rupees. 10 
17. Whoever. in contravention of QD'y provision of this Act or aDy 
rule or order made or condition of licence granted thereunder manu-
'factures, p08lle8SeS, eeHs, purellases. '1:I'aa8ports, imports inter-State, 
exports inter-State or uses prepared opium 'Shall be pmrishablewith 
rigorous imprisonment for a tenn which shall not be leIS than ten years 15 
but which may extend to ·twenty years and shall also ,be liable to fine 
which shaH not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to 
two lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg-
ment, impose a fine exceeding two lakh rupees. :10 
:11. Whoever, in e8Iltraventionof any ,provision of this Act, or any 
rUlle or order made· or condition of licenee granted thereunder cultivates 
the ·opium poppy or produces, manufactures, posses&es, sells, purchases, 
-traDBports, imPlDrts inter-State, exports inter-State or uses opium shaH 
be punishaole with rigorous imprisonment for a tenn which siIall not 25 
be less than ten years but which may extend to twenty years and shall 
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but 
which may extend to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judl-
ment, impose a fine exceeding two lakh mpees. 
19. Any cultivator licensed to cultivate the opium poppy an account 
of . the Ccn tl'al Government who embeaz1es or otMorwise Wegally dis-
''}X'JSes -of lht: opilml 'produced or my ,part thereof, Ihall be puDisDble 
withrigOi.'OUS imprisonment for a tenn which shall not be less than ten 
'yean ·but whieh may Q1eftd"to twenty years 'and '1halI also be liable to 35 
·h.-blah shall not _ 'leis than ODe la1dl rupees wtwltlch may extend 
to two lakh rupees: 
PrOYiied that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg-
ment, impo!;e a fine exceediAg two iakh RqMIeS. 

, 
13 
to. Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act or 8Qy PwUah-
rate or order made or condition of licence gr.nted thereunder,- menttor 
contra-
(a) cultivates any cannabis plant; or 
(b) produces, manufactures, possesses, sells, purehasea, tran. 
ventlonin 
relation 
toeanna-
bia plant 
ad 
canna.. 
bfa. 
5 ports, imports inter-State, exports inter-State or uses cannabis. 
to 
shall be punishable-
(i~ where such contravention relates to ganja or the cultivation 
of cannabis plant, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees; 
(d) where such contravention relates to cannabis other than 
ganja, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than ten years but which may extend to twenty years and shal' also 
be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees and 
15 which may extend to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, 
impose a tine exceeding two lakh rupees. 
21. Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act, or any 
rule or order made or condition of licence granted thereunder manu-
20 factures, possesses, sEliDs, purchases, transports, import,; inter-State. 
exports inter-State or uses any manufactured drug Or any preparation 
containing any manufactured drug shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which s'aall not be less than ten years, but 
which may extend to twenty years and shall also be liable to fine which 
25 shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh 
rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg-
ment, impose a flne exceeding two lakh rupees. 
22. Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act or any 
30 rule or order made or condition of licence granted thereunder, manu-
factures, possesses, sells, purchases, transports, import,; inter-State, ex-
ports inter-State, or uses any psychotropic substance shall be punishable 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten 
years but which may extend to twenty years and shall also be liable to 
35 fine which shall not be less than one laith rupees but whiCh may extend 
to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that tl:l4t court may, for reasons to be r~orded in the judi-
mint, imposeaftDe"exeeeding two lakh ~. 
Puniah-
mentfor 
contra-
ventionin 
relation 
to manu-
faetured 
drup 
and pre .. 
parationll. 
Puniah-
mentfor 
contra-
ventionin 
relation 
topsy-
chotropic 
sub-
stancu. 

Punish-
mentfor 
illegal 
import 
into 
India, 
export 
from 
India or 
tran-
ahipment 
of nar. 
cotic 
drugs and 
psycho-
tropie 
sub-
stances. 
Punish. 
mentfor 
.;:xtem'iJ 
dea1in~3 
in nar-
cotic 
c:1rugs 
and 
psycho-
tropic 
substan. 
ces in 
contra-
vention 
of sec-
tIon 12. 
Punish-
mentfor 
allowing 
nremi-
8(~S, etc., 
to be 
used for 
commis-
sion of 
an 01-
fence. 
Punish. 
menttor 
certain 
acts by 
lieenaee 
or his 
_rvanta 
•• 
23. Whoever, in contravention of any proVlslon of this Act or arty 
rule or order made or condition of licence or permit granted or certift-
C:lte or authorisation issued thereunder, imports into India or exports 
from India or tranships any narcotic· drug Or psychotropic substance 
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall 5 
not be less than ten years but which may extend to twenty years and 
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees 
but may extend to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg-
ment, impose a fine exceeding two lakh rupees. 10 
24. Whoever engages in or controls any trade whereby a narcotic 
drug or a psychotropic substance is obtained outside India and supplied 
to any person outside India without the previous authorisation of the 
Central Government Or otherwise than in accordance with the condi-
tions (if any) of such authorisation granted under section 12, shall be 15 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than ten years but which may extend to twenty years and shall 
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but 
may extend to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg- 20 
ment, impose a fine exceeding two lakh rupees. 
25. Whoever, being the owner or occupier or having the control of 
use of any house, room, enclosure, space. place, animal or conveyance. 
knowingly permits it to be used for the commission by any other per~on 
of an offence punishable under any provision of this Act, shall be 25 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than ten years but which may extend to twenty years and shRll 
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but 
which ma,Y' extend to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg- 30 
ment, imp0l:ie a fine exceeding two lakh rupees, 
2&. If the holder of any licence, permit or authorisation granted under 
thi~_ Act or any rule or order made thereunder or any person in his 
employ and actinl{ on his behalf-
(c> omits, without any reasonable cause, to maintain accounts 35 
or to submit any return in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act, or any rule made thereunder; 
. (b) faHs to produce without any reasonable caUSe such licence, 
permit or authoriR.'ltion on m-mund or any officer ·authorised hy t~le 
Central Government or Sta-teo Government itt this behalf, ~p 

45 of 1860. 
15 
(c) .keeps any ~ccounts or makes any statement which is false 
or which he knows or has reason to believe to be incorrect; or 
(d) wilfully and knowingly does any act in breach of any of 
the conditions of licence, pennit or authorisation for which a 
5 penalty is not prescribed elsewhere in this Act, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three years or with fine or with both. 
27. Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act, or any rule 
or order made or permit issued thereunder, possesses in a small quantity, 
10 any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, which is proved to have 
been intended for his personal consumption and not for sale or distri-
bution, OJ' consumes any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, shall, 
notwithstnnding anything contained in this Chapter, be punishable,-
(a) where the narcotic drug or psychotropic substance possess-
15 ed or consumed is cocaine, morphine, diacetyl-morphine or any 
other narcotic drug or any psychotropic substance as may be speci-
fied in this behalf by the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year or with fine or with both; and 
20 (b) where the narcotic drug or psychotropic substance possess-
ed or consumed is other than those specified in or under clause '(a), 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or 
with fine or with both. 
Explanation.-(l) For the purposes of this section "small quantity" 
25 means such quantity as may be specified by the Central Government by 
notification in thp. OfficiRI GR7.P.ttP.. 
(2) Where a person is shown to have been in possession of a small 
quantity of a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, the Durden of 
proving that it was intended for the personal consumption of such per-
30 son and not for sale or distribution, shall lie on such person. ' 
28. Whoever attempts to commit any offence punishable under this 
Chapter or to cause such offence to be committed and in such attempt 
does any act towards the commission of the offence shall be punishable 
with the punishment provided for the offence. 
35 29. (1) Whoever abets or is a par~y to a criminal conspiracy to 
commit, an oft'ence punishable under this Chapter, shall, whether such 
offence be or be not committed in consequence of 'Such abetment or in 
pursuance of such criminal conspiracy, and notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 116 of the Indian Penal Code, be punishable with 
40 the punishment }ll'ovided for the offence. ' 
45 
(2) A person abets, or is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit, 
an offence, within the meaning of' this section~ who, in India, abets or is 
a party to the criminal conspiracy to the commission of any act in a place 
without and beyond India which-
(4) would constitute an otlence if committed within India; or 
Punish-
ment for 
illegal 
posses-
sion in 
small 
quantity 
for per. 
sonal 
consump. 
tion of 
any nar. 
cotic 
drug or 
psycho-
tropic 
subs-
tanceor 
consump-
tion of 
such 
drug or 
SUb3_ 
tance. 
Punish. 
mentfor 
ettempts 
to com-
mit 
offences. 
Punish-
ment for 
abet. 
mentand 
criminal 
conspi-
racy. 

Prepara-
tion. 
Ilnhane-
edpun-
ilhment 
for cer. 
tain of-
fences 
after 
previous 
convic_ 
tiOD. 
16 
(b) under the laws of such place, is an offence relating to 
narcotic drugs or psychotropic substance having all the legal condi-
tions required to constitute it such an offen~e the same as or anaio-
gous to the legal conditions required to constitute it an offence 
punishable under this Chapter, if comm;tted within India. 5 
30. If any person makes preparation to do or omits to do anything 
which constitutes an offence punishable under any of the provisions of 
section 15 to section 25 (both inclusive) and from the circumstances of 
the case it may be reasonably inferred that he was determined to carry 
out his intention to commit the offence but had been prevented by cir- 10 
cumstances independent of his will, he shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be Jess than one-half of the 
minimum term (if any). but which may extend to one-half of the maxi-
mum term, or imprisonment witb which he would have been punishable 
in the event of his having committed such offence, and also with fine 15 
which shaH not be less than one-half of the minimum amount (if any) 
of fine with whiCh he would have been punishable, but which may extend 
to one-half of the maximum amount of fine with which he would have 
ordinarily (that is to say in the absence of special .reasons) been punish-
able, in the event aforesaid: 20 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg-
ment, impose a higher fine. 
31. (1) If any person who has been convicted of the commission of, 
or attempt to commit, or abetment of, Or criminal conspiracy to commit, 
any of the offences punishable under section 15 to section 25 (both 25 
inclusive) is subsequently convicted of the commission of, or attempt 
to' commit, or abetment of, or criminal conspiracy to commit, an offence 
pi.uiishable under-
(a) section 15 to section 19. clause (ii) of section 20 and section 
21 to section 25, he shall be punished for the second and every sub- 30 
sequent offence with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than fifteen years but which may extend to thirty years 
and shall also be liable to fine which sha~l not be less than one lakh 
fifty thousand rupees but whi-ch may extend to three lakh rupees: 
(b) clause (i) of section 20, h£> shall be punished for the second 35 
and every subsequent offen.ce for ~ term which may extend to ten 
years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judg-
ment, impose.- 40 
. (i) in a case falling under cl~4se , (a), a fine exceeding three 
lakh rupees; and 
(ii) in a case' fal~ing under clause (b), a fl!he exceeding one lakh 
rupees. 
(2) Where any penon is convict~d by a competent court of'criminal45 
jurlsdictionootside India under any law corresponding to the -proVisions , . .. . . . 
of section 15 to section 25 (both inclusive) section 28 and section 29 . ... . , , 
such person, in r~pect of such conviction, shall' be dealt with for the 
purposes of sub-section (1) as if he hatl been convicted by a colirt in India . 
• • 

lot 1974. 
20 of 1958. 
17 
32. Whoever contravenes any provision of thi'S Act o.r any rule or order 
made, or any condition of any licence, permit or authorisation issued 
thereunder for which no punis~ent is separately provided in' ·this 
Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
5 extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
33. Nothing contained in section 3600.( the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973 or in the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 shsll apply to a 
person convicted of an offence under this Act unless such person is under 
eighteen y.:!ars of age or that the offence for which such p,erson is convicted 
10 is punishable under Sf>ction 26 or section 27. 
34. (1) Whenever any person is convicted of an offence punishable 
under any provision of Chapter IV and the court convicting him is of 
opinion that it is necessary to require such person to execute a bond for 
ltbstaining from the commission of any offence under this Act, the court 
15 may at the time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute 
a hond for a sum proportionate to his means, with or without sureties, 
for abstaining . from commission of any offence under Chapter IV during 
such period not exceeding three years as it thinks fit to fix. 
(2) The bond shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the 
20 Central Government and the provisions of the Code of Criminal Proce-
Z of 1974. dure. 1973, shall, in so far as they are applicable, apply to ;iiI 'matters 
connected with such bond a'S if it were a bond to keep the peace ordered 
to be executed under section 106 of that Code. 
(3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or othe.rwise, the' bond so 
25 executed shall become void 
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an appellate 
court or by the High Court or Sessionll Judge when exercising . the powers 
of revision. 
35. (1) In any 'prosecution for 'an offence 'under this Act which 
':¥> requires a culpable mental state of ihe accused, the court shall presume 
'the existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for the 
accused to prOve the fact that he had no lIuch mental itate with' respect 
to the act charged' as an offence in that prosecutlon. 
. Explanation.-In this section "culpable ,mental state" includes inten-
35 tjon, motive, knowledge of a fact and belief in. or· reason to believe, a 
fact. • -
• 
Punish-
ment fOJ: 
offence 
for which 
no punish. 
ment is 
provided. 
Applica-
tion of 
section 
360 of 
the 
Codeo!. 
Criminal 
Proce-
dure, 
1973 and 
('fthe 
Proba-
tion of 
Offen-
ders 
Act. 
]958. 
Secul'ity 
forab-
staining 
trom 
com-
n,iEion 
of of-
fence. 
Pre-
sump-
tion of 
culp_ 
able 
mental 
state . 

Offences 
to be 
tried' . 
summa.. 
rily. 
Offences 
to be 
cogniza. 
ble. 
Oft'ences 
by com-
panies. 
Power of 
court to 
releue 
certain 
offenders 
on pro-
batton. 
18 
(2) For the purpose of this section, a fact is said to be proved only 
when t.he court believes jt to exist beyond a reasonabJe doubt and not 
merely when its existence is established by a preponderance ,of pro-
bability. 
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 5 
Procedure, 1973, any offence punishable under sections 26, 27 and 32 of 2 of 1974. 
this Act may be tried summarily by a Magistrate of the ftrst class. 
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, every offence punishable under this Act shall be 2 of 1974. 
cognizable. 10 
3R. (1) Where an offence under Chapter IV has been committed by 
a company, every person, who, at the time the offence was committed 
was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and J 5 
punishea accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sUb-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 20 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any 
offence under Chapter IV has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
mankger, secretary or other officer of the company, SUch director, 25 
manager, secretary pr other ofIicer shalI be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
ExplaMtion.-For the pu.rpose of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm go 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) Udirector"; in relatio~ 'to a ftrm, means a partner in the firm. 
31. (1) When any addict is found guilty of an offence punishable 
under section 21 and if the court by which he is found guilty is of the 
opinion, regard being had to. the age, character, antecedents or physical 35 
or mental condition of the offender, that it is ex~ient so to do, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force, the court may, instead of sentencing him at once to 
any imprisonment, with his consent, direct that he be released for under-
going medical treatment for de-toxiflcation or de-addiction from a ho'S- 40 
pital or an institution. maintained or recognised by Government and on his 
entering into a bond iri the form pre8Cnbed by the Central Government, 
with or without sureties, to appear and furnish before the court within 
a period not exceeding one year, a report regarding the result of his 
mCdh~al treatment and, in the meantime, to abstain from the commf8llion 4-5 
of any offence under Chapter IV . 
• 

19 
(2) 1£ it appears to the court, having .regard to the report regarding 
the result of the medical treatment furmshed under sub-section (1), that 
it is expedient 'So to do, the court may direct the release of the offender 
after due admonition on his entering iDto a"bond in the form prescribed 
5 by the Central Government, with or without sureties, for abstaining from 
the commission of any offence under Chapter IV during such period not 
excEeding three years as the court may deem fit to specify or on his 
failure so to abstain, to appear before the court and receive· sentence 
when called upon during such period. 
JO 40. (1) Where any person is convicted of any of the offences punish-
able under section 15 to section 25 (both inclusive), section 28, section 29 
or section 30, it shall be competent for the court convicting the person 
to cause the name and place of business or residence of such person, 
nature of the contravention, the fact that the person has been so convicted 
15 and such other particulars as the court may consider to be appropriate 
in the circumstances of the case, to be published at the expense of such 
person in such newspapers or in such manner as the court may direct. 
(2) No publication under sub-'Section (1) shall be made untH the 
period for preferring an appeal against the orders of the court has expired 
20 without any appeal having been preferred, or such appeal, having been 
preferred, has been disposed of. 
(3) The expenses of any publication under sub-section (1) shall be 
recoverable from the convicted person as if it were a fine imposed by the 
court. 
CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE 
41. (1) A Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class or 
any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered by the state 
Government in this behalf, may issue a warrant for the a,rrest of any 
30 person whom he has reason to believe to have committed any offence 
punishable under Chapter IV, or for the search, whether by day or by 
night, of any building, conveyance or place in which he has reason to 
believe any narcotic drug or psychotropic sUbstance in respect of which 
an offence punishable under Chapter IV has been committed or any 
:35 document or other article which may fUrnish evidence of the commission 
of such offence is kept or concealed. 
(2) Any such officer of. gazetted rank of the, departments of central 
excise, narcotics, customs, revenue intelligence or any other department 
of the Central Government or of the Border Security For~e as is ero-
40 powered in this behalf by general or special order by the Centr",,} Gov-
ernment, or any such officer of the revenue, drugs control, excise, police 
or any ether department of a State Government as is empowered in this 
behalf by general or special order of the State Govemment, if he has 
reason to believe from personal knowledge or information given by any 
45 person and taken in writing that any person has committed an offence 
punishable under Chapter IV or that any' narcotic drug, or PlYchofropic 
substance in respect of which any offence punishable under Chapter IV 
has been com.ri1itted or any document or other article which may furnish 
evidence of the commission of such . o~nce has been kept or concealed 
50 in any building, ('onVf'Yllnc(, 0\' plllc(\ may uuthot'isf' any oftlCel' subordi-
nate to him but superior in· rank to a pei6n, &eJ)by, or a c0l'18table~ tQ amst 
such a pel'!on or search a building, conveyance or place whether by day 
/ 
l 
Power 
of court 
to pub-
Ush 
names, 
place of 
Lusine83. 
etc., of 
certain 
offenders. 
Power 
to issue 
warrant 
and 
authori-
seation. 

Power of 
entry. 
search. 
seizure 
and 
arrest 
without 
warrant 
or autho-
risation. 
Powerot 
seizure 
and 
arrest in 
public 
places. 
GO. 
Or by night or himself arrest a person or search a building, conveyance 
or place. . 
(3) The officer to who~ a w~rant .1.lndel-.suh-section (1) .is ~dd.ressed 
and the officer who authorDedthE! arrest Or sem;-ch or the oftlcei who is 
so authorised under sub-sectipn (~) shall have all the powers of an o~ 5 
acting unde.r sec~on 42. 
42. (1) Any such officer .(peing an officer superior in rank to a peon, 
sepoy or constable) of the departments of central excise, narcotics, cus-
toms, revenue intelligence or any other department of the Central 'Gov-
ernment or of the Border Security Force as i'S eml?owered in this behalf 10 
by general or special order by the Central Government, or any such officer 
(being an officer superior in rank to a peon. sepoy or constable) of the 
revenue, drugs control, excise, police or any other department of a State 
Governmen t as is empowered in this behalf by general or speCial order 
of the State Government, if he has reason to believe from personal 15 
knowledge or information given by any person and taken down in writ-
ing, that any narcotic drug, or psychotropic substance, in respect of which 
an offence punishable under Chapter IV has been committed or any 
document or other article which may furnish evidence of the commission 
of such offence is kept or conceal~d in any building, conveyane or en- 20 
closed place, may, between sunrise and sunset,-
(a) enter into and search any such building, conveyance or place; 
(0) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove any 
obstacle to such entry; 
(c) seize such drug or substance and aU materials used in the 25 
manufacture thereof and any other article and any animal or con-
veyance which he has reason to believe to be liable to confiscation 
under this Act and any document or other article which he has ,reason 
to believe may furnish evidence of the commission of any offence 
punishable under Chapter IV relating to such drug or substance; and 30 
(d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any person 
whom he has reason to believe to have committed any offence 
punit;halJle under Chapter IV relating to such drug or substance: 
Provided that if such officer has reason to believe that a search warrant 
or authorisation can.not be obtained without affording opportunity for the 35 
ccncealm~llt of evidence or facility for the escape of an offender, he may 
enter and search such building, conveyance or enclosed place at any time 
between sun set .and sun rise after recording the grounds of his belief. 
(2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing under 
sub-secti~n (1) or records grounds for his belief under the proviso thereto, 40 
he shall'forthwith send a copy thereof to his immediate official superior. 
43. Any officer of any of the departments me~tioned in section 42 
may-
(a) seize, in any public place or in transit, any narcotic drug or 
psychotropic substance in respect of which he has reason to believe 45 
an offence punishable under Chapter. IV has been committed, and, 
along with such drug or substance, any animal or conveyance or 
article liable to confisc~tion under this Act, and any document or other 
aI'ticle which he hUiI rcason tu !Jelieve may furnish evidence of the 
• commil8ion· Of an. oft'en" punishable under· Chapter IV relating' to 50 
such drug or 'Substance; , 

(b) detain and search any person whom he has reason to believe 
to have committed an offence punishable . under Chapter IV, and, if 
such person has any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance in his 
possession and such possession appears to him to be unlawful, arrest 
~ him and any other person in his company. 
! 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the expression "public 
place" includes any public conveyance, hotel, shop, or other place . 
intended fnr USf' by, or uccel)sibl~ to, the public. 
44. The provisions of sections 41, 42 and 43, shall so far as may be, 
10 apply in relation to the offences punishable under Cbapter IV and relat-
ing to coca plant, the opium poppy or cannabis plant and for this purpose 
references in those sections to narcotic drugs, or psychotropic substance, 
shall be construed. as including references to coca plant, the opium 
poppy and cannabis plant. 
P.3wer of 
e~try, 
search, 
seizure 
and 
al'ftStin 
oflences 
rela-
ting to 
coca 
plant, 
opiwn 
POPPy 
and can-
nabis 
plant. 
15 45. Where it is not praoticable to seize any goods (including standing Pro-
crop) which are liable to confiscati.->n under this Act, any officer duly 
authorised under section 42 may serve on the owner or person in POSlf!S-
sion of the goods, an order that he shall not remo*, part with or other-
wifle deal with the goods except with tl)e previous permission of such 
20 officer. 
46. Every holder of land shall give inunediate information to any 
officer of the Police or of any of the departments mentioned in section 42 
of all the opium poppy, cannabis plant or coca plant which may be 
illegally cultivated within his land and every such holder of land who 
25 knowingly neglects to give such information, shall be liable to punish-
ment. -
47. Every officer of the Government and every panch, sarpanch and 
other village oftk:er of whatever description shall give immediate infor-
mation to any oIIlcer oftbe Police or of any of the departments mention-
30 ed in section 42 when it may come to his knDwl~ge that any land has 
been illegally cultivated with the opium poppy, cannabis plant or coca 
plant, and every such officer of the Govemment, panch. sarpanch and 
other vUlage oftlcer who neglects to.ve sud). iDfonnation shall be 
liable to pwUshment. 
cedure 
where 
seizure 
of 
goOds 
liable 
to con-
ftscation 
not 
practi_ 
cable. 
Duty 
of land 
holder 
to giVe 
informa-
tion of 
iLlegal. 
cultiva-
tion. 
Duty 01 
certain 
oftk:ers 
to give 
informa-
tiOn of. 
illepl 
cultiva-
tion. 

Report of 
arrest 
aDd 
seizure. 
PuDilb-
ment for 
vexatioua 
entry, 
search, 
acizureor 
arrest. 
Fuilureof 
ofBccria 
duty or 
his con-
nivance 
at 
the cont-
mventioa 
of the 
provisiOns 
of this 
Act. 
UablUty Of 
illicit 
drop, 
substam:ea, 
pIaDtI. 
artic:lel 
aDd am-
veyallCel to 
coalsca-
1ioa. 
57. Whenever any person makes any arrest or seizure under this Act, 
he shall, within forty-eight hours next after such arrest or seizure, make 
a full report of all the particulars of such arrest or seizure to his irrune-
diate official superior. 
58. (1) Any person empowered under section 42 or section 43 or sec- 5 
tion 44 who-
(a) without reasonable ground of suspicion enters or searches, ' 
or causes to be entered or searched, any building, conveyance or 
~~; , 
(b) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the property of any 10 
person on the pretence of seizing or searching for any narcotic drug 
or psychotropic substance or other article liable to be confiscated 
under this Act, or of seizing any document or other article liable to 
be seized under section 42, section 43 or section 44; or 
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily detains, searches ~r arrests 15 
any person, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment fOr a term which may extend to 
six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
(2) Any person wilfully and maliciou:;dy giving false information 20 
and so causing an arrest or a search being made under this Act shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years 
or with fine or with both. 
59. (1) Any officer, on whom any duty has been imposed by or under 
this Act and who ceases Or refuses to perform or withdraws himself 25 
from the duties of his office shall, unless he has obtained the express 
written permiSSion of his official superior or has other lawful excuse for 
so doing, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year or with fine or with both. . 
(2) Any officer on whom any duty has been imposed by or under :30 
this Act and who wilfully aids in, or connives at, the contravention of 
any provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, shall. 
be punishable with imprisonment for a. term which may extend to ftve 
years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under sub-section 35 
(1) or sub-section (2) except on a complaint in writing made with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government, or as the case may be, the 
State Government. 
60. (1) Whenever any offence punishable under Chapter IV has been 
committed, the narcotic drug, psychotropic su·bstance, the opium poppy, 40 
coca plant, cannabis plant, materials, apparatus and utensils in respect 
of which or by means of which such offence has been committed, shall 
be liable to confiscation. . 
(2) Any narcotic drug er psychotropic substance lawfully produced~ 
imported inter-State, exported inter-State, imported into India, tran&- 45 
ported, manufactured, possessed, used, purchased or sold along with or 
in addition to, any narcotic drug or psych.otropic substance which is 

liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) and the receptacles, packages 
and coverings ·in which any narcotic drug or psychotropic. 'Substance, 
materials, apparatus or utensils liable to confhcation under sub-section 
(1) is found, and the other contents, if any, of such receptacles or 
5 packages shall likewise be liable to confiscation. 
(3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any narcotic drug 
or psychotropic substance, or any article liable to confiscation under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be liable to confiscation, unless 
the owner of the animal or conveyance proves that it was so used with-
10 out the knowledge or connivance' of the owner himself, his agent, if any, 
and the person-in-charge of the animal or conveyance and that each of 
them had taken all reasonable precautions against such use. 
61. Any goods used for concealing any narcotic drug or psychotropic 
substance which is liable to confiscation under this Act shall also be 
15 liable to confiscation. 
Explanation.-In this section "goods" does not include conveyance as 
a means of transport. 
62. Where any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance is sold by a 
person having knowledge or reason to believe that the drug or substance 
20 is liable to confiscation under this Act, the sale proceeds thereof shall 
also be liable to confiscation. 
63. (1) In the trial of offences under this Act, whether the accused 
is convicted or acquitted or discharged, the court shall decide whether 
any article or thing seized under this Act is liable to confiscation under 
25 section 60 or section 61 or section 62 and, if it decides that .the article 
is so liable, it may order confiscation accordingly. 
(2) Where any article or thing seized under this Act appears to be 
liable to. confiscation under section 60 or section 61 or section 62, but the 
person who committed the offence in connection therewith is not known 
30 or cannot be found. the court may inquire into and decide such liability, 
and may order confiscation accordingly: 
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article or thing shall 
be made until the expiry of one month from the date of seizure, or 
without hearing any person who may claim any right thereto and the 
35 evidence, if any, which he produces in respect of his claim: 
40 
Provided further that if any such article or thing, other than a 
narcotic drug, psychotropic substance. the opium poppy, coca plant or 
cannabis plant is liable to speedy and natural decay, or if the court is 
of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of its owner, it may at 
any time direct it to be sold; and the provisions of this sub-section ahall, 
as nearly 8S may be pr8Ctic8b~, apply. to the net proceeds of the sale. 
(3) Any person not convicted who claims any right to property 
which has been confiscated under this section may appeal to the Court 
of Session against the order of confiscation. 
Confisca-
tionof 
goods 
used for 
conceal-
ing 
illicit 
drop or 
subs-
tances. 
Confillca-
lion 
of sale 
proceeds 
of illicit 
drup or 
substances. 
Procedure 
inmakine 
confisca-
tions. 

Power to 
tender 
immunity 
from 
prosecu-
tion. 
Power to 
make 
rules 
regUlat-
ins dis-
posal of 
confiscated 
articles 
and 
rewards. 
Presump-
tion as to 
documents 
in cer-
tain cases. 
26 
84. (1) The Central Government or the State Government may, if it 
is of opinion (the reasons for such opinion being recorded in writing) 
that with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person appear~ng to 
have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to the contraven-
tion of any of the proviSions of this Act or of any rule or order made 5 
thereunder it is necessary or expedient so to do, tender to such person 
immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Act or under· the 
Indian Penal Code or under any other Central Act or State Act, as the 4S of 1860. 
case may be, for the time being in force on condition of his making a 
full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances relating to such 10 
contravention. 
(2) A tender of immunity. made to, and accepted by, the person con-
cerned, shall, to the extent to which the immunity extends, render him 
immune from prosecution for any offence in respect of which the tender 
was made. 15 
(3) If it appears to the Central Government o.r, as the case may be, 
the State Government, that any person to whom iirununity has been 
tendered under this section has not complied with the conditions on 
which the tender was made or is wilfully concealing anything or is giving 
false evidence, the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State 20 
Government, may record a finding to that effect and thereupon the 
immunity shall be deemed to have been withdrawn and such person 
may be tried for the offence in respect of which the tender of immunity 
was made or for any other offence of which he appears to have been guilty 
in connection with the same matter. 25 
65. In connection with offences against rules which under this Act fall 
to be made by the State Government, the State Government, and in 
connection with other offences, the Central Government, may make rules 
to· regulate-
(a) the disposal of all articles or things confiscated under this 30 
Act; and 
(b) the rewards to be paid to the officers, informers and other 
persons out of the proceeds of fines and confiscations unde.r this Act. 
66. Where any document-
n is producei or furnished by any person or has been seized 35 
fro~ the custody or control of any person, in either ca'se, under this 
Act or under any other law. or 
(ii) has been received from any plac-e outside India (duly 
authenticated by such authority or person and in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government) in the course of investi- 40 
gation of any offence under this Act alleged to have been committed 
by a person, 
and such document is tendered in any prosecution under this Act in 
evidence ~gainst him, or. against him and any other person who is tried 
Jointly with him, the court shall- 45 
(a) presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the signature 
and every other part of such document which purports to be· in the 
handw;rltfng of any particular person or which the court may reason-

ably assume to have been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, 
any particular person, is in that person's handwriting; and in the case 
of a document executed or attested, .that it was executed or attested 
by the person by whom it purports to have been so executed or 
5 attesbedj 
(b) admit the document in evidence, notwithstanding that it is 
not duly stamped, if such document is otherwise admissible in 
evidence; 
(c) in a case falling under clause (i), also presume, unless the 
10 contrary is proved, the truth of the contents of such document. 
67. Any officer referred to in section 42 who is authorised in this Power 10 
call for behalf by the Central Government or a State Government may, during informa-the course of any enquiry in connection with the contravention of any . 
provision of this Act-
15 (a) call for information from any person . for the purpose of 
20 
satisfying himself whethe.t there has been any contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder; 
(b) require any person to produce or deliver any document or 
thing useful or relevant to the enquiry; 
(c) examine any person acquainted with the facts and circum-
stances of the case. 
88. No officer acting in exerci'8e of powers vested in him under any 
provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall be 
compelled to say whence he got any information as to the commission of 
25 any offence. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
89. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or a State Government or any officer of the Central 
30 Government or of the State Government or any other person exercising 
any powers or discharging any functions o.rperforming any duties under 
this Act, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
70. Wherever under this Act the Central Government or the State 
35 Government has been empowered to make rules, the Central Government 
or the State Government, as the case may be, subject to other provisions 
of this Act, may while making the rules have regard to the provisions of 
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, the Protocol of 1972 
amending the said Convention and of the Convention on Psychotropic 
40 Substances, 1971 to which India is a party and to the proVisions of any 
other international convention relating to narcotic drugs or psychotropic 
lIubstances to which India may become a party. 
tlon, etc. 
Informa-
tion as 
to com-
mission of 
offences. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good 
fai!h. 
Central 
Govern-
ment and 
Stille 
Govern-
ments to 
have re-
gard to 
interna-
lional 
cbnYen-
tions 
while 
makin. 
rules. 

Power of 
Govern-
ment to 
establish 
centres for 
identifica-
tion, 
treatment, 
etc., of 
addicts 
and for 
supply of 
narcotic 
drll8S and 
psycho-
tropic 
substances. 
Recovery 
of sums 
due to 
Govern-
ment. 
Barol 
juris-
diction. 
'Tran-
sitional 
pro. 
vtslons. 
'11. () The Government may, in its discretion, establish many centres 
as it thinks fit for identificlltion, treatment, education, after-care, reha-
bilitation, social re.integration of addicts and for supply, subject to such 
OOIIdlUona and in such manner as may be prescribed, by tbe cODcemecl 
Govemment of any narcotle drugs and psychotropic substances to the 5 
addicts regIstered with the Government and to others where such supply 
Is a medlcal neeesslty. 
(2) The Government may make rules cODslstent with this Act provid-
ing for the establishment, appointment, maintenance, management and 
superintendence of, end for supply of narcotic drup and psychotropic lO 
substances from, the ceatres referred toln lub-sectlon (1) and. for the 
appointment, training, powers, duties and persons employed in such 
centres. 
72. (1) In l"espect of any licence fee or other sum of any kind pay~ 
able to the Central Government or to the State Government under any J 5 
of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. 
the officer of the Central Government o.r the State Government, as the 
case may be, who is empowered to require the payment of such sum, 
may deduct the amount of such sum from any money owing to the person 
from whom such sum may be recoverable or due or may recover such 20 
amount or sum by attachment and sale of the goods belonging to such 
persons and if the Pomount of the same is not 10 recovered, the same may 
be recovered from the person or from his surety (if any) as if it were 
an arrear of land revenue. 
(2) When any person, in compliance with any rule made under this 2;' 
Act, gives a bond (other than a bond under section '34 and section 39) 
for the performance of ·any act, or for his abstention from any act, such 
performance or abstention shall be deemed to be a public duty within 
the meaning of section 74 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872; and upon'· 9 of 1872-
breach of the conditions of such bond by him, the whole sum named 30 
therein as the amount to be paid in case of such breach may be recovered 
from him or from his surety (if any) as if it were an arrear of land 
revenue. 
73. No civil court shall entertain any suit or proceeding against any 
decision made Or order passed by any officer or authority under this Act :~5 
or under any rule made thereunder on any of the following matters, 
namely:- " 
(a) withholding, refusal or cancellation of any licence for the 
cultivation of the opium poppy; 
(b) weighment, examination and classification, according to the 40 
quamy 3nd consistence of opium and any deductiohs from, or addi~ 
'lion to, the .standard price made in accordance with such examina:-
tion; 
(c) confiscation of opium found to be adulterated with any 
foreign . substance. 45 
74. Every officer or other employee of the Government exercising or 
performing, immediately before th~ comme~ent of this Act, any 
powers or duties with respect to any matters provided for in this Act, 
shall, on such con'unencement, be deemed to have been appointed under 

119 
the relevant provisions of this Act to the same post and with the same 
designation. as he was 'holding immediately befote such commencement. 
75. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
G~ette, delegate, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be 
5 specified in the notification, 'Such of its powers and functions under this 
Act (except the power to make rules) as it may deem necessary or 
expedient, to the Board or any other authority or the Narcotics Com· 
missioner. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
10 Gazette, delegate, subject to such conditions aid limitations as may be 
specified in the notification, such of its powers and functions under this 
Act (except the power to make rules) as it·may deem necessary or 
expedip.nt, to any authority or officer .of that Government. 
76. (1) Subject to the other prOVisions of this Act, the Central Gov· 
15 ernment may, by notification in the Official Ga7.ette, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to th-e generality of the foregoing power, 'such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the method by' whiCh percentages in the case of liqUid 
20 preparations shall be calculated for the purposes of clause. (v), (vi), 
(xiv) and (xv) of section 2; 
(b) the form of bond to keep the peace to be executed under 
section 34; 
(e) the form of bond to be executed for release of an addiCt· 
25 convict for medical treatment under sub-section (1) of section 39 
and the bond to be executed by such convict before his release 
after due admonition under sub-section (2) of that section; 
(d) the authority or the person by whom and the manner in 
which a document received from any place outside India shall be 
30 authenticated under clause (ii) of section 66; 
(e) the conditions and the manner in which narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances may be supplied for medical necessity to 
the addicts registered with the Central Government and to others 
under sub-se::tion (1) of section 71; 
35 (f> the establishment, appointment, maintenance, management 
and superintendence of centres established by the Central Govern· 
ment under sub·section (1) of section 71 and appointment, training, 
powers and duties of persons employed in such centres; 
(g) the term of office .of, the manner of filling casual vacancies 
+0 of, and the allowances payable to. the Chairman and members of 
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 'Substances Consultative Com-
mittee and the conditions and restrictions subject to which a non· 
member may be appointed to a sub.committee under sub·section 
(5) of section 6. 
(h) any other matter which is to be, Or may be, preS(ribed. 
Power 
to deia-
gate. 
Power 
of 
Central 
Govel"h-
menltto 
make 
rw.. 

Rule. 
and 
notifi-
cations to 
be laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Power of 
State 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
Applica-
tioll of 
the 
Customs 
Act, 
1982. 
Applica-
tion of 
tbe 
Dru,. 
and 
Cosmetic. 
Act, 
1NG not 
b~. 
3n 
77. Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government and 
every notification issued under clause (xi) of section 2, section 3 and 
clause (a) of, and Explanation (7) to, section 27 shall be laid, as soon 
as may be, after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in se'jSion, for a total period of thirty days which may be 5 
,comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session OJ;' 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or .notification or both Houses agree that the 
rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or the notifi- 10 
cation shall thereafter have effect only in sUch modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule Or notification. 
78. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the State Govern- 15 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette. make rules for carry-
ing out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) conditions and the manner in which narcotic drugs and 2!) 
psychotropic substances shall be supplied for medical necessity to the 
addicts registered with. the State Govemment and others under sub-
section (1 ) of section 71; 
(b) the establishment, appointment, maintenance, management, 
superintendence of centres established under sub-section (1) of sec- 25 
tion 71 and appointment, training, powers and duties of persons 
emp10yed in such centres; . . 
(c) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislature of that 3° 
State. 
79. All prohibitions and restrictions imposed by or under this Act on 
the import into India, the export from Inc:Ua and transhipment of narcotic 
drugs and psychotropic substances shall be deemed to be prohibitions 
and restrictions imposed by or under the Customs Act, 1962 and the pro- 35 
visions of that Act shall apply accordingly: 52 of 1962. 
Provided that, where the doing of anything is an offence punishable 
under that Act and under this Act, nothin~ in that Act or in this seCtion 
shall prevent the oftender from being punished under this Act. 
80. The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be 40 
in addition to, and not' in derogation of, the Drugs and Cosme~ics Act, 
UNO· or the'· rules made- thereunder. 

81. Nothing in this Act or in the rules macie thereunder shall affect 
the validity.of any Provincial Act or an Act of any State Legislature for 
the time being in force, or of any rule made thereunder which imposes 
any restriction or provides for a punishment not imposed by or provided 
5 for under this Act or imposes a restriction 01' provides for a punishment 
greater in degree than a corresponding restriction: imposed by or a 
corresponding punishment provided for by or under this Act lor. the' 
cultivation of cannabis plant or consumption of or traffic ill', any narcotic 
drug or psychotropic substance within India. . 
Saving of 
State 
and 
ipecial 
laws. 
13 of 1857. 10 82. (1) The Opium Act, 1857, the Opium Act, 1878 and the Dangerous RePeat' 
I of 1878. Drugs Act, 1930 are hereby repealed. D4 
2 of 1930. savings. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
or purported to have been done or taken under any of the enactments 
repealed by sub-section (1) shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with 
15 the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under 
the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
83. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in . the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
~o this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of three years from the date on which this Act receives the assent 
of the President. i 
115 (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be attet 
it is made, be laid before the Houses of Parliament. 
Power to 
remove 
didlcul .. 
~. 

I ... ad.a! N_-proprletary 
Sl. Nalm' 
No. 
g 
3 
• 
(+ )-LYSEitGlDE 
5 
6 
7. E'l1CYCL1DINE 
8 ROLICYCLIDtNE 
9 
'0 PSILOCYBINE 
II 
III TENocYCLlDINE 
I! 
14 
IS 
16 AMPHETAMINE. 
I, DEXAMPHETAMINE 
18 MECLOQ,tTALONE 
II METHAMPHETAMINE 
10 METHAQ.1.1ALONE 
III METHYLPHENIDATE. 
.. I'RBNCYCLlDINE 
~S PHENMETRAZINE 
A4 AMOBARBITAL 
15 CYOLOBARBITAL 
Ai GLtTl'ETHIMlDE 
*7 PENTAZOCINEl 
is HNTOBABBITAL 
.. IBOOBAR.IITAL 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See clause (xxiii) of section 2] 
LIST OF PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES 
O,her n'.l\pr{lpri~'a .. y 
na~, 
DET 
DMHP 
DMT 
LSD, J.sD-2S 
JUI'sctline 
I arahexyl 
PCE 
PHP, pepy 
P Ii lucine. p;i IOlsin 
STP,DOM 
TCP 
THC 
DOB 
MDA 
POF 
Chrmlca! name 
N. N-Diethy)~rYPtamin(' 
3-( I ,lI-Dimethy)heptyl)-' _h ydroxy-,.8,g,IO-k'tra bydro- 5 
6,6.!t-trimethVI-6H-dibenzo [h,d] pYl'an 
N, N-DimelhyltryptamiJ!t' 
(+ )-N,~-Diethyllysergam;c!c (d.lY!itI'j{ic acid diethyla-
mide) 
3,4,s-Trimcthoxyphenethylamin .. 
3-H"xyl-l-hydroxY-7 ,8,9, I 0-11' trllhydro-6,6,g-tl illV'-
t hYI-6H-dibl'nzo[b, dJ pyran 
N -Ethyl-l-phenyJcyclohexylamine 
J -( I-Phcnylcycloht'xyl) pyrrolidine 
3-(2-Dimethylaminoothyl)-4- hydroxyindl}!t' 
3-(2-Dimethyl.~minoethyl)-indolzt'-4-yl dihydroRfn 
phosphau 
2-Am;no-'-(1I.s-dimelhoxY-4-mcthyl) plleJ.ylpr()pan~ 
1-[ 1-(lI-Thienyl) cycloht'xyl] r·iperidine 
15 
Tetr ahydroc3.llnabinols. the following isomerll 110 
~6a (roa).· ~6a(7l. /'; 7, ~8. ~9, ~ 10, Ll9(1I) 
allcl their stereuchemical variants 
2, 5-dimethoxY-4-bromoamphetaminr 
3, 4-lDC'thylenedioxyamphetamine 
(± )-lI-Amino-l-phenylpropan r 
(+ )-a-Amino-I-phenylpropane 
g-(o-Chloropbenyl)-:z-methyl-4"(sH)quinazolinODe 
(+ )-a-Methylamino-I-pik-nylpropane 
1I-Me,hyl-3-0 - tolyl-4(sH)-quinazolinone 
g-Phenyl-2 (ll-pipr.ridyl) acetic acid. methyl t'ster 30 
I-(I-Phtnylcyclohexyl) p:pcridine 
S-MethYl-a-phenylmorpholine. 
S-Bthyl-5-(s-methylbutyl)-barbituric 8(id 
5-( I-CYClohe~n-l-yl)-5-cthYlbarbituric acid 
a-EthYl-a-phenylglutarimidc 
l.lI., .... S.6-Hexahydro-6, 'I-dimethyl 3-(8-
methyl-a-butenyl)-a. 6-mr:thano-g-bienzuocin-8-01 
S-Bthyl-S-' I-methylbutyl) barbituric acid 
S-Allyl-S-( I-metbylbutyl) barbituric acid 
35 
45 

tDternatloaai noD-proprietary name. 
Sl. 
Nu. 
gil AIJ.AftA,l'!OI.AM· 
5 
31 AMFEPRA.MONF. 
92 BARRITAl. 
33 BENZPHETAMINE 
34' BPOMAZEPAMI 
10 
35 CAMA7..EPAMt 
36 CHr.ORDIAZEPOX!DEI 
15 
37 CJ,OBA.Z,\MI 
3" cr.ON AZf:PAM-
20 39 cr,ORAZEPATEI 
<10 CLOTIAZEPAMI 
'1' CI.OXA,Zor.'l.W 
25 
42 DEJ.ORI\ZEPAMI 
43 DlAZRPJ\MI 
30 44 BSTAZOL.\MI 
45 ETHCHI.OR" YNor. 
46 ETHINAMATE 
35 4" ETHYLLOPLAZRPATV 
46 FLl1DIArnP.\lCI 
49 PLUNITRAZEPAMI 
40 50 PLURADPAMI 
51 HA1,AZEPAM' 
52 H~LOXAZOL~MI 
45 
53 KETAZOLAMt 
50 54 LEFETAMlNE 
55 LOPR.AZOLAM-
56 LOlLAZEJlAMI 
55 
~3 
Olhn non-proprietary 
"i\l"~~ 
SpA 
Chcotniatl name 
U-UhlOl'O-,-uacthyl-6-pbetl,s","+IridoJo'it ... ] [I, 
41 bconzodiazepine 
:1-" DicthYlan~no) propiophcononr 
5,5-Dlerhyloorbiturie ae.>id 
N-Bcnzyl-N, 0( -dimethytphenethYlamine 
,-BrOmo-I, g-dihydro-5-(ll..PYriJtyJ)«H-I, ....- •• 
diazepin-2-OJIc . 
,-Chloro-I, g-dihycfro-s-hyclroxy-l.methyl-5iJI!euyl. 
IIH-I, 4-benzodi.zcpin-2~, ~te 
(coster) 
,-Chluro-II-(methylamino)-s-phen yl-Sll-I, 4-benmdia-
zc:pillt'-<!.-oxide 
,-Chloro-.-rnethyl-5-phmyl-IH-I, 5-ben.,dia.epiDe-t, 
4(gH, 5H)-dione 
5-(o-Chloropbenyl)-I, 3-ctihydro-7-nitro-2B.',-t. 
Ixmzodia7.epin-2-olll' 
7-ChlorO-II, 3-Oihydroog~·5.pbenyt·IH.· f·beuo-
diazc" ine-3-carboxylic acid 
5·( =-Chlorophenyl)-7-etbyl·I, S-dihydro-I.metbyl-dl. 
tht'nl) [2, 3-e]-I, f-d'.zt'pin-2- one 
lo-Clhlol'o-•• b-(o-cbloropbeny )·2, S, 7,lIb·tetnbyclro-
UlC'izoJo-[3, \i-d] [r,4] bcn.odiuepj.~;lsH)-olie 
7-Chloro-5-(o-chlorophenyl).I, 3-clibydrootH-r, ... 
bt'nzodiazepin-\i.onC' 
,-Chloro- I, 3.dihydro-l-methyl.5-pbenyl-aH-I, .. 
b .. n7.odia.-piJ~.IZ-OIIe 
R-Chl~ro-6~phcnyl-4-H-I-tri.solo [f, lJ4) [~' •. fl beD-
zlJd.azepmc . 
E,hvl-2-chloro"inylemynylcarbinoJ 
I-Elh yn ylcycloliexanoicarbaDlate 
Ethyl ,-cbIoro-5·(o-fl.lIOrOpheQ)U~~4I8o 
I H-I, f-benzociallCpinC'·s-carbOSyla'le'" , . 
7-Chloru-5·(o-f1uorophenyl)-I, g-4f~vdr.n.~-...... h.r1"a. 
I, 4-benzodiallCpin.II-one . r7",("" ~ • 
5-( .,-'PIuoropbenyl)-I, 3·dihyd"o-I·lpethyl·'-I\I~H. 
I, 4-benzodiallCpin·2000CJDC . .' 
7-Ch.loro-.-rll-(cliethylamino) edayl]·5·Co-ftuoropheayl). 
I, 3-dihyaro-2H-I, 4-benllOdiUepllH-cJDC 
7-Ch,oro-" g-dihydro·S-phllllyl·l. (1I,II.g.triftuorQethyl) 
2, H-I, 4-benzodiuepin-2-one 
lo-BrOmo-1 rb-(o-f1uoropben)I)-lI,3,7, IIb-eetrahy-, 
drooxalolo [3, 2.d] [I. fl·ben.odiuepiD~ C~ 
ODe 
II-Chloro-8, 12h-dihydro-2, 8-dimethyl·lstboplaeayl· 
4H1J. g]~xa.ino-[3, 1I-d] [I, 4] beil_~ 
7(6H)-dione 
(-) -r -DimcthylaminO-I, II-dipbenytethane 
6-(o-Chlorophenyt)·II, 4-4ihydro-a·lC .... ,...Ii!ipera-
aiayl) millthyleDc]-8-DitrG-Is-_C6aa· [I, st .. ] 
[I, 4] ben.xlia.epiD-I-ODe 
7-Chloro-~·(CM:h!orop~yI)-I, 3-dih)'lh-t"'~ 
IIH·I, 4-beUocIiuepiAofI-one 

r 
I ....... U_I.OII ........ I ... .,. _me. 
81. 
No. 
57 LOlUCBTAUMMt 
58 M<\.ZlNDOL 
59 MEDf\ZR~AMI 
60 MBPKOBAIIATE 
61 ~BTHYLPHENOBARBITAI. 
fill NB'rHYPJtYLON 
6S NIMETAZEPAMI 
~ NITRAZEPAMI 
6~ NORDAZEPAMI 
66 OXAZEPAM' 
67 OXAZOLAMI 
68 PHENDlMETRAZ[NF. 
69 PHENOBARBtT AI. 
70 PHBN1'B&M[NE 
71 PlNAZBPAM' 
71. PIPRADROL 
73· PRAZEPAMI 
7S· TEMAZBPAM' 
'75· TETRAZBPAW' 
;e. 'I'lUAZOLAMI 
." Sahl· ... t' 'Iq)ariuiOllI of abo .. t' • 
34-
Other Jion·p,.oPri,tory 
name. Chemical name 
7-ChJoro·5·(o-chJorophenyl)'I, . s~y.dro·s.byci.uy·i.: 
methyJ-aH'I, 4-benzodiuepiD -a-oDe 
5-(.e.QhJorophm)'1)-II, 5-dihydro-3H·imidIllD [I, "0] 
boindo)·s-ol 
7·Chlaro-lI, 3·clihydro-l.metbyl-:;·poonyl·IB.I, 4-
bensodiallqJine 
II.Methyl-g-propyl·I, s·propailc:4iol dicarbamate 
5·Ethyl-l.methyl-5.phenylbarbit1lric acid 
3, S·Dietbyl·5·met!ayl-a. 4·piperi4inc-dione 
I, 3·Dihydro-l.methyl.,.nitrc-5-phenyl-aH.I, ,,-ben. 
aoclia.cpiD -a-oDe . 
5 
10 
I, 3-Dihydro-7·nitro-5·pbeuyl·1 H·I, 4·benzodiaae· 15 
pin'lI-one 
,-Cblaro-I, S-dibydro-s·phenyl'l (lIH)·I ••• benlodia-
erpin-a-ooe 
,-Ch10r0-I, S-4ihydro-S-hy4roxv·s-phcnyl-aH'I, 4· 
benllOdiuepin'I-oDe 
Io-Chloro-a, 3,7, 11 b-tetrahydro.lI.mcthyl-1Ib-pbaryl. 
oxaaolo [S, lI·d] [14] benlOcIiuepiD-ti CSH)-onc 
(+) s, foDimetbyl'lI pben)Irnorl·holine 
S-Bthyl s-phenylbarbituric acid 
e( e( ·Dimethylphenethylamine 
7-Chl aro-l, S·~ihydro-s·phenyl·I'(lI.propynyl)'lIli'I, 
4·bmaodiutpin-a-oDC . 
1,I·Dipbenyl.I.(g.piperidyl)·metbanol 
20 
7·Cblora·1 (cyclc.propylaaetbyll )'I,ls-dibydro-s·pbenyl 
.lIH.I,4-&enllOdiuepin-lt-one. . 30 
,·CbIoro-I,S-dihyciro-S·hydroay.l·metbyl-s·pbeDyI-a!I. 
1,4·benzodiaz~piD-It-one 
'1.Cbloro-5~(cyclohexen-l.yl) .I,3-dihydro-l-Jlletbyl .. lI . 
1 ..... benzodialcpin.lI-one 
8 Chlor0-6-( o-chloropheDyl).me&byl ..... H-.. triacolo (4.3' 
a) (1,4) bcDzodl .. epiue. 3S 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The statutory control over narcotic drugs is exercised in India 
through a number of Central and State enactments. The principal 
Central Acts, namely, the Opium Act, 1857, the Opium. Act, 1878 and the 
Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 were enacted a long time ago. With the 
passage of time and the developments in the field of illicit drug traftle 
and drug abuse at national and international level, many deficiencies in 
the existing laws have come to notice, some of which are indicated be-
low:-
(i) The scheme of penalties under the present Acts is not 
sufficiently deterrent to meet the challenge of well organized gangs 
of smugglers. The Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 provi~es for a 
maximum tenn of imprisonment of 3 years with or without fine and 
4 years imprisonment with or without fine for repeat offences. 
Further, no minimum punishment is presCribed in the present laws, 
as a result of which drug traffickers have been some times let off 
by the courts with nominal punishment. The country has for the 
last few years been increasingly facing the problem of transit 
traffic of drugs coming mainly from S\)me of our neighbouring 
countries arad destined tnainly to Western countries. 
(ii) The existing Central laws do not provide for investing the 
officers of a number of important Central e51forcement agencies like 
narcotics, customs, central excise, etc., with the power of investi-
gation of offences under the said laws. 
(iii) Since the ena,ctment of the aforesaid three Central Acts a 
vast body of international law in the field of narcotics control has 
evolved through various international treaties and protocols. The 
Government of India hilS been a party to these treaties and conven-
tions which entail several obligations which are not covered or are 
only partly covered by the present Acts. ' 
(iv) During recent years new drugs of addiction which have 
come to be known as psychotropic substances have appeared on the 
scene and posed serious problems to national governments. There 
is no comprehensive law to enable exercise of control over psycho-
tropic substances in India in the manner as envisaged in the Con-
vention on Psychotropic Substances 1971 to which also India has 
acceded. 
2. In view of what has been stated above. there is an u.rgent need for 
the enactment of a comprehensive legislation on na,rcotic druRs and 
psychotropic substances which, i'Rter alia, should consolidate and amend 
the existinJ{ laws relating to narcotic drugs, strengthen the existing con-
trols over drugs of abuse. considerably enhance the penalties particularly 
for trafficking offences, make provisions for exercising effective control 
over psychotropic substances and make provisions for the implementation 
of international conventions relating to narcotic drugs and psychotropic 
substances to which India has become a party. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NzwDELHI; VISHW ANATH PRATAP SI~qJ.l 
The 18th August, 1985. 
35 

7" 
79· 
73. T 
'75, 
N cites on clause. 
C14uae 2.-This clause defines the various expressions occurring in 
the Bill. 
, 'Clause 3.-This clause empowers the Central Government to amend 
the Schedule of psychotropic substances. 
CICZU8e 4.-This clause specifies measures which the Cen.tral Govern .. 
ment is required to take for the purpose of preventing and combating 
abuse of narcotic drugs and illicit traffic therein. 
ClauRe 5.-This clause deals with the appointment of officers of the 
Central Government and their powers and functions to carry out the 
purposes of the proposed legislation. 
Clan'Po 6.-This clause envisages the appointment by the' Central 
Government of an advisory . committee to be called "The Narcotic Drugs 
and Psychotropic Substances Consultative Committee". 
ClaWle 7.-This clause empowers the State Government to appoint 
officers to carry out ,the purposes of the proposed legislation. 
CiCluge S.-This clause prohibits the various operations such as cultI-
vation, manufacture, possession, sale, purchase, transport, import, export, 
etc. in relation to all the narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances 
except for medical and scientific purposes and to the extent and the 
manner' provided by the other provisions of the proposed legislation and 
the rules made thereunder. 
ClAuse -9.-ThiI,clause empowers the Central Govetn111ent to petmit, 
coDtrol and regulate (subject to the provisions of clause 18) by rules. 
certain operations lin relation to certain narcotic drugs 2nd· psycho-
tropic substances. 
Clatiae 10.-'.Phis clause empowers the State Government to permit, 
control and regulate by rules (subj.ect to the provisions of clause 18) 
certain operations relating to certain narcotic drugs. 
Clause n.-This clause lays down that narcotic drugs and psychotro-
pic substances shall not be Hable to be destrained or attached. 
Cluu.'1e 12.- This clause prohibits all external dealings in narcotic 
drugs and psychotropic substances except with the previous authorisa~ 
tion Cif the Central Government. 
CLGUIC l3.-This clause empOwers the Central Government to permit 
certain .operations relating to cOca leaves for use in the preparation of 
an,. flavouring agent 
Clame 14.- This clause empowers the Government to allow cultt.: 
vation of cannabis plant for certain industrial purposei and for horti-
cultural purposes.' . 
CZtw.Ie 15.-nu. clause provide.- for pWJi,hment for contravention."tii 
Illation' *0 peppy straw, I, • 

37 
CZause 16.-This clause pro\Tides for punishment in relation to' coca 
pl8l'1t and coca leaves. 
Clause 17.-This clause provides for pumihment for contravention 
in relation to prepared opium. 
Clause IS.-This c181USe ptrovides for punishment for eontrawDtion 
in relation to the opium poppy and opium. 
CZause 19.-This clause provides for punishment for embezzlement by 
cultivator of opiwn cultivated on accCOWlt of the central Government 
Clause 2O.-Tbis clause provides for punishment for contravention. in. 
relati~n to cannabis plant and cannabis. 
ClaUse 21.-This clause provides' for pW11sbrnent for' contraven.tiUn 
in relation to manufactured. drugs and preparations. 
Clame 22.-This clause provides for punishment for contraVention ia 
relation to psychotropic, substances. 
ClauSe 23.-ThiS 'clause pi'oVides for, puniShment for illegal lmport 
into India, export from India or transhipment of narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic, substances. 
Clause 24.-Th1s ~lause provides for pUnishment for externAl deau~ 
in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances' in contravention of cl&use 
1~ " 
Clause 25.-This clause provideS for punishment for allowing pre-
mises, etc., to b~ used for commission of offences under the proposed 
legislation. 
Clause 26.'-Tl:tis clause' provides for punishment for certain acts by 
licensee under the proposed legislation or his. servants. 
Clause 27.-This clause prbvidas for punishment for illegal pOSseiiIbn 
in small quantity for personal conSumption, of any narcotic drug or 
psychotropic substance, or for consumption of such drug or substance. . , . . 
CTlause 28.- This clause provides' for punishment for attemptS - to 
commit 01!ences under the proposed legislation. 
Cbause 29.~This clause provides'for punfshthent for'abetrbent of, and 
criminal conspiracy to commit, offences tinder the! proposed legislation: 
Clause 30.-This clause 'provides for puriishm.ebt f6r' prepai'stfon ,to 
commit. offences under the proposed legisiation. 
Cleme 31.--Sub-c1ause (1) of this clause provides for EmhafU!ed 
punishment for certain offences after previous conviction. Sub-dause 
(2) of. ,this clause provides that an., corivictiOJ1' under any, correspOnding 
law outside IndiashaU be treated as conviction in India for Ute putpo.es 
of enhanced punishment. 
c' cf,a.UB~ 32.-This is a residuary clause which provides for 'pUnishment 
for offence~ for whjch no punishment is separatt!ly provid~. 

38 
CLause IS.-This clause provides that the benefit of probation imder 
section 360 of the Code of Crinunal procedure, 1973 or under the Proba .. 
tion of Offenders Act, 19'58 shall not be available to certain offenders 
above 18 years of age. 
Clause 34.-This clause empowers a court convicting an of!ende~ 
under the proposed. legislation to require him to furnish a bond for 
abstaining from committing similar offences for a period not exeeeding 
three years. 
ClaUBe 35.-This clause contains a rule of evidence and provides that 
in any prosecution under the proposed legislation. the existence of culp-. 
able mental·state shall be presumed. 
Clause 36.-'lhis clause provides for summary trial of offences of petty 
nature by Magistrates of the first clUB. 
Clause 37.-This clause makes cognizable all offences under the pro-
$Josed legislation. 
Clame 38.-This clause renders criminally liable the directors and 
principal oftlcers of the companies and finns for of!ences committed by 
such companies and ftrms. 
Clame 39.-'l'h.is clause empowers the cdnvicttng court to release an 
~ddict-offender after· admonition and on probation for undergoing medical 
~atment for de-toxication or de-addiction, 
Clame 4O.-This clause empowers the court to publish tltIl! names, 
places of business, etc., of the offenders convicted of trafficking offences 
in relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. 
Clause 41.-This clause empowers (in addition to the ftrst class 
Magistrates and specially empowered second class Magistrates) the 
Gazetted Officers of the central excise, narcotics, drugs control, customs, 
revenue intelligence. Border Security Force, Revenue. Excise, Police or 
other departments of the Central and State Governments to issue warrants 
and authorisations f~r atTests, search and seizure. 
Clause 42.-This clause empowers the officers of the above mentioned 
departments of the CentTal and State Governments to arrest, search and 
lIei ze without warrant or authorisation. 
Clamp. 43.-'I'his clause deals with power of the above mentioned 
Qfficel'S -of seizure and arrest in public places. 
Clau..'1e 44.- This clause lays down that the powers of entry, searcli, 
seizure and arrest availa.ble in relation to na,rcotic drugs find psycliotro-
pic su1:istanees shall also be exercisable in relation to the offences eon .. 
nected with coca plant, the opium poppy and cannabis plant. . 
Clause 45.-This clause prohibits the removal of tlie goods which are 
liable to confiscation but are not capable of being seized. 
CEaUBe 46.-This clause enjoins duty upon the ~n~holders to live 
Jnft;lnnatlonof illegal cultivation of the opium- poppy, cannabis plant aD(! 
coca plant to the law enforclng a·~etes, 

39 
CZGwe 47.-This c1aUle enjoins a duty upon all the Goverllmflli; 
'01ticer&. panches, surpanches and other village officers to give infonna-
tion of illegal cultivation of the opium poppy, coca plant and cannabis 
plant to the law enforcing agencies. 
CUlUoSe 48.-This clause empowers M.agistrates to order attachment of 
"iUly opium poppy, coca plant and cannabis plant illegally cultivated. 
Clause 49.-This clause empowers the law enforcement oftlcers to stop 
aDd search animals and conveyances used for the illegal transport of 
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. 
ClaUBe SQ.-This clause specifies conditions under which search of 
persons arrested 'shall be conducted.. 
Clau.ve Sl.-This clause makes applicable the provisions of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to all warrants issued and arrests, searches 
and seizures made under the proposed legislation. 
Clau.se S2.-l'htis clause lays down the manner of disposal of persons 
arrested and articles seized in connection with offences. 
CZause 53.-This clause empowers the Central Government aDd the 
State Government to invest officers of certain departments with powers 
of an officer-in-charge of a police station for the investigation of offences 
under the proposed legislation. 
ClaUoSe S4.-This clause contains a rule of evidence and lays down 
that in any trial under the proposed law, the accused who fails to account 
satisfactorily for the possession of any incriminating drug, substance or 
material, etc. shall be preswned. to have committed an offence, in relation 
to such drug, substan.!e, material. etc. 
Clause 55.-This clause enjoins a dUty upon an officer-in-charge of the 
police ~tation to receive and keep in safe custody the goods and articles 
seized under the proposed law and delivered. to him. 
Clause 56.-This claUSe requires all the law enforcing officers to 
assist each other in carrying out the provisions of the proposed law. 
ClauSe :"/.-'l'his claUSe requires a law enforcing officer to make a 
report within 48 hours of every arrest or seizure made by him to his 
immediate aliLLperior. 
Clcuae :>u • ..;....This clause makes provision for pUnishment for vexatious 
entry, search, seizure or arrest made under the proposed law. 
Clau.se bl:l.-This clause provides for punishment for failure of oftlcers 
in their dl1ty or their connivance at the contravention of the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. 
CZa;uge 6O.-This clause provides that any drug, substance; plant, 
material or conveyance in respect of which or by means of which ari 
offence has been committed or which has been otherwise used in the 
c:onunission of any offence. under the proposed legislation would be Hable 
til confiscation. 

40 
ClGuIe 61.-This clause lays down that goods used for conc:eaitq 
dzu."or 'substances liable to r:onflscation'~ alSo bEH~'O~~ted." .' 
C14UBe 62.-This clause provides for the conftscation of the sale 
proceeds of illicit drugs or substances. . " '. 
CZa'use 63.-This clause details the procedure to be followed in making 
confiscations. 
Clause 64.-Tbis clause empowers the Central Government and the 
State Governments to tender immunity to approvers. 
Clawe 65.-This clause empowers the Central Government and the 
State Govenunents to make rules for the dis~al of confiscated articles 
and provide for rewards to officers and informers. 
CU&UBe 66.-TlUs clause contains a rule of evidence and envisages the 
r~i of preswnption of the genuineness of the documents tendered in 
evidence in prosecution under the propoaed legislation. 
CLAuae 67.-Thi.s clause empowen the Central Government aDIi State 
Government to call for information, and require any person to . prodw:e 
or deliver any document or thing or to examine any person in connec-
tion With 'the contravention of any provisions of the proposed legislation. 
CIaUBe 68.-This clause grants privilege of the non-disclosure of tl;le 
.ource of information relating to the commission of offences. 
Clause 69.-This clause grants immunity from civil and criminal 
proCeedings: to the Central Government and State Governments and 
their officers for exercising their powers or discharging their functions or 
tdr' anYthing done or intended to be done in good faith. 
C1C&use 70.-This clause lays down that the Central Government aild 
the State Governments shall have regard to International Conventions 
while making rules. 
Ctcw.te 7l.-This clause empowers the Central and State Governments 
~ eatabliah centres for identification, treatment, etc., of addicts 'and for' 
mpply of narcotic drugs and psychotropic subetancea where such supply 
is a :lMdical necessity. 
Clause 72.-This clause lays down that the amounts recoverable 
Under the proposed law shall, in the event of default of payment, be 
recdVerable by attachment and sale and in the manner al for arrears of 
land revenue. 
CW1Ue 73.~Th1s clause bars the jurisdiction of clvi1 COurtl to enter .. 
tain&nY sUit'or proceeding in the matters relating to withholding, refusat 
or cancellation of licence for cultivation of the opium poppy; weighment, 
examination, and classification of opium and confiscation of adulterated 
opi~ 
Clause 74.-This clause contains transitional. provisions to enaure the 
contbfuld appointment of the enforcement officers. 

41 
tlause 75.-Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Centrai 
Government to delegate its powers and functions to the Board or any 
other authority or t~e Narcotic Commissioner. . . 
Sub-clau.se (2) of this clause empoweIS the State Government to 
delegate its powers and functions to any authority or officer. 
CLA'U8e.7fL.-This clause empowers the Central Government to make 
r:wes fOf carrying out the PU1'pQlleS of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 77.-This c1a~ provides that ~ ~ made an,4 notifications 
issued by· the Central Gov~~t sQ.all be laid before each House of 
Parliament. .. . . 
Clause 78.-This clause' ·empowers the State Governments to malre 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. 
CtaUie 7g,-This clause lays down that the prohibitions and restric-
tions imposed under the Bill on the import into India and expo.rt from 
India and transhipment of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances 
shall be deemed to be prohibitions and restrictions under the Customs 
Act, 1962. ' 
CL~u,Be SO.-This clause lays down that the proposed law shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Clau.C!e S1.-This clause saves the validity of State laws in matters of 
punishment and restriction in relation to the cultivation of cannabis 
pl~nt or consumption of, or traffic in, any narcotic drug or psychotropic 
substance within India. 
Clf11t,e 82.-Tb,is c~u~. repeals. the Opium Act, 1857, Opium Act 1878 
an~ th~. Dan,ge~o~s Drugs Act, 1930 which are the laws presently appli-
cable to the subject matter of narcotic drugs. 
Clause 83.-This clause empowers the Central Government to remove 
diftlculties which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the 
proposed legislation. 

The enforcement of the propo:red legislation OJ) narcotic d,ru8S ~d 
psychotropic substances immed,j,ately afLer the enactm.ent of the Bill 
re.l.ating thereto in so far as the same relates to the Centr.al Government 
will be done by the existing Central enforcement machinery'. 
Clause 4 of the Bill contains a prQviaion under which the central 
. Government may, by order if it considers neceasllj or expedient so to 
do constitute an authority or a hierarchy of authorities for the p1Up088 
of exercising such of the powers and functions of the Central Govern-
ment as may be mentioned in the order. This is merely an enabling pro-
vision and It is only in the light of the working of the legislation that 
the Central Government would be able to decide as to whether it would 
be necessary to constitute an authority or hierarchy of authorities and, 
if so, as to what would be the composition of such a.uthority or hierarci1y 
of authorities. In the circumstances, ~t 'is not possible at this stage to 
visualize the nature and quantum of the expenditure which may be 
.ipvolvedin the event of any authority or hierarchy of authorities being 
set up under this clause. 
Clause 5 of the Bill envisages appointment of the Narcotics Com-
missioner and other officers. It is proposed at this stage to enforce the 
legislation through the Narcotics Commissione.r presently working as 
such and other available machinery. No additional expenditure would, 
therefore, be involved on this account. 
Clause 6 of the Bill, inte1" alia, provides that the Central Govemment 
may constitute an Advisory Committ.e to be called "the Narcotic Drugs 
and Psychotro~ Substaru:es Consultative Committee" to advise the 
Central Government on such ma~ relating to the administration of 
tae proposed legislation as are referred to it by :that Government from 
time to time. Having regard to the scheme of tlie constitution of the 
said Consultative Conunittee in the B111, the Committee would mainly 
consist of officials. In case non-officials are appointed or services of non-
officials are utilised by ·the Com,mittee, some expenditure would be :.n-
volved. It is, however, not possible to viaualize at this stage the actual 
additional expenditure which may be involved on this account. 
Clause 71 of the Bill, inte1" Glia, empowers the Government to estab .. 
lish centres for identification, treatment, education, afte.r-care, rehabili-
tation, etc., of addicts. This is also in the nature of an enabling provi-
sion. As far as the Central Government is concerned, it will be aole 
to take decision regarding the establishment of such centres, only after 
a comprehensive review of the drug abuse situation and the arrange-
ments and f~ilities already existing in this regard in the Government 
hospitals and institUtions. However, the provision of this clause would 
mainly concern the State GovernmentS. 
The intention of the Government is to manage with the existing 
machinery to the maximum extent possible. For the reasons already 
stated, it is not possible to visualize the nature and quantum of additional 
expenditure which may be involved by reason of the prOVisions of clauses 
4, 6 and 71. 
~/ 

MEl-.10RANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (3) of clause 1 empowers the ~ntral Government to 
appoint the date of commencement of the Act and the different provi-
jiiQtls thereof and for different States. 
Item (b) of sub-clause (xi) of clause 2 empowers the Central Gov-
ernment to declare any narcotic substance or preparation to be a 
manufactured drug or declare any narcotic substance or preparation not 
to be such a drug. 
Item (a) of sub-clause (:wi.) empowers the Central Government to 
notify any pharmacopoeia other than an Indian pharmacopoeia for the 
purposeg of that provision. 
Item (b) of sub-clause (xvii) empowers the Central Governmert to 
declare of any plant of anyother species of Papaver to be opium 
poppy for the purposes of the law. 
The Explanati'on to clause 2 empowers the Central Government to 
prescribe any basis other than the one mentioned in that Explanation 
for the' purpose of calculating percentages in liquid preparations. 
Clause 3 empowers the Central Government to amend the Schedule 
containing the list of psychotropic substances. 
6ub-clause (3) of clause 4 empowers the Central Government to 
constitute an authority or an hierarchy of authorities for the purpose 
of exercising powers and functions of the Central Government. 
Clause 6 empowers the Central Government to constitute an advisory 
committee to be called the Narcotic Drugs and. Psychotropic Substances 
Consultative Committee and alS'O to prescribe the conditions and restric-
tions subject to which a non-member shall be appointed to a sub-
committee of the said Committee. 
Clause & empowers the Central and the State GovernmentR to make 
rules to prescribe the manner and the extent to which certain operations 
in relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances shall be per-
missible for medical and scientiftc pt.trpOIJeS. 
Clause 9 empowers the Central Govemment to make rules to permtt. 
control and regulate certain operations relating to narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances. 
---. ----.. 
Clause 10 empowers the State Government to make rules to pennit, 
control and regulate certain operations relating to harcotic drugs. 
43 

44 
Clause 14 empowers the Central and the State Governments to allow, 
by a general or a special order, cultivation of any cannabis plant for 
industrial or horticultural purposes and specify the conditions therefor. 
Clause 27 empowers the Central Government to notify the narcotic 
drugs or psychotropic substances, the possession for consumption of 
which shall be an offence under this clause and also to specify the quan-
tity which shall be treated as "small quantity" for the pu1'PO,Be of an 
offence under this claUSe. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 41 empowers the State Government to 
empower any Megistrate of the second class to issue warrant for arrest. 
Sub;.clause (2) of this clause empowers the Cehtral and the Stat. 
Governments to empower the Ga~tted otBcers of their ~ft 
departments mentioned in the sub-clause to issue authorisation for the 
arrest of persons. 
Clause 42 empowers the authorised offteoers of. eertain departments of 
the Central Government and the State Government to enter, tearch, 
seize find arrest without walT8n.t. 
Clause 48 empowers the State Government to specially empower any 
Magistrate other than a Metropolitan Magistrate or a. Magistrate of the 
first class to order attachment of the opium poppy, eannabis plant or coca 
plant, illegally cultivated. 
Clause 53 empowers the Central Government and the State Govem-
ments to invest the powers of an officer-In-charge of a police station on 
the offlcers of certain departments of the Central and State Govern-
ments. 
Clause 65 empowers the Central and State Governments to make 
rules to regulate the disposal of confiscated articles and to provide for 
payment of rewards to the officers, informers and other persons. 
Clause 66 empowers the Central Government to ptescrlbe the manner 
in which and the authority by which the documents received from foreign 
countries shall be authenticated. 
Clause 71 empowers the Central and the State Governments to make 
rules relating to the establishment appointment, maintenance, manage-
ment and superintendence of, and for the supply of narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances from, the centres and for the appointment, 
training, powers and duties of persons employed in such centres. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 75 empowers the Central Government to 
delegate its powers and functions to the Board oraby other authority or 
the Narcotics 'Commissioner. Sub-clause (2) of this clau!e empOWers 
the State Government to delegate its powers and functions to any 
autliority or oftlcer. 
Clause 76 empowers the Central Government to make rules to earry 
out the purposes of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 78' elTlpeftVetB the" Sta'te Go~' to 1WSke- ruYel! tb eatry 
out the pt11'J:iose9 df the proptoSed legislatfon.· . 
Clause 83 empowers the Central Govemment to make any provision 
not inr.OIlSistent with the provision of the A,.Ct to remove any c:UfIlculty 

45 
to glvmg effect to the proposed legislation within three years of its 
enactment. 
The field of :narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances has been a 
continuouSlly developtng and chjanging one. Moreover, it would be 
necessary to give effect to the fresh decisions that may be taken under 
the International Conventions.· It is, therefore, necessary to empower 
the Central Government to declare any narcotic substance or preparation 
to be a "manufactured drug" or to denotify the same or to add to or 
omit any substances from the list of psychotropic substances. Thus, the 
delegation of power in respect of these matters is considered neceslJfU"Y:. 
Under the existing law contained in the Opium Act, 1878 and the 
Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (to be repealed) the power of control and 
regulation in relation to narcotic drugs vests in the Central and State 
Governments. It is proposed to continue the same pattern of control 
and regulation lUlder the Bill. 
The delegation in respect of the remaining items relates to administra-
tive details and procedure. The delegation of legislative power involved 
is of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to narcotic drugs, to make 
stringent provisions for the control and. regulation of operations 
relating to narcotic drugs and psychotropic 8ubstan(.'es and for matters 
connected therewith. 
(Vi.hWGRClth PTatop Singh, 
Minister 0/ Finance.) 