 
As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 162 of 2022
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF URBAN PLANNING 
IN SCHOOLS BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. Sඁඋං඄ൺඇඍ E඄ඇൺඍඁ Sඁංඇൽൾ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of urban planning in senior secondary level in all the 
schools throughout the country in order to prepare students from school level and thereby 
ensuring sustainable as well as positive development in urban regions and for 
making it obligatory for the Central and State Governments to provide
requisite infrastructure for the purpose and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Urban Planning in Schools 
Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and
commencement.
5

 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State, and in all other cases the Central Government; 
(b) “District Committee” means Committee on Compulsory Teaching of Urban 
Planning established at district level under section 9;
(c) “Infrastructure” means all resources required for study and researching on urban 
planning and requisite environment in the school; 
(d) “National Committee” means National Committee on Compulsory Teaching of 
Urban Planning established at national level under section 5;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(f) “School” means any recognised school imparting education till Class 12th and 
includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or 
a local authority; 
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its expenses 
from the appropriate Government or the local authority; 
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; and 
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its 
expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority;
(g) “State Committee” means Committee on Compulsory Teaching of Urban 
Planning established at State level under section 8;
(h) “urban planning” means design and regulation of the uses of space that focus on 
the physical form, economic functions and social impacts of the urban environment 
and on the location of different activities within it.
 3.  (1) From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify, curriculum for teaching, training and research of urban planning for 
class seventh to twelfth and not later than the beginning of the 2022-23 academic session 
in accordance with the academic standards for health, safety and physical education. 
(2) The appropriate Government on the recommendations of the National 
Committee established under section 5 shall develop a model curriculum for teaching, 
training and research of urban planning for students studying in class seventh to 
twelfth in school.
(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure appointment of such number of 
teachers with such qualifications, as may be prescribed, for imparting compulsory 
teaching of urban planning in schools.
 4.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year of the 
commencement of the Act, formulate a National Policy for providing urban planning in all 
schools of the country and ensuring requisite infrastructure and other facilities required for 
urban planning. 
(2) The national policy referred to in sub-section (1) shall provide for,— 
(i) imparting teaching of urban planning to all the students as per their ability and 
physical condition in all the schools; 
(ii) encouraging teaching of urban planning and creating awareness of the importance 
of urban planning among the school’s students; 
(iii) ensuring the availability of teacher or instructor specialised in urban planning 
in all the schools; 
(iv) releasing adequate funds for infrastructure development for teaching of urban 
planning in all the schools;
(v) incorporating urban planning as compulsory subjects in all the schools; 
National policy 
for urban 
planning education 
and infrastructure 
in all schools.
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
45
Deﬁnitions.
Compulsory 
Teaching of 
urban planning 
in schools.
2

(vi) preparing standard and qualitative syllabus for urban planning as per the age 
and mental capacity of the students under the guidance of experts and universalisation 
thereof; 
(vii) providing scholarship and stipend to those students whose performance in 
urban planning has been outstanding; 
(viii) giving weightage to marks obtained in urban planning for admission in 
colleges, universities, and institutions of national importance; 
(ix) giving preference to the outstanding urban planning professionals in direct 
recruitment under the Central and State Government services; and 
(x) such other provisions, as the Central Government may deem fit and necessary for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force 
of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, a National Committee to 
be known as the National Committee on Compulsory teaching of Urban Planning in 
schools for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
 ( 2) The National Committee shall consist of,–
(i) Union Minister of Education — Chairperson, ex-officio;
 (ii) Union Minister of State for Education — Vice-Chairperson, ex-officio;
 (iii) Secretary, Union Ministry of Education — Member, ex-officio;
 (iv) Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs — Member, ex-officio;
(v) Secretary, Department of School Education 
and Literacy — Union Ministry of Education — Member, ex-officio;
 ( vi) one representative to be nominated by NITI Aayog — Member;
(vii) one representative nominated by the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs who holds expertise in the field of urban planning—Member;
(viii) one representative to be nominated by Town and Country Planning 
Organisation—Member;
(ix) one representative to be nominated by the School of Planning and 
Architecture, New Delhi—Member;
(x) two urban planning consultants to be nominated by NITI Aayog who hold 
expertise in the field of urban planning—Member;
(3) The National Committee shall also consist of such number of members, 
having special knowledge or experience in the fields of Urban Planning as the 
Central Government may deem fit. 
(4) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it 
considers necessary for the functioning of the National Committee. 
(5) The salary and  allowances payable to and other terms of conditions of services 
of other members under sub-section (3), officers and staff of the National Committee 
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The National Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government:
Provided that the Committee shall meet at least once every three months.
6. (1) The National Committee shall,—
(a) make recommendations to the appropriate Government on the curriculum and 
syllabus for Teaching of Urban Planning in schools from Class seventh and twelfth; 
(b) make recommendations to the appropriate Government regarding the class 
or category of students or educational institutions which shall be exempted from the 
provisions of this Act; 
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
45
Constitution 
of National 
Committee on 
Compulsory 
Teaching of 
Urban Planning.
Functions of 
the National 
Committee.
3

(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to be 
appointed in educational institutions for teaching of urban planning; and
(d) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities with a 
view to ensure effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The recommendations given by the National Committee under sub-section (1) shall be 
binding on the appropriate Government.
7. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the National 
Policy formulated under section 3.
(2) The appropriate Government shall review the progress and quality of teaching 
of urban planning being imparted by the schools, from time to time, in such manner, as 
may be prescribed. 
8. (1) The State Government shall, within three months of the coming into force 
of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, a State Committee to be 
known as the State Committee on Compulsory Teaching of Urban Planning in Schools 
under their jurisdiction. 
(2) With effect from such date as the State Government may, by notification consist 
of the following members in the State Committee namely:—
(i) Minister of Education of the State Government concerned—Chairperson; 
ex-officio;
(ii) Minister of State for Education of the State Government concerned—
Vice-Chairperson; ex-officio;
(iii) Secretary, Ministry of Education of the State Government concerned—
Member; ex-officio;
(iv) Secretary, Ministry of Urban Planning—Member;
(v) three representatives from respective Urban Development Authorities in the 
State—Members;
(vi) three to five consultants from different topographical regions in the State to 
be nominated by the Ministry of Urban Planning.
(3) The State Committee shall also consist of such number of members, 
having special knowledge or experience in the fields of Urban Planning as the 
State Government may deem fit. 
(4) The State Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it 
considers necessary for the functioning of the State Committee. 
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
services of the members appointed under sub-section (3) and officers and staff of 
the State Committee shall be such, as may be prescribed. 
(6) The State Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such 
rules of procedure regarding transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed 
by the State Government:
Provided that the Committee shall meet at least once in every three months.
(7) The functions of the State Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
9. (1) The State Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of 
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, in each district a Committee 
to be known as the District Committee on Compulsory teaching of Urban Planning in 
Schools under their jurisdiction. 
(2) The District Committee shall consist of,— 
(i) Member of Parliament to be nominated by the Central Government— 
Chairperson, ex-officio;
(ii) Member of Legislative Assembly to be nominated by the State Government— 
Vice Chairperson, ex-officio;
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
45
50
Appropriate 
Government to 
implement 
National policy.
Constitution 
of a District 
Committee on 
Teaching of 
Urban Planning.
4

(iii) Mayor of the District concerned—Member;
(iv) District Magistrate of the District concerned—Member;
(v) one representative from all the Municipal Corporations in the district– 
Member;
(vi) one representative each from any two reputed NGO/Community Based 
Organisations or Voluntary Agencies to be nominated by the State Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The District Committee shall also consist of such number of members, 
having special knowledge or experience in the fields of Urban Planning as the 
State Government may deem fit. 
(4) The State Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it 
considers necessary for the functioning of the District Committee. 
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
services of the member appointed under sub-section (3) and officers and staff of the 
District Committee shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(6) The District Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be pre-
scribed by the State Government: 
Provided that the District Committee shall meet at least once in every three months.
(7) The functions of the District Committee shall be such as may be prescribed. 
10. Any school which violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for punitive 
action by the appropriate Government, including withdrawal of recognition of the school in 
such manner and with such condition, as may be prescribed.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds from time to time for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject-matter of this Act.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
Penal Provisions.
Central
Government to 
provide funds.
Act not in
derogation of 
other laws.
Power to make 
rules.
5