Short title.
Bill No. 162 of  2005
THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act,
2005.
2. (1) In section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act),  in clause ( h), after sub-clause ( id), the following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ie) any certificate or instrument (by whatever name called),—
(a) issued, to an investor by  any special purpose distinct entity
which possesses any financial asset representing debt or receivable by
such entity, and, acknowledging the beneficial interest of such investor in
such financial asset; and
 (b) which may, by general or special order, be specified as such by
the Securities and Exchange Board of India;”.
Amendment of
section 2.
42 of 1956.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3.  After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“17A. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act or any other
law for the time being in force, no securities of the nature referred to in sub-clause (ie)
of clause (h) of section 2 shall be issued to any investor or trade on any recognised
stock exchange unless such securities have been approved by the Securities and
Exchange Board of India.
(2) Every special purpose distinct entity referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause
(h) of section 2 shall—
(a) make an application, for specifying any certificate or instrument under
sub-clause (ie) of clause ( h) of section 2, as secrurites, to the Securities and
Exchange Board of India, in such form and manner as may be specified by
regulations;
(b) file along with an application made under clause ( a) the draft of the
certificate or instrument which such entity proposes to issue to the investor as
securities of the nature referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2.
(3) The Securities and Exchange Board of India may, to protect the interest of
investors in the securities of the nature referred to in sub-clause ( ie) of clause (h) of
section 2, specify by regulations,—
(i) the contents of the certificate or instrument to be filed under clause (b)
of sub-section (2) and to be issued as securities of the nature referred to in sub-
clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2, to the investors;
(ii) the manner in which such contents shall be disclosed in the certificate
or instrument to be issued as securities of the nature referred to in sub-clause
(ie) of clause (h) of section 2.”.
4. In section 31of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which at least fifty-one per cent. of equity share capital
of a recognised stock exchange is held within twelve months from the date of
publication of the order under sub-section (7) of section 4B by the public other
than the shareholders having trading rights under sub-section (8) of that section;
(b) the form and manner in which an application shall be made
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 17A;
(c) the contents of the certificate or instrument under clause ( i) of sub-
section (3) of section 17A;
(d) the manner in which such contents shall be disclosed in the certificate
or instrument under clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 17A.”.
Insertion of
new section
17A.
Approval of
Securities and
Exchange
Board of India
for securities
referred to in
sub-clause (ie)
of clause (h) of
section 2.
Amendment of
section 31.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
During the Budget Session of Parliament in the current year 2005, it was proposed to
amend the definition of “securities” in the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (the
SCR Act) so as to provide a legal framework for trading of securitised debt including mortgage
backed debt.
2. Securitisation is a form of financing involving pooling of financial assets and the issuance
of securities that are re-paid from the cash flows generated by the assets.  This is generally
accomplished by actual sale of the assets to a bankruptcy remote vehicle, that is, a special
purpose vehicle, which finances the purchase through the issuance of bonds.  These bonds
are backed by future cash flows of the asset pool. The most common assets for securitisation
are mortgages, credit cards, auto and consumer loans, student loans, corporate debt, export
receivables, off-shore remittances, etc.
3.  Besides other advantages, securitisation (a) allows banks and financial institutions to
keep these loans off their balance-sheet, thus reducing the need for additional
capital; (b) provides the banks and financial institutions with alternative forms of funding
risk transfer, a new investor base, potential capital relief and capital market development;
(c) can reduce lending concentration, improve liquidity and improve access to alternate
sources of funding for banks and financial institutions; (d) facilitates attainment of funding
at lower cost as a result of isolating the assets from potential bankruptcy risk of the originator;
(e) facilitates better matching of assets and liabilities and  the development of the long-term
debt market; (f) provides diversified pools of uniform assets; and (g) has the advantage of
converting  non-liquid loans or assets which cannot be easily sold to third party investors
into liquid assets or marketable securities. Lower funding costs are also a result of movement
of investments from less efficient debt markets to more efficient capital markets through the
process of securitisation.
4. In India, the securitisation market remains underdeveloped. Although two major
legislative  initiatives, namely, (a) the amendment to the National Housing Bank Act, 1987
(NHB Act) in the year 2000; and (b) the enactment of the Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, (SARFAESI Act), have
been taken, the market has not picked up because of the absence of the facility of trading on
stock exchanges.  The potential buyers get discouraged by the possibility of having to hold
the certificate or instrument in respect of securitisation transactions till maturity.  This, in
turn, restricts the growth of business of housing finance companies and banks.
5. The securitisation transactions under the NHB Act are not covered under the definition
of “securities” under the SCR Act.  As such, trading in certificates or instruments relating to
such transactions cannot take place on stock exchanges and buyers of such securitised financial
certificates or instruments are left with few exit options. Under the SARFAESI Act, while
“security receipts” have been covered under the definition of “securities”, the provisions of
the said Act  restrict sale and purchase only amongst qualified institutional buyers.  Besides,
the “security receipts” under the SARFAESI Act can be issued only by a securitisation
company or a reconstruction company registered with the Reserve Bank of India. This
obviously limits the interest in such receipts and the market has not taken off at all.
6. Keeping in view the potential of the securities market for the certificates or instruments
under securitisation transactions, international trends and consultations held with major
institutional participants and market experts, it has been decided to amend the  SCR Act,
inter alia,—
(i) include securitisation certificate  or instrument under the definition of
“securities” and to insert for the said purpose, a  new  sub-clause (ie) in clause (h) of
section 2 of  the SCR Act, 1956;
3

4
(ii) to provide for obtaining approval from the Securities and Exchange Board
of India for issue of the proposed certificate or instrument and procedure therefor and
insert for the said purpose a new section 17A in the SCR Act, 1956; and
(iii)  to provide for the manner in which contents of such certificate or instrument,
being the “securities” and acknowledging beneficial interest shall be disclosed.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM
The 7th December, 2005.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend section 31 of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 so as to confer power upon the Securities and Exchange Board of
India to make regulations on the matters such as specifying the form and manner in which
an application shall be made under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 17A; specifying
the contents of the certificate or instrument under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 3) of section
17A and the manner in which such contents shall be disclosed in the certificate or instrument
under clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 17A.
2. The regulations made by the Securities and Exchange Board of India shall be laid,
as soon as may be, after they are made, before each House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which regulations may be made are generally matters of
procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) ACT, 1956
(42 OF 1956)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
31. (1) * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for the manner in which at least fifty-one per cent. of equity share
capital of a recognised stock exchange is held within twelve months from the date of
publication of the order under sub-section (7) of section 4B by the public other than the
shareholders having trading rights under sub-section (8) of that section.
* * * * *
6
Definitions.
Power of
Securities and
Exchange
Board of India
to make
regulations.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.
————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of  Finance)
MGIPMRND—4388LS(S3)—12-12-2005.