10K SABdA 
C0RRIGEJlJD il 
t~ 
THE SUGAR UNDERTAKINGS (TM-DG DVER OF t1ANAGEl'1ENT) • 
BILL, "7~ . , 
t L-" bel As introduced in IPk Sabha 7 
1. Page 11, lines 32 and 33,-
for' IIOrdi ance" re ad. 
2. Page 13, line 26,-
y 
"Ordinance" 
for "requirements" K~ IIrequirement" 
3. Page 13, line 2~;-
after "\.,,)rking capit'.:I.l" insert-
"-. NEW DELHI; 
"in terms of sub-clause (2) of 
clause 8 of the Bill" 
November ~4, 1 '78 
Agrahayana 3, 1900 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SAllHA ON 
Bill No. 162 of 1978 
-THE ,··SUGAR UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF 
MANAGEMENT) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
.to prq1)i,d.e lor the temporary taking over, in the public interest# of the 
managtment of certain sugar undertakings in certain circumstances. 
W..1fD1&A8 for maiRtaining the continuity of production of ~ar, for 
~&'¥OidiDl UDdue harGship to cane producing farmers and to b~t sub-
aerve tAeinterast& of all sections 'Of the people, it is expedient in the 
public interest to provide for the taking over for a limited period the 
5 management of every sugar undertaking which fails or ceases to manu-
facture sugar or which fails to pay promptly amounts due for the cane 
acquired for the purposes of the undertaking; 
to 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the 
Republic of India as follQws:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
. .:1. (1) This Act may be call-ed the Sugar Undertakings 
of Management) Act, 1978. 
. (~) .It extenQs to the whole of India. .. . . 
(Taking Over Short title, 
extent and 
commence-
ment. 
IS"') It llhall be deemed to have come into force on the ~h day ot 
N()V'ember,' 1978. 

Vestina 
Of 
m&nqe-
ment of 
a sup!" 
uader-
teldn, 
in Ceab'al 
Govern-
m6'nt. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day", in relation to any augar year, meIDI lUcia 
day in the year as the Central Government may, by noWlcatlOll, 
specify having regard to the agro-climatic conditions prevalliDg or 
likely to prevail, the quantity of cane available or likely to be avalla- 5 
ble for crushing and other relevant factors: 
Provided that for the sugar year 1978-79, the appointed day shall 
be the 15th day of November, 1978; 
(b) "cane" means sugarcane; 
(c) "date of vesting", in l'elation to a sugar undertaking, meana JO 
the date on whieh the management of the undertaking vests m the 
Central Government under s!!Ction 3; 
(d) "notification" means a notification published in the Oftlcial 
Gazette; 
(8) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this J; 
Act; I 
(f) "sugar undertaking" means an undertakinl engaaed in the 
manufacture or production of sugar by means ot vacuum pans and 
with the aid of mechanical power and "notified sugar underta.kiDg" 
means a sugar undertaking in respect of whic:h a notification hu 20 
been issued under section 3; 
(g) "sugar year" means the period of twelve months commene-
ing on the 1st day of October and ending with the 30th day of 
September next following; 
(h) words and expressions used but not deftned in this Act 15 
and defined in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to tbem in that 85 of MIl. 
Act and for this purpose a sugar undertaking shall be deemed to be 
an industrial undertaking within the meaning at that Act; 
(i) words and expressions used but not deftnecl in tlUa Act or 30 
in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1861 but &:I of 1811. 
defined ill the Companies Act, 1956 shall have the mean. reepec- 1 01 11A. 
tively assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956. 
CHAPTER II 
TAKING OVBR OF MANAGEMENT 
3. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfted-
(a) that any sugar undertaking has in any sugar year failed to 
commence the manufacture of sugar on or before the appointed day 
l,S 
in respect of that year, or having started the manufacture of aupr 
on or Defore that day ceased to manufActure sugar before the expiry 40 
of the average period of manufacture of sugar in relation to that 
undertaking; or 
(b) that on any date in any sugar year any sugar undertaking 
has, in relation to the cane purchased Qefore that ~ta. for the pur-
poses of the undertaking, arrears of cane dues to the extent ot more 45 . . 

, 
3 
than ten per cent. of the total price of the cane purchased for the pur-
poses of the undertaking during the immediately preceding sugar year; 
and 
(c) that in either case the effective functioning of the under-
taking is necessary for the purposes of this Act, 
the Central Government may issue a notice in such form and in aach 
manner as may be prescribed to the owner or the manager of such sugar 
undertaking calling upon such owner or manager to report in writing 
within such time, not being less than five days, as may be specified in 
10 the notice, the circumstances under which such undertaking has so failed 
to commence or ceased to manufacture sugar or, as the case may be, 
clear the said arrears of cane dues and to show cause as to why the 
management of such undertaking should not be taken over by the 
Central Government under this Act. 
15 (2) As soon as may be, after the receipt of t1>le report under sub-
section (1) from the sugar undertaking, or where the sugar undertaking 
hal failed to make such report within the time specified in the notice 
to that undertaking under sub-section (1), after the expiry of such 
time, the Central Government may make such further inquiry (if any) 
zo 8S it may deem fit, and-
(a) if the Central Government is satisfied that having regard 
to all the circumstances of the case and the purposes of this Aet 
that it would be expedient to give further time to the undertaking 
to enable it to commence or resume production of sugar or, 81 
the case may be, clear the arrears of cane dues, it may, by order 
in writing, specify the date on or before which and the manner 1n 
which such undertaking shall commenCe or resume production of 
.ugar or, as the case may be, clear the said arrears of cane dues; or 
(b) if th~ Central Government is not satisfied as provided in 
clause (a), declare by notification that the management of such 
undertaking shall vest in the Central Government on and from IUch 
date as may be s~ified in such notification. 
(3) If a sugar undertaking has failed to comply with an order made 
under clause (a) of sub-section (2), or having commenced or resumed 
3S the production of sugar on or before the date specified in such order, 
eeased to manufacture sugar before the expiry of the average period 
of mauufacture of Bugar in relatfoon to that undertaking, and the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to do for the purposes of 
this Act, it may, by notification, declare that the management ot such 
40 sugar undertaking shall vest in the Central Government on and from 
BUeh date as may be specified in such notification. 
(4) Any failure on the part of the owner or manager of the sugar 
undertaking to utilise the undertaking for the manufacture ot sugar 
durlng any period shall not be taken into account for the purpose of 
45 issuing a notiftcation in respect of that undertaking under clause (b') 
of sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) where such failure is attributable 
to any circumstances (other than financial dift\culties) beyond his con-
trol. '. ,- ' ...... -I~ 
(5) Every .. notification issued under sub-section (2) or sub-sectfon 
So (3) for veatinl tb. manapment of a BUlar \I.dart.king in the Central 

.Auets, 
etc., of 
notifted 
auaar 
under-
takin,. 
4 
Government shall be in force for such period not exceeding three years 
from the date of vesting as may be specified 1n the notifteatlon. but if 
the period so spetified is less than three years from the date f1f vesting 
and the Central Government is of opinion that it is expedient in the 
public interest that the management of the sugar undertaking should 5 
continue to vest in the Central Government after the expiry 'of the 
period so specified, it may, from time to time, issue, by notift~ijOn, 
direotions for such continuance for such further period as may be :':PtCi-
fled in the directions: 
Provided that the total period for which the management of the 10 
undertaking may remain vested in the Central Government .hall : in 
no C8S.~ exceed three years from the date of ves~g. 
(6) For the purposes of this section-
(a) "cane dues", in :relation to any cane purchased by a sugar 
undertaking, means the price payable in accordance witA ,the 15 
agreement (whether express or implied) or arrangement IelaUng 
to such purchase and where there is no such agreement or U'l'GIe-
ment, the price as determined in accordance with the law applicable 
to such purchase; 
(b) any cane dues being the price payable for any cane acquired 20 
for the purposes of a sugar undertaking shall not be deemecito be 
in arrears at any time before the expiry of fou~ days from the 
date of delivery of such cane to the undertaking; .. 
(c) the average ~eriod of manufacture of sugar ~ relation 'to 
any sugar undertaking with respect to any sugar year (hereafter ~5 
in this clause referred to as the current sugar year) shall be. calcu-
lated by dividing the htal number of calendar days during which 
the undertaking manufactured sugar during the period of three 
sugar years immediately preceding the current sugar year, by the" 
number of sugar years in which the undertaking manufactured sugar 30 
during the said period of three years. 
4. (1) The notified sugar undertaking shall be d~ed to incl~de all 
Hsets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges, in relation to the ~id 
undertaking and all property. movable and immovable, including laQds, 
buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machtn~, automobiles and 35 
other vehicles and goods under production or in transit, cash balances, 
reserve l.unds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising 
out of, such property as were, immediately before the date of !v~ng, 
in the ownership, possession, power or control of that undertaking, 
whether within 'or outside India, and all books of account, r~sters 40 
and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto. ' 
(2) Any contract, whether express or implied, or other arrangehlent. 
(whether under any statute or otherwise) in so far as it reJates to the 
management of the business and affairs 'of .the notified suga~ Und~r. 
taking, and in force immediately before the date of vesting, or BllY 45 
order made by any Court in so far as it relates to the management of 
the business and affairs of that undertaking and in. force immediately 
before, the said date, shall be deemed to have terminated on. that ute., 

(8) All persons in whom the management df the business and affairs 
of the notified sugar undertaking vests immediately before the date of 
vesting shall, as from that date, cease to be so vested. 
(4) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or ()rder of any Court, tri-
5 bunal or other authority or anything contained in any law (other than, 
thf. Act) for the time being in force, every Receiver, OtBcial Liquidator 
or other person in whose possession or custody or under whose control 
the notified sugar undertaking or any part thereof may be immediately 
before the date of vesting, shall, on that date, deliver the possession of the 
t o aid undertaking or such part thereof, as the case may be, to the Custo-
dian, appointed under section 5, or, where no Custodian has been appoint-
e4, to such other person as the Central Government may direct. 
(5) The Central Government may take, or cause to be taken, all 
neeessary steps for se~uring the possession of the notified sugar 
15 unditrtaltfn'g. 
5. (1) The Central Government may, as soon as it is convenient admi- Appoint_ 
nistraUvely so to do, appoint an individual or a body of individuals or a ment ot 
G.Wemm&nt company as the Custodian of a notifled sugar undertaking Custodian. 
or a group of notified sugar undertakings for the purpose of taking over 
.10 the management of such undertaking or undertakings and the Custodian 
so appointed shall carry on the management of such undertaking or 
undertakings for and on behalf of the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government may also appoint an individual or a 
Gover .... ent company as the Custodian-General for exercising supervi-
.15 .Ioft and control over all the notified sugar undertakings, and on such 
appointment, every Custodian appointed under sub-section (1) shall act 
utter tht guidanee, control and supervision of the Custodian-General. 
(3) On the appointment of a Custodian under sub-section (1), the 
charge of management of the notified sugar undertaking or group of noti-
30 fied sugar undertakings, as the case may be, shall vest in such Custodian 
and all persons in charge of ,the management of such undertaking or 
undertakings immediately before such appointment shall cease to be in 
charge of such management and shaU be bound to deliver to the Custo-
dian all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in their 
35 custod~ relating to such undertaking or group of undertakings. 
(4) The Central Government may issue such directions (including 
directions as to initiating, defending or continuing any legal proceedings 
before any Court, tribunal or other authority) to the Custodian or. Custo-
dian-General as to his or its powers and duties as the Central G~vern-
40 ment deems desirable and the Custodian-General or. if there is no eusto-
djan-General. the Custodian may apply to the Cf>ntraI Government at 
any time for instructions as to the manner in which the Custodian or the 
Custodian-General shall conduct the management of the notified sugar 
undertaking or in relation to any matter arising in the course of such 
4~ management. 
(5) Any person, wh:>, on the appointed day, has in his possession or 
under his control any books. papers or 'other documents relating to the 
notified sugar undert~king. shall. notwithstanding nnything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force. be liable. to account for the 
50 books, papers and other documents, to the Custodian and shall deliver 

Pay-
ment of 
amount. 
Sower of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
makecer-
tain de-
clara-
tions. 
8 
them up to the Custodian or to such other person as may be authorised 
by the Central Government or the Custodian in this behalf. 
5 
(6) Every person in charge of the management of the notifled sugar 
undertaking, immediately before the date of vesting, shall, within ten 
days from that date or within such further period as the Central Govern-
ment may allow in this behalf, furnish to the Custodian a complete 
inventory of all the properties and assets (including particulars of book 
debts, investments and belongings) forming part of the undertaking 
immediately before the date of vesting and of all liabilities and obliga-
tions of the undertaking subsisting immediately before that date and J (!) 
also of all agreements entered into by the owner or manager of the 
undertaking, in relation to the said undertaking, and in force immediately 
before that date. 
(7) The Custodian-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Central Government and shalt' receive such remuneration 88 may be bed IS 
by the Central Government. 
(8) Every Custodian or where a body of individuals has been appoint-
ed as the Custodian, each such individual shall hold oftlce during the 
pleasure of the Central Government and shall receiVe from the funds of 
the sugar undertaking or group of sugar undertakings concerned, such ~o 
remuneration as may be fixed by the Central Government. 
Explananon.-'I'he remuneratIon payable to the Custodian ot two or 
more notified undertakings shall be allocated among the funds ot the 
undertakings in such proportion as the Central Government may, havJng 
regard to the quantum of work in respect of such undertaldnp and 25 
other relev~mt circumstances, by order determine. 
6. (1) The owner of every notifted sugar undertaking shall be Jiven 
lty the Central Government an amount In cash for vesting in It UJlder 
section 3 the management of such undertaking. 
(2) For every month during which the management of the notified 30 
sugar undertaldng remains vested in the Central Government under til .. 
Ad. the amount, referred to In suh-sedion (1), shall be,-
~ 
(a) where the daily cane crushing capacity of the undertaking is 
five hundred tonnes or less, an pmount of five hundred rupees; and 
(b) where the daily cane CTushing capacity of the underiaJdng 35 
is more than flve hundred tonnes, an amount computed at the rate 
of one rupee for each tonne of such capacity or an amount of one 
thousand two hundred and ftfty rupee!;, whichever III 1M!'!. 
CHAPTER ITI 
REl,rt.T TO 5i.rGA~ lJNDJl:RTAKTNr.S ANn CANT. PMDUCING P'ARMnS 40 
7. (1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied, in relation to a 
notifted sugar undertaking that it is necessary so to do in the interests 
of the general public with a view to preventing the fall in the volume of 
production of the sugar innustry, it may, by notification, declare that-
(a) all or any of the enactment~ specified in the Schedule .hall 4S 
not apply or ShA1J "pply .wlth :quch :ldaptAtfons, whether by way of 

5 
mod1!cation, addition or omission (which does not, however, atfect the 
policy of the said ~actments) to such suaar undertaking, as may be, 
apeelfted in such notification, or 
10 
(b) the operation of all or any of the contracts, assurances of 
property, agreements, settlements, awards, standing orders or other 
instruments in force (to which such sugar undertaking or the person 
owning such undertaking is a party or which may be applicable to 
such sugar undertaking or person) immediately before the date of 
issue of the notification shall remain suspended or that all or any of 
the rights, privileges, obligations and liabilities accruing or arising 
thereunder before the said date, shall remain suspended or shall be 
enforceable with such adaptations and in such manner as may be 
specified in the notification. 
(2) The notification made under sub-section (1) in relation to a notifi-
15 ed sugar undertaking shall remain in force, in the first instance, for such. 
period not exceeding one year as may be specified in the notification but 
the duration of such notification may be extended from time to time by 
~ further notification by a period not exceeding one year at a time. 
(3) Any notification made under sub-section (1) shall have effect not-
20 withstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, 
agreement, or instrument or any decree or order of a Court, tribunal, 
oftlcer or other authority or of any submission, settlement or standing 
order. I 
(4) Any remedy for the enforcement of any right, privilege, obligation 
25 or liability referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) and suspended or 
mod1fted by a notification made under that sub-section shall, in accordance 
with the terms of the notification, remain suspended or modified and all 
proceedings relating thereto pending before any Court, tribunal, officer 
or other authority shall accordingly remain stayed or be continued sub-
30 jed to such adaptations, so, however, that on the notification ceasing to 
have effect-
(a) any right, privilege, obligation or liability so remaining sus-
pended or modified shall become revived and enforceable as if the 
notification had never been made; 
35 (b) any proceeding so remaining stayed shall be proceeded with 
subject to the provisions of any law which may then be in force, 
~om the stage which had been reached when the proceedings 
become stayed. 
(5) In comp~ting the period of limitation for the enforcement of any 
40 right, privilege, obligation or liability referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1), the period during which it or the remedy for the enforce-
ment thereof remained suspended shall be excluded. 
8. (1) The Central Government may issue such directions as it deems Asais-
fit to the Custodian-General and the Custodians to facilitate the speedy tan~~ 
AS clearance of arrears of cane dues so as to avoid undue hardship to cane not ., su,ar lftl-
producing farmers. dertaking, 
, (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of Bub-section (1), the ~~~!:: Of 
. Central GoverlUllent may render such assistance in such manner as it may cane dues. 

Notified 
lugar un-
dertaking, 
if a com-
pany, not 
to be 
wound 
UP. 
Con-
tracts, etc. 
in bad 
faith may 
be cancel-
led or 
varied. 
Power to 
terminate 
the con-
tract Of 
employ-
ment. 
Ma~Je­
mentol 
not~ 
lUCid' un· 
8 
deem fit to any notified sugar undertaking to enable the undertakinf to 
.lear the whole or any part of its arrears of cane dues so as to avoid 
undue hardship to cane producing farmers. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the expr.,mon 
"arrears of cane dues" shall be construed in accordance with the pro- 5 
visions of clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (6) of section 3. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANIlOUS 
9. (1) No proceeding for the winding up of a notified sugar UJ;I.dertak· 
ing, being a company, shall lie in any Court or be continued whether by 10 
or under the supervision of any Court or voluntarily, except with the 
consent of the Central Government. . 
(2) In computing the period of limitation prescribed by any law for 
the time being in force for any application which may be made in the 
course of winding up of any such notified sugar undertaking in respect IS 
of any matter arising out of any transaction in relation to such under-
taking, the time during whieh the making of such application was barred 
by this Act shall be excluded. 
10. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied, after such inquiry as 
it may think fit, that any contract or agreement entered into by the 20 
owner or manager of a notified sugaJ' undertaking, in relation to the said 
undertaking, at any time within twelve months immediately ptececUng 
the date of vesting, has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental 
to the interests of the undertaking, it may make an order cancelling or 
varying (either unconditionally 'Or subject to such conditions as it may 2.5 
think fit to impose) the contract or agreement and thereafter the con-
tract or agreement shall have effect accordingly: 
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied 
l"xcept after giving to the parties to the contract or agreement a reason· 
able opportunity of being heard. 30 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) 
may mak .. ' an application to the principal Court of civil jurisdiction 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the regiltered office ot the 
sl1.gar undertaking is situated for the variation or reversal of such order 
and, thereupon such Court may confirm, vary or reverse such order. 35 
11. If the Custodian or CustodianMGeneral is of opinion that any 
coatract of employment entered into by any owner or member ofa 
notified sugar undettaking 'or its agent in relation to the said. unde,.· 
taking, at any time before the date of vesting, is unduly onerous, he 
may, by giving to the employee one month's notice in writin~ or the 40 
SAlary or wages for one month in lieu thereot', terminate such contract, 
of employment. 
12. (1) Pending the taking over by a Custodian, appointed UDder 
section 5, of the physical possession of any notified sugar un~t 
the per8QIl in charge of the management of such undertaldJi.' fm1b.e.. 4S 
diately before the date of vettin, shall,\ o~ and from that date, be in 
to ' I 

9 
charge of the management of such undertaking for and on behalf of 
the Central ?overnment; and the management of such undertaking 
shall be carrIed on by such person subject to the provisions contained. 
in sub-section (2) and such directions, if any, as the Central Government 
S may give to him, and no other person, including the said undertaking 
shall, so long as such management continues, exercise any powers of 
management in relation to the said undertaking. 
(2) No pers::m in charge, under sub-section (1), of a notified sugar 
undertaking shall, without the previoUs approval of the Custodian-
10 General appoint~ under section 5,-
(i) incur any expenditure from the assets appertainfng to the 
undertaking otherwise than for the purpose of making routine pay-
ments of salaries or commissions to employees, agents or for the 
purpose of meeting the routine day to day expenditure; 
IS (ii) transfer or otherwise dispose of any such assets or create 
any charge, hypothecation, lien or other incumbrance thereon; 
(iii) invest in any manner any moneys forming part of such 
assets; 
(iv) acquire. any immovable property out of the moneys form-
20 ing part of such assets; 
(v) enter into any contract of service or agency, whether ex-
pressly or by implication, for purposes connected wholly or partly 
with the undertaking or vary the terms and conditions of any 
contract relating to any such transaction subsisting on the date of 
2S vesting. 
(3) The approval of the Custodian-General may be given either 
generally in relation to certain classes of transactions relating to the 
notified. sugar undertaking or specially in relation to any of its transac-
tions. I 
30 13. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Government, the Custodian.General or any other offic·er of Govern-
ment or any Custodian in respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Govern-
3S ment the Custodian-General or any other officer of Government or any 
CusU;dian for any damage caused, or likely to be caused, by anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all 
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other tha~ those 
40 under this section or section 8 or section 20 may also be exerCised by 
any person or persons as may be speCified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section 
(1) the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under 
the I direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
dertaking. 
pending 
taking 
over phy_ 
sical pos-
session by 
the Cus-
todian. 
Protec-
tion of 
actian 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 

Debts in. 
curred for 
the pur_ 
poses of 
notified 
sugar un. 
dertakings 
to have 
priority. 
Penalties. 
Offences 
by com-
panies. 
10 
15. E,very debt aflSIng out of any loan advanced to a notified sugar 
undertaking by the Central Government or.a State Government for 
carrying on the management of such undertaking-• 
(a) shall have priority over all other debts, whether secured 
or unsecured, incurred before the management of such undertaking S 
was taken over under this Act; 
(b) shall be a preferential debt within the meaning of section 
530 of the Companies Act, 1956, 1 of 1956. 
and such debts shall rank equally among themselves and be paid in full 
out of the assets of the undertaking unless such assets are insufficient 10 
10 meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions. 
16. If any person-
(a) fails b deliver to the Custodian any assets, books of account, 
registers or any other documents in his custody relating to any 
notified sugar undertaking, or IS 
(b) retains any property of such undertaking or removes or 
destroys it, or 
(c) fails to comply with the provisions of section 5, or 
(d) fails to comply with any direction made under this Act, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 20 
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
17. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 25 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all 30 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conniv-
ance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, 3S 
manager, secretary or other officer of' the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or 'Jther officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Exp14nation..-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 

1 of 1956. 
5 of 1978. 
II 
18. (1) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any sugar under-
taking which is owned by or is under the management of the Central 
Government or a State Government or a corporation established by 
or under an enactment (including an Ordinance) or a Government 
S company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the management of a sugar 
undertaking by a receiver or an authorised controller appointed by the 
Central Government or a State Government under any law for the time 
being in force shall also be deemed to be management of the undertak-
10 ing by the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may 
be. 
19. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law (other than this 
Act):>r any judgment, decree or order of any Court, tribunal or other 
15 authority or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other 
than this Act. 
Act not 
to apply 
to certain 
sugar un_ 
dertakings. 
Act to 
have 
over-
riding 
effect. 
20. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to Power to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. make 
21. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act and 
20 every notification made under section 7 'shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House oJ Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two 'or more SUCCESsive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the succes-
25 sive sessions aforesaid, both H)uses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notifica-
tion should n)t be made, the rule or notification shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
30 prejudice to th~ validity of anything preViously done under that rule or 
notification. 
22. (1) The Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Ordi-
ance, 1978', is hereby repealed. 
(2) NotwithsLmding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
3S under the Ordin:mc~ so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the c)rresponcling prOVisions of this A~t. 
THE SCHEDULE 
'1: (See section 7) 
rules. 
Laying of 
rules and 
certain 
notifica-
tions. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 
200t 1946. 1. The Indus~ 'ial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. 
14 of 1947. 2. The Indurt'ial Disputes Act, 1947. 
11 of 1946. 3. The Minimum Wages Act, 19~. 
I 
t' 
j '.-
. .. i 
\. ~. 
i 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sugar production during 1977-78 season had reached a record. level 
of about 65 lakh tonnes. Taking into account the record sugar produc-
tion and the high level of sugar stock in the system, the need to further 
maximise domestic consumption of sugar and other factors, the Gov-
ernment had removed controls on prices, distribution, etc., of sugar 
from the 16th August, 1978. The open market prices of sugar through-
out the country have come down and are ruling at reasonable levels. 
There had, however, been a disquieting increase in the a.rI'ears due 
to sugarcane growers, despite the efforts of the Government to liberalise 
the availability and terms of bank credit. The arrears of cane price 
for 1977-78 sugar season, as at 'the beginning of the current 1978-79 
season, that is, on the 1st October, 1978, amounted to over Rs. 53 crores. 
There was also an apprehension that on one pretext or the other a 
considerable number of sugar undertakings might not commence pro-
duction during the current 1978-79 season on time. In the interests of 
the consuming public and sugarcane growers and to maintain pro-
duction and availability of sugar, whit'h is an essential commodity, it 
became necessary to make provision for the taking over by the Govern-
ment of the management of the defaulting sugar undertakings far a 
specified period. • 
In view of the urgency, and as Parliament was not in session, the 
Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Ordinance, 1978 
(5 of 1978) was promulgated on the 9th November, 1978 to achieve the 
above objec.ts. 
The Bill seeks to replace the provisions of the Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th NovembeT', 1978. B. P. SINGH. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 425-M (ABI) /78-D, dated the 22nd November, 1978' 
from Shri Surjit Singh Bamala, Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation to 
the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Bill recommends the' consideratioon of the Bill under article 117 (3) 
of the Constitution. 
.,~. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill, if enacted, would necessitate expenditure on account of 
payment to the personnel to be emplOyed to administer the Act and to 
exercise superintendence and control over the Custodians, payment of 
amounts to the owners of sugar undertakings for vesting their manage-
ment in the Central Government and for providing financial assistance 
to such undertakings to clear the arrears <)f sugarcane dues. 
Under' sub-clauses (2) and (7) of clause 5 of the Bill, a Custodian-
General may be appointed. He m 9y have to be r,rovided supporting 
staff and it may be necessary for him to set-up regional offices for 
smooth and. efficient control of takeri-o\rer units. Tileir salaries and 
allowances as also other office expenditure would ei1tail an ~mnual ex:;-
penditure of about Rs. 7 lakhs in the first year of operation of the 
legislation. In the subsequent years, there may be a decrease or increase 
in the expenditure on this account and the same would depend upon, 
inter alia, the number of units the management whereof is for the time 
being vested in the Central Government. 
Although information about sugarcane dues of individual mills has 
been collected and a number of sugar undertakings has sugarcane dues 
in excess of 10 per cent of the price payable for the cane purchased during 
1977-78, it is by no means an indication that the management of all such 
undertakings shall have to be taken over. The reasons for such dues 
are to be adjudged objectively. It is, therefore, not possible at this 
juncture to have a p,recise idea of the actual number of sugar undertak-
ings whose management ma~ have to be taken over and therefore of 
the requirements of funds. It is, however, estimated that the take-over 
of the management of a sugar undertaking will involve non-recurring ex-
penditure by way of loan assistance of the order of Rs. 50-60 lakhs towards 
sugarcane dues and Rs. 30-35 lakhs by way of working capital and a 
recurring expenditure of Rs. 6,000 to 15,000 towards payment to the owner 
of the sugar undertaking in terms of clause 6 of the Bill. The payments 
under the said clause 6 will have to be made only for the period during 
which the management of the sugar undertaking remains vested in the 
Central Government. 
The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
naIll-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Clause 
3 provides for the issue of a notice under certain circumstances to the 
owner or manager of a sugar undertaking. The form in whit'h such 
notice may be :ssued may be prescribed by rules. Simil:r.rly. the marmer 
in which such notice will be served on such owner or manager may 
have to be prescribed by rules. All these matters are of a procedural 
character. Moreover, the rules made under clause 20 will have to be 
laid before e:-ch House of Parliament and they will be subject to the 
scrutiny of Parliament. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a nonnal 
character. 
14 

Memorandum exptaining the modifications contained in the Bill to replace 
the Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) 
Ordinance 1978 
Apart from changes of a formal and drafting nature, sub-section (1) 
of section 10 of the Ordinance has been modified to provide that the Cen-
tral Government will have the ,option of cancelling or varying a contract 
or agreement entered into by the owner or manager of a notified sugar 
undertaking in relation to the said undertaking either on the ground that 
such contract or agreement has been entered into in bad faith or on the 
ground that such contract or agreement is detrimental to the interests 
of the undertaking. 
IS 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the temporary taking over, in the public interest, of the 
management 'Of certain sugar undertakings in certain circumstances. 
(Shri Bh4nu Pratap Singh, 
Minister lY/ State in tne Ministry 
. of Agriculture and Irrigation.) 