1
THE GUTKA AND PAN MASALA (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the manufacture, promotion and sale of gutka and pan masala.
Whereas, the 43rd World Health Assembly in its Fourteenth Plenary meeting held on
the 17th May, 1990, reiterated the concerns expressed in the Resolution passed in the
39th World Health Assembly (WHO) and urged Member States to consider in their tobacco
control strategies plans for legislation and other effective measures for protecting their
citizens with special attention to risk groups such as pregnant women and children from
involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke, discourage the use of tobacco and impose
progressive restrictions and take concerted action to eventually eliminate all direct and
indirect advertising, promotion and sponsorship concerning tobacco;
A
ND WHEREAS, it is considered expedient to enact a law to prohibit the manufacture,
promotion and sale of tobacco products in the public interest and to protect the public
health;
Bill No. 162 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS, section 2 of the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution)
Act, 2003 (34 of 2003) contains a declaration as to expediency of control by the Union of the
Tobacco industry.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gutka and Pan Masala (Prohibition) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "gutka" means combination of tobacco containing arecanut, synthetic katha,
lead, arsenic, magnesium carbonate and any other substance causing injury to health
on consumption; and
(b) "pan masala" means and includes,—
(i) Khaini, Jarda or any preparation containing betel nuts, lime, katha
(catechu) and tobacco whether or not containing other ingredients such as
cardamom, copra or menthol; and
(ii) any flavouring material containing tobacco, chemical ingredients or
carcinogenic elements which are hazardous to human consumption.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in other law for the time being in force,
manufacturing, promotion or selling of pan masala and gutka is hereby prohibited.
4. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or with a fine which may extend to
rupees five lakhs or with both.
5. No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
6. An Offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Prohibition on
manufacture,
promotion or
sale of pan
masala and
gutka.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Punishment.
Court
empowered to
try offences.
Offences to be
cognizable.
Power to make
rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A large number of children, youngsters and adults are getting habituated towards the
use of pan masala and gutka which is proving to be very hazardous to their health. The
number of pan masala and gutka users is increasing day-by-day. This naturally causes
damage to their health and threatens their very existence.
Pan masala and gutka can cause cancer too. The warning on the packing of these
products to the effect that "chewing of gutka and pan masala  is injurious to health" is an
ample proof in this regard. In fact, recent studies by the Tata Institute for Fundamental
Research, Mumbai and Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute, Delhi and Gujarat Cancer Research
Society, Ahmedabad have proved the deadly effects of using pan masala and gutka. That
this habit is spreading at a very fast rate is proved by the rapid increase in the turnover of
these products. The Government has admitted that the pan masala and gutka industry has
grown from an estimated rupees 200 crore in 1992 to rupees 1000 crore in 1997.
The State Governments of Goa, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh have expressed
serious concern over the increasing use of gutka and pan masala. An expert Technical
Committee on use of tobacco in pan masala and gutka, which was constituted on 17.8.1994
under the Chairmanship of the Director-General of Health Service had recommended that the
use of chewing tobacco in pan masala/gutka should be prohibited as its consumption was
injurious to health. The recommendations were also endorsed by the Central Committee for
Food Standards, a statutory advisory Committee under the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, 1954, charged with the responsibility to advise Central/State Governments on matters
concerning food safety and quality control.
However, the use of pan masala and gutka continues unabated causing serious
damage to the health of children, youngsters, the aged persons and even women.
The Bill seeks to prohibit the manufacture, promotion and sale of pan masala and
gutka.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
May 7, 2015.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

GMGIPMRND—1271LS(S-3)—14.07.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the manufacture, promotion and sale of gutka and pan masala.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)