AS introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 163 of 2022
THE WIND TURBINE AND SOLAR ENERGY WASTE (HANDLING, 
DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING) BILL, 2022
By
Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam, M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of waste being generated by wind turbine 
and solar energy devices by prescribing norms and fixing responsibilities  
and duties on manufacturers, re-cyclers and consumers with regard to  
disposal of the waste generated by wind and solar energy devices  
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 Whereas decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human  
Environment held at Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take  
appropriate steps for the protection and improvement of human environment;
 Whereas decisions were taken as part of Paris Agreement, 2015 regarding Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDC);

 A nd whereas it is considered necessary to implement the decisions aforesaid to protect 
the environment from the ill-effects of non-biodegradable garbage;
 A nd whereas article 48A of the Constitution enjoins upon the State to endeavour to 
protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Wind Turbine and Solar Energy Waste (Handling, 
Disposal and Recycling) Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Board” means the Central Board for the Prevention, Control and Abatement of 
Wind Turbine Waste and Solar Energy Waste constituted under section 4;
(c) “wind turbine waste” means the waste generated from the foundation, tower, 
components of the gearbox and generator and turbine blades;
(d) “solar energy waste” means waste generated from solar panels, photovoltaic 
(PV) solar modules and other product which are discarded, surplus, obsolete, broken 
from solar energy devices;
(e) “disposal” means disposal of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste  
according to prescribed norms to prevent contamination of ground water, surface water, 
ambient air quality and harmful effect on human health;
(f) “hazardous waste” means any wind turbine waste and solar energy waste 
which by reason of any of its physical, chemical, reactive, toxic, flammable,  
explosive or corrosive characteristics causes danger or is likely to cause danger to health or  
environment, whether alone or when in contact with other wastes or substances.
(g) “operator” means a person or establishment owning or operating a facility for 
collection, transportation and disposal of  wind turbine waste and solar energy waste;
(h) “consumer” means a person using products capable of generating wind turbine 
waste and solar energy waste;
(i) “re-cycler” means any person or establishment engaged in re-cycling or  
re-processing of used solar equipment or wind turbine or assembly of their component;
(j) “storage” means the temporary containment of wind turbine waste and solar 
energy waste in a manner so as to prevent its littering and hazardous effects on human 
being; 
(k) “transportation” means carrying of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste 
from one place to other place hygienically through specially designed transport vehicle 
Short title, extent 
and  
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
30
25
20
15
2
35

so as to prevent littering and harmful effects on human being;
(l) “distributor” means any person who distributes or re-sell wind turbine or photo-
voltaic modules under his own name or trademark in the country;
(m) “importer” means any person who sell photovoltaic modules from a third coun-
try in India;
(n) “distance seller” means any person who sell solar-wind energy equipment and 
modules by means of distance communication directly to private households or to users 
other than private households in India; and
(o) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 3. The disposal of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste by any person or company 
knowingly or otherwise in any drain, landfill, at public places such as streets, roads, market 
place, open vacant plots and such other places is hereby prohibited.
 4. The Central Government shall, within six months of the commencement of this Act, 
prepare and publish in the Official Gazette a National Policy for Scientific Management of 
Wind Turbine Waste and Solar Energy Waste Management for management of wind turbine 
waste and solar energy waste throughout the country.
 5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,  
constitute a Board to be known as the Central Board for the Prevention,  
Control and Abatement of Wind Turbine Waste and Solar Energy Waste for effective  
implementation of the provisions of the Act. 
  ( 2) The Board shall consist of Chairperson and such other members to be  
appointed by Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
  ( 3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of  
services of Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
  6. ( 1) The Board shall be responsible for prevention, control and abatement of wind 
turbine waste and solar energy waste in the country.
  ( 2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Board shall 
perform all or any of the following functions, namely:—
(a)  advise the Central Government on any matter concerning improvement of 
recycling of wind turbines, cells, panels and the prevention, control or abatement 
of solar energy waste;
(b) monitor the implementation of the compliance criteria and procedure for 
handling and disposal of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste;
(c) grant authorization and registration to a person or an agency engaged in 
collection or dismantling or recycling of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste 
provided that the applicant possesses appropriate facilities to handle the waste  
safety;
(d) prescribe guidelines for household solar and wind energy users;
(e) plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for the prevention, 
Prohibition on 
disposal of wind 
turbine waste 
and solar energy 
waste in public 
place.
National Policy 
for Scientific 
Management of 
Wind and Solar 
Waste Manage-
ment.
Constitution of 
Central Board.
Functions of the 
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
3

control and abatement of solar energy waste; 
(f) plan and organize training of persons engaged or to be engaged in  
programmes for prevention, control and abatement of solar waste on such terms 
and conditions, as may be prescribed;
(g) enhance information exchange, education and awareness raising  
programmes in all sectors of society through mass media regarding prevention, 
control and abatement of solar waste;
(h)  collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to wind 
turbine waste and solar energy waste and the measures devised for its effective 
prevention, control and abatement;
(i) prepare manuals, codes or guides relating to prevention, control and  
abatement of solar energy waste;
(j) prevent and monitor illegal dumping of solar energy waste;
(k) improve institutional and technical capabilities of regional and  
sub-regional centres with training and technology transfer;
(l) collect and disseminate information in respect of matters relating  
wind-solar pollution; and
(m) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
 7. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a)  ensure that all the wind  turbine waste and solar energy waste generated within 
its territorial jurisdiction is handled and disposed of in accordance with compliance 
criteria and procedure as may be prescribed;
(b) facilitate infrastructure facilities for collection, storage, transportation and 
disposal of solar and wind energy waste and wind turbine waste;
(c) after due authorization, permit the operator to collect, transport and dispose of 
the solar waste and wind turbine waste in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) ensure earmarking or allocation of industrial space or shed for wind turbine 
waste and solar energy waste dismantling and recycling in the existing and upcoming 
industrial park, estate and industrial clusters;
(e) ensure recognition and registration of workers involved in dismantling and  
recycling of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste;
(f) undertake industrial skill development activities for the workers involved in 
dismantling and recycling of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste;
(g) undertake annual monitoring and to ensure safety and health of workers  
involved in dismantling and recycling of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste;
(h) prepare integrated plan for effective implementation of provisions for importers 
and distant sellers;
(i) preparation and submit annual report to Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Responsibilities 
of Appropriate 
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4

Climate Change regarding prevention, control and abetment of wind turbine waste and 
solar energy waste; and
(j) encourage setting up of integrated Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facility 
(TSDFs) for ‘hazardous waste’ management on Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode 
in clusters of hazardous waste generating industries.
 8. It shall be the duty of every manufacturer,—
(a) to obtain Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) Authorization and manage 
their responsibilities;
(b) to ensure that every solar and wind energy device offered for sale in the market 
contains—
(i) the procedure for its handling and disposal; and
(ii) the information about the parts which may be recycled and which not be 
re-cycled.
(c) to set-up adequate number of collection centers for the hazardous waste; 
(d) to informing treatment facilities of the product’s composition, including the 
potential use of hazardous materials;
(e) to inform end customers regarding disposal of their old PV modules;
(f) to create public awareness through advertisements, publications and other elec-
tronic media about the hazardous substances in their products which may cause ill  
effects on human body;
(g) to reduce the movement of hazardous and other wind turbine waste and solar 
energy waste;
(h) to take complete responsibility financial and otherwise for the recovery and 
recycling of the  wind turbine waste and solar energy waste;
(i) to design the products to facilitate dismantling and recovery; and 
(j) to report annually of the wind turbines and PV modules to the prescribed agency 
of appropriate Government.
 9. It shall be the duty of every consumer to ensure that the wind turbine waste and  
solar energy waste is not disposed of in any manner except in the manner prescribed for the  
purpose.
 10. It shall be the duty of every re-cycler to,—
(a) get his product registered with the appropriate Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed;
(b) re-cycle only those parts of an solar and wind energy equipment that has been 
marked as re-cyclable by the manufacturer;
(c) achieve mandatory collection and re-cycling targets as may be prescribed;
(d) ensure that he is utilizing environmentally sound technologies and possesses, 
Duty of  
Manufacture.
Duty of  
consumer.
Duty of  
Re-cycler.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
5

adequate technical capabilities, requisite facilities and equipment to recycle, reprocess 
or reuse hazardous wastes, as approved by the Central Pollution Control Board;
(e) ensure that the recycling processes are in accordance with the standards laid 
down in the guidelines published by the Central Pollution Control Board from time to 
time,
(f) ensure that residue generated thereof is disposed of in a hazardous waste  
treatment storage and disposal facility; and
(g) obtain authorization and maintain records of wind turbine waste and solar  
energy waste handled by him and file annual return to Central Pollution Control Board.
 11. The transportation of wind turbine waste and solar energy waste shall be carried out 
as per the manifest system whereby the transporter shall be required to prevent leakage of 
the wind turbine waste and solar energy waste to informal sector during transportation and 
hazardous waste shall be transported as per protocols.
 12. It shall be the responsibilities of the importer and distant dealer to,—
(a) collect the wind turbine waste and solar energy waste from the consu mer 
and deposit it to the collection centre or dismantler or recycler as designated by 
manufacture in such manner as may be prescribed, as the case may be; and
(b) ensure all protocols are followed as prescribed for the manufacture.
 13. ( 1) Where a person or the company contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 
or of any rules made under the act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term and with 
fine in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 Explanation.—For the purpose of this section “company” means any corporate and 
includes a firm or other association of individuals.
  ( 2) Urban Local Bodies shall collect the fine under sub-section ( 1) and the funds 
may be used to strengthen wind turbine and solar energy waste disposal system within their 
jurisdiction. 
 14. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
 15. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.
20
Transportation 
of Wind Turbine 
Waste and Solar 
Energy Waste.
Duty of Import-
er and Distant 
Dealer.
Penalty.
Act to have
overriding 
effect.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
25
30
35
6

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Wind and solar energy seem more promising than ever. Fossil fuel is one of the major 
causes of the climate crisis. Renewable energy can limit climate disruption and boost energy 
security. India plans to generate 500 gigawatts of non-fossil energy by 2030, including 140 
GW of wind and 280 GW of solar power. Questions remain about whether the waste created 
at the end of the life cycle from solar panels and wind turbines will be as dangerous as the 
fossil fuels which they aim to replace.
 Though most part of wind turbines are made up of recyclable materials such as steel, 
iron, copper, and aluminium, rotor blades are made of composite materials based on carbon 
fibres, plastics, and resins. Due to their large size and sturdy build, transportation becomes 
expensive. Therefore, wind turbine blades pose a significant economic and environmental 
challenge as they reach their end-of-life stage. With some techniques, these can be reused 
and, eventually, turbines need to be de-commissioned.
 Manufacturing solar panels often require the use of several noxious chemicals. Add 
to that, solar panels have an operating lifespan of around 20 to 30 years. A solar panel 
is essentially made up of several sheets of silicon crystals called cells. Each cell making 
up a solar panel is sandwiched by an aluminium and glass layer. Together, they form the  
energy-producing components that convert sunlight into electricity. Normally silicon is  
recyclable, but to improve the solar cell’s electrical efficiency, metals such as cadmium 
and lead are added. Studies have shown these metals can leach out of the cells and get into 
groundwater, as well as affect plants. These metals also have detrimental effects on human 
health as lead is known to impair brain development in children, and cadmium is a carcin -
ogen. Several components of solar energy devices are hazardous and should be disposed of 
in a manner that does not harm the environment.
 Due to these challenges, non-conventional energy resources will lose their inherent  
environmental benefit if legislative and infrastructure frameworks are not effective for 
waste handling, disposal, and recycling. If waste recycling is left to the vagaries of the 
informal sector, we would face irreversible environmental damage and health problems.  
Many workers engaged in informal waste management operations are the most vulnerable 
and unaware of the hazards associated with them. The legal framework for the disposal of 
solar and wind energy waste will enable the adoption of clean energy in an ethical way and 
manufacturers, distributors, and consumers will be held responsible for the generated waste. 
It will also enable us to develop new business models for renewable energy as this waste 
contains many valuable and rare materials. A holistic approach to unconventional energy 
includes not only a green and clean perspective but also resource and material management.
 The large cost gap between recycling and discarding solar panels and wind turbine 
blades in landfills points to an unpleasant truth that manufacturers or consumers will not 
dispose of the solar cells or panels properly without regulations. With regulations, there will 
be an encouragement to invest in research to reduce pollutants and recycling costs.
 Promoting the 3 R Concept (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) for Hazardous Waste, the 
bill envisages creating a policy and infrastructure framework for proper channelization of 
solar and wind energy waste for processing. The fundamental approach is precautionary or 
polluter-pays principles, with the cardinal principles of accountability, transparency, and 
sustainability to ensure its proper implementation. While oil and gas prices have reached 
7

record-high levels, renewables are getting cheaper all the time. If energy prices will be lower 
and more predictable, there will be positive effects on food and economic security.
 As society continues to adopt unconventional power, the problem of disposal may  
worsen in the coming decades and we will lose the benefits of using clean energy. It is esti-
mated that solar and wind waste will become the most prevalent form of waste in landfills 
in India soon . It is, therefore, high time that matter may be regulated before the situation 
becomes alarming.
 Hence this Bill.
   
New Delhi; POONAMBEN HEMATBHAI MAADAM
5 July, 2022.
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Board to 
be known as the Central Board for the Prevention, Control and Abatement of wind turbine 
waste and solar energy  waste for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall facilitate infrastruc -
ture facilities for collection, storage, transportation and disposal of waste. The expenditure  
relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. The 
Central Government may also have to provide some financial assistance to the States for this 
purpose. Also, the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Con-
solidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees four hundred and sixty crore 
will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
10

LOK  SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of waste being generated by wind turbine  
and solar energy devices by prescribing norms and fixing responsibilities  
and duties on manufacturers, re-cyclers and consumers with regard to  
disposal of the waste generated by wind and solar energy devices  
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 
(Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam,  M.P .)