THE  CODE  ON  WAGES,  2017
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Prohibition of discrimination on ground of gender.
4. Determination of disputes with regard to same or similar nature of work.
CHAPTER II
MINIMUM WAGES
5. Payment of minimum rate of wages.
6. Fixation of minimum wages.
7. Components of minimum wages.
8. Procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages.
9. Power of Central Government to fix national minimum wage.
10. Wages of employee who works for less than normal working day.
11. Wages for two or more classes of work.
12. Minimum time rate wages for piece work.
13. Fixing hours of work for normal working day.
14. Wages for overtime work.
CHAPTER III
P
AYMENT OF W AGES
15. Mode of payment of wages.
16. Fixation of wage period.
17. Time limit for payment of wages.
18. Deductions which may be made from wages.
19. Fines.
20. Deductions for absence from duty.
21. Deductions for damage or loss.
22. Deductions for services rendered.
23. Deductions for recovery of advances.
24. Deductions for recovery of loans.
25. Chapter not to apply to Government establishments.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 163 of 2017

CLAUSES
CHAPTER IV
PAYMENT OF BONUS
26. Eligibility for bonus, etc.
27. Proportionate reduction in bonus in certain cases.
28. Computation of number of working days.
29. Disqualification for bonus.
30. Establishment to include departments, undertakings and branches.
31. Payment of bonus out of allocable surplus.
32. Computation of gross profits.
33. Computation of available surplus.
34. Sums deductible from gross profits.
35. Calculation of direct tax payable by employer.
36. Set on and set off of allocable surplus.
37. Adjustment of customary or interim bonus against bonus payable under this Code.
38. Deduction of certain amounts from bonus payable.
39. Time limit for payment of bonus.
40. Application of this Chapter to establishments in public sector in certain cases.
41. Non-applicability of this Chapter.
CHAPTER V
A
DVISORY BOARD
42. Central Advisory Board and State Advisory Boards.
CHAPTER VI
PAYMENT OF DUES, CLAIMS AND AUDIT
43. Responsibility for payment of various dues.
44. Payment of various undisbursed dues in case of death of employee.
45. Claims under Code and procedure thereof.
46. Reference of disputes under this Code.
47. Presumption about accuracy of balance-sheet and profit and loss account of
corporations and companies.
48. Audit of accounts of employers, not being corporations or companies.
49. Appeal.
50. Records, returns and notices.
CHAPTER VII
F
ACILITATOR
51. Appointment of  Facilitators and their powers.
CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
52. Cognizance of offences.
53. Penalties for offences.
54. Offences by companies.
55. Composition of offences.
(ii)

CLAUSES
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
56. Bar of suits.
57. Protection of action taken in good faith.
58. Burden of proof.
59. Contracting out.
60. Effect of laws, agreements, etc., inconsistent with this Code.
61. Delegation of powers.
62. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases.
63. Protection against attachement of assets of employer with Government.
64. Power of Central Government to give directions.
65. Savings.
66. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.
67. Power to remove difficulties.
68. Repeal and savings.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
(iii)

Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
THE CODE ON WAGES, 2017
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the laws relating to wages and bonus and matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code on Wages, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Code and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Code
shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Bill  No. 163 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “accounting year” means the year commencing on the 1st day of April;
(b) “Advisory Board” means the Central Advisory Board or, as the case may be,
the State Advisory Board, constituted under section 42;
(c) “agricultural income-tax law” means any law for the time being in force relating
to the levy of tax on agricultural income;
(d) “appropriate Government” means,––
(i) in relation to, an establishment carried on by or under the authority of
the Central Government or the establishment of railways, mines, oil field, major
ports, air transport service, telecommunication, banking and insurance company
or a corporation or other authority established by a Central Act or a central
public sector undertaking or subsidiary companies set-up by central public
sector undertakings or autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the Central
Government, including establishment of contractors for the purposes of such
establishment, corporation or other authority, central public sector undertakings,
subsidiary companies or autonomous bodies, as the case may be, the Central
Government;
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the State Government;
(e) “company” means a company defined in clause ( 20) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013;
(f) “contractor”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes
to produce a given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of goods or
articles of manufacture to such establishment, through contract labour or who supplies
contract labour for any work of the establishment and includes a sub-contractor;
(g) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be registered
under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or any other law for the time being in force
in any State relating to co-operative societies;
(h) “corporation” means anybody corporate established by or under any Central
Act, or State Act but does not include a company or a co-operative society;
(i) “direct tax” means––
(I) any tax chargeable under the––
(A) Income-tax Act, 1961;
(B) Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964;
(C) agricultural income-tax law; and
(II) any other tax which, having regard to its nature or incidence, may be
declared by the Central Government, by notification, to be a direct tax for the
purposes of this Code;
(j) “employee” means, any person (other than an apprentice engaged under the
Apprentices Act, 1961), employed on wages by an establishment to do any skilled,
semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, operational, supervisory, managerial, administrative,
technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be
express or implied, and also includes a person declared to be an employee by the
appropriate Government, but does not include any member of the Armed Forces of the
Union;
(k) “employer” means a person who employs one or more employees in his
establishment and where the establishment is carried on by any department of the
Central Government or the State Government, the authority specified, by the head of
Definitions.
18 of 2013.
2 of 1912.
43 of 1961.
7 of 1964.
52 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
such department, in this behalf or where no authority, is so specified the head of the
department and in relation to an establishment carried on by a local authority, the chief
executive of that authority, and includes,—
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the occupier of the
factory as defined in clause (n) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 and, where
a person has been named as a manager of the factory under clause ( f) of
sub-section (1) of section 7 of the said Act, the person so named;
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority
which, has ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment and where the
said affairs is entrusted to a manager or managing director, such manager or
managing director; and
(iii) contractor;
(l) “establishment” means any place where any industry, trade, business,
manufacture or occupation is carried on and includes Government establishment;
(m) “Facilitator” means a person appointed by the appropriate Government under
sub-section (1) of section 51;
(n) “factory” means the factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2 of the
Factories Act, 1948;
(o) “Government establishment” means any office or department of the
Government or a local authority;
(p) “Income-tax Act” means the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(q) “industrial dispute” means,—
(i) any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between
employers and workers or between workers and workers which is connected
with the employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or with the
conditions of labour, of any person; and
(ii) any dispute or difference between an individual worker and an employer
connected with, or arising out of, discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or
termination of such worker;
(r) “minimum wage” means the wage fixed under section 6;
(s) “notification” means a notification published in the Gazette of India or the
Official Gazette of a State, as the case may be, and the expression “notify” with its
grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;
(t) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government;
(u) “same work or work of a similar nature” means work in respect of which the
skill, effort and responsibility required are the same, when performed under similar
working conditions by employees and the difference if any, between the skill, effort
and responsibility required for employees of any gender, are not of practical importance
in relation to the terms and conditions of employment;
(v) “State” includes a Union territory;
(w) “Tribunal” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (r) of section 2
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
(x) “wages” means all remuneration, whether by way of salary, allowances or
otherwise, expressed in terms of money or capable of being so expressed which would,
if the terms of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person
employed in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and
includes,—
(i) any remuneration payable under any award or settlement between the
parties or order of a court;
63 of 1948.
63 of 1948.
43 of 1961.
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(ii) any remuneration to which the person employed is entitled in respect
of overtime work or holidays or any period of leave;
(iii) any additional remuneration payable under the terms of employment,
whether called a bonus or by any other name;
(iv) any sum which by reason of the termination of employment of the
person employed is payable under any law, contract or instrument which provides
for the payment of such sum, whether with or without deductions, but does not
provide for the time within which the payment is to be made;
(v) any sum to which the person employed is entitled under any scheme
framed under any law for the time being in force;
(vi) any house rent allowance,
but does not include––
(A) any bonus payable under this Code, which does not form part of the
remuneration payable under the terms of employment or which is not payable under
any award or settlement between the parties or order of a court or Tribunal;
(B) the value of any house-accommodation, or of the supply of light, water,
medical attendance or other amenity or of any service excluded from the computation
of wages by a general or special order of the appropriate Government;
(C) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident fund,
and the interest which may have accrued thereon;
(D) any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concession;
(E) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses entailed on
him by the nature of his employment; or
(F) any gratuity payable on the termination of employment in cases other than
those specified in sub-clause (iv):
Provided that, for the purposes of Chapter IV, “wages” means all remuneration
(other than remuneration in respect of overtime work) capable of being expressed in
terms of money, which would, if the terms of employment, express or implied, were
fulfilled, be payable to an employee in respect of his employment or of work done in
such employment and includes dearness allowance, that is to say, all cash payments,
by whatever name called, paid to an employee on account of a rise in the cost of living,
but does not include,––
(i) any other allowance which the employee is for the time being entitled to;
(ii) the value of any house accommodation or of supply of light, water,
medical attendance or other amenity or of any service or of any concessional
supply of foodgrains or other articles;
(iii) any travelling concession;
(iv) any bonus including incentive, production and attendance bonus;
(v) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund
or provident fund or for the benefit of the employee under any law for the time
being in force;
(vi) any retrenchment compensation or any gratuity or other retirement
benefit payable to the employee or any ex gratia payment made to him;
(vii) any commission payable to the employee:
Provided further that for calculating the wages under the first proviso for
the purposes of payment of bonus, if the payments made by the employer to the
employee under clauses ( i) to ( vii) exceeds one-half of the all remuneration
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
specified under the said proviso, the amount which exceeds such one-half shall
be deemed as remuneration and shall be accordingly added in all remuneration
under that proviso.
Explanation.––Where an employee is given in lieu of the whole or part of the
wages payable to him, free food allowance or free food by his employer, such food
allowance or the value of such food shall, for the purposes of the first proviso, be
deemed to form part of the wages of such employee;
(y) “worker” means any person (except an apprentice as defined under clause (aa)
of section 2 of the Apprentices Act, 1961) employed in any industry to do any manual,
unskilled, skilled, technical, operational or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the
terms of employment be express or implied, and includes working journalists as defined
in clause (f) of section 2 of the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 and sales promotion
employees as defined in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Sales Promotion Employees
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1976, but does not include any such person—
(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act, 1950, or the
Navy Act, 1957; or
(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee
of a prison; or
(iii) who is employed mainly in a supervisory or managerial or administrative
capacity.
3. (1) There shall be no discrimination among employees on the ground of gender in
matters relating to wages by the same employer, in respect of the same work or work of similar
nature done by any employee.
(2) No employer shall, for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
sub-section (1), reduce the rate of wages of any employee.
4. Where there is any dispute as to whether a work is of same or similar nature for the
purpose of section 3, the dispute shall be decided by such authority as may be notified by
the appropriate Government.
CHAPTER II
M
INIMUM WAGES
5. No employer shall pay to any employee wages less than the minimum rate of wages
notified by the appropriate Government for the area, establishment or work as may be specified
in the notification.
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the appropriate Government shall fix the
minimum rate of wages payable to employees.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government shall fix—
(a) a minimum rate of wages for time work; or
(b) a minimum rate of wages for piece work; or
(c) a minimum rate of wages to apply in the case of employees employed on piece
work for the purpose of securing to such employees a minimum rate of wages on a time
work basis.
(3) The minimum rate of wages on time work basis may be fixed in accordance with any
one or more of the following wage periods, namely:––
(i) by the hour, or
(ii) by the day, or
(iii) by the month.
52 of 1961.
45 of 1955.
11 of 1976.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
Prohibition of
discrimination
on ground of
gender.
Determination
of disputes
with regard to
same or
similar nature
of work.
Payment of
minimum rate
of wages.
Fixation of
minimum
wages.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(4) Where the rates of wages are fixed by the hour or by the day or by the month, the
manner of calculating the wages shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(5) The appropriate Government may, by notification, fix factors by which the minimum
wages so fixed be multiplied for different types of work.
(6) For the purpose of fixation of factors referred to in sub-section (5), the appropriate
Government shall take into account the skill required, the arduousness of the work assigned
to the worker, geographical location of the place of work and other factors which the
appropriate Government considers necessary.
7. (1) Any minimum rate of wages fixed or revised by the appropriate Government, in
respect of employment, under section 8 may consist of––
(i) a basic rate of wages and a special allowance at a rate to be adjusted, at such
intervals and in such manner as the appropriate Government may direct, to accord as
nearly as practicable with the variation in the cost of living index number applicable to
such workers (hereinafter referred to as “cost of living allowance”); or
(ii) a basic rate of wages with or without the cost of living allowance, and the
cash value of the concessions in respect of supplies of essential commodities at
concession rates, where so authorised; or
(iii) an all-inclusive rate allowing for the basic rate, the cost of living allowance
and the cash value of the concessions, if any.
(2) The cost of living allowance and the cash value of the concessions in respect of
supplies of essential commodities at concession rate shall be computed by such authority,
as the appropriate Government may by notification, appoint, at such intervals and in
accordance with such directions as may be specified or given by the appropriate Government
from time to time.
8. (1) In fixing minimum rates of wages in respect of any employment for the first time
under this Code or in revising minimum rates of wages so fixed, the appropriate Government
shall either—
(a) appoint as many committees and sub-committees as it considers necessary
to hold enquiries and recommend in respect of such fixation or revision, as the case
may be; or
(b) by notification publish its proposals for the information of persons likely to
be affected thereby and specify a date not less than two months from the date of the
notification on which the proposals shall be taken into consideration.
(2) Every committee and sub-committee appointed by the appropriate Government
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall consist of persons––
(a) representing employers;
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the members
specified in clause (a); and
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one-third of the total members of the
committee or sub-committee, as the case may be.
(3) After considering the recommendation of the committee or sub- committee appointed
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, all representations received by it
before the date specified in the notification under clause (b) of that sub-section, the appropriate
Government shall by notification fix, or as the case may be, revise the minimum rates of
wages and unless such notification otherwise provides, it shall come into force on the expiry
of three months from the date of its issue:
Provided that where the appropriate Government proposes to revise the minimum
rates of wages by the mode specified in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1), the appropriate
Government shall also consult concerned Advisory Board constituted under section 42.
Components
of minimum
wages.
Procedure for
fixing and
revising
minimum
wages.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(4) The appropriate Government shall review or revise minimum rates of wages at an
interval of five years.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, fix the national minimum wage:—
Provided that different national minimum wage may be fixed for different States or
different geographical areas.
(2) The minimum rates of wages fixed by the appropriate Government under section 6
shall not be less than the national minimum wage and if the minimum rates of wages fixed by
the appropriate Government earlier is more than the national minimum wage, then, the
appropriate Government shall not reduce such minimum rates of wages fixed by it earlier.
(3) The Central Government, before fixing the national minimum wage under
sub-section (1), may obtain the advice of the Central Advisory Board constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 42.
10. If an employee whose minimum rate of wages has been fixed under this Code by the
day works on any day on which he was employed for a period of less than the requisite
number of hours constituting a normal working day, he shall, save as otherwise hereinafter
provided, be entitled to receive wages in respect of work done on that day, as if he had
worked for a full normal working day:
Provided that he shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full normal working day,—
(i) in any case where his failure to work is caused by his unwillingness to work
and not by the omission of the employer to provide him with work; and
(ii) in such other cases and circumstances, as may be prescribed.
11. Where an employee does two or more classes of work to each of which a different
minimum rate of wages is applicable, the employer shall pay to such employee in respect of
the time respectively occupied in each such class of work, wages at not less than the
minimum rate in force in respect of each such class.
12. Where a person is employed on piece work for which minimum time rate and not a
minimum piece rate has been fixed under this Code, the employer shall pay to such person
wages at not less than the minimum time rate.
13. (1) Where the minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Code, the
appropriate Government may—
(a) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal working day
inclusive of one or more specified intervals;
(b) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be allowed
to all employees or to any specified class of employees and for the payment of
remuneration in respect of such days of rest;
(c) provide for payment for work on a day of rest at a rate not less than the
overtime rate.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall, in relation to the following classes of
employees apply, only to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed,
namely:—
(a) employees engaged on urgent work or in any emergency which could not
have been foreseen or prevented;
(b) employees engaged in work of the nature of preparatory or complementary
work which must necessarily be carried on outside the limits laid down for the general
working in the employment concerned;
(c) employees whose employment is essentially intermittent;
Power of
Central
Government
to fix
national
minimum
wage.
Wages of
employee
who works
for less than
normal
working day.
Wages for
two or more
classes of
work.
Minimum
time rate
wages for
piece work.
Fixing hours
of work for
normal
working day.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(d) employees engaged in any work which for technical reasons has to be
completed before the duty is over; and
(e) employees engaged in a work which could not be carried on except at times
dependent on the irregular action of natural forces.
(3) For the purposes of clause (c) of sub-section (2), employment of an employee is
essentially intermittent when it is declared to be so by the appropriate Government on the
ground that the daily hours of duty of the employee, or if there be no daily hours of duty as
such for the employee, the hours of duty normally include periods of in action during which
the employee may be on duty but is not called upon to display either physical activity or
sustained attention.
14. Where an employee whose minimum rate of wages has been fixed under this Code
by the hour, by the day or by such a longer wage period as may be prescribed, works on any
day in excess of the number of hours constituting a normal working day, the employer shall
pay him for every hour or for part of an hour so worked in excess, at the overtime rate which
shall not be less than twice the normal rate of wages.
CHAPTER III
P
AYMENT OF W AGES
15. All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency notes or by cheque or through
digital or electronic mode or by crediting the wages in the bank account of the employee:
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification, specify the industrial
or other establishment, the employer of which shall pay to every person employed in such
industrial or other establishment, the wages only by cheque or through digital or electronic
mode or by crediting the wages in his bank account.
16. The employer shall fix the wage period for employees either as daily or weekly or
fortnightly or monthly subject to the condition that no wage period in respect of any employee
shall be more than a month:
Provided that different wage periods may be fixed for different establishments.
17. (1) The employer shall pay or cause to be paid wages to the employees, engaged
on—
(i) daily basis, at the end of the shift;
(ii) weekly basis, on the last working day of the week, that is to say, before the
weekly holiday;
(iii) fortnightly basis, before the end of the second day after the end of the
fortnight;
(iv) monthly basis, before the expiry of the seventh day of the succeeding
month.
(2) Where an employee has been—
(i) removed or dismissed from service; or
(ii) retrenched or has resigned from service, or became unemployed due to
closure of the establishment,
the wages payable to him shall be paid within two working days of his removal, dismissal,
retrenchment or, as the case may be, his resignation.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), the
appropriate Government may, provide any other time limit for payment of wages where it
considers reasonable having regard to the circumstances under which the wages are to be
paid.
Wages for
overtime
work.
Mode of
payment of
wages.
Fixation of
wage period.
Time limit for
payment of
wages.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall affect any time limit
for payment of wages provided in any other law for the time being in force.
18. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, there shall be no deductions from the wages of the employee, except those as are
authorised under this Code.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) any payment made by an employee to the employer or his agent shall be
deemed to be a deduction from his wages;
(b) any loss of wages to an employee, for a good and sufficient cause, resulting
from—
(i) the withholding of increment or promotion, including the stoppage of
an increment; or
(ii) the reduction to a lower post or time-scale; or
(iii) the suspension,
shall not be deemed to be a deduction from wages in a case where the provisions made
by the employer for such purposes are satisfying the requirements specified in the
notification issued by the appropriate Government in this behalf.
(2) Deductions from the wages of an employee shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of this Code, and may be only for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) fines imposed on him;
(b) deductions for his absence from duty;
(c) deductions for damage to or loss of goods expressly entrusted to the employee
for custody; or for loss of money for which he is required to account, where such
damage or loss is directly attributable to his neglect or default;
(d) deductions for house-accommodation supplied by the employer or by the
appropriate Government or any housing board set-up under any law for the time being
in force, whether the Government or such board is the employer or not, or any other
authority engaged in the business of subsidising house-accommodation which may
be specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government by notification;
(e) deductions for such amenities and services supplied by the employer as the
appropriate Government or any officer specified by it in this behalf may, by general or
special order, authorise and such deduction shall not exceed an amount equivalent to
the value of such amenities and services.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the expression “services” does
not include the supply of tools and raw materials required for the purposes of
employment;
(f) deductions for recovery of—
(i) advances of whatever nature (including advances for travelling
allowance or conveyance allowance), and the interest due in respect thereof, or
for adjustment of overpayment of wages;
(ii) loans made from any fund constituted for the welfare of labour, as may
be prescribed by the appropriate Government, and the interest due in respect
thereof;
(g) deductions for recovery of loans granted for house-building or other purposes
approved by the appropriate Government and the interest due in respect thereof;
Deductions
which may be
made from
wages.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(h) deductions of income-tax or any other tax levied by the Central Government
or the State Government and payable by the employee or deductions required to be
made by order of a court or other authority competent to make such order;
(i) deductions for subscription to, and for repayment of advances from any
social security fund or scheme constituted by law including provident fund or pension
fund or health insurance scheme or fund known by any other name;
(j) deductions for payment of co-operative society subject to such conditions as
the appropriate Government may impose;
(k) deductions made, with the written authorisation of the employee, for payment
of the fees and contribution payable by him for the membership of any Trade Union
registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926;
(l) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by an employer on account of
acceptance by the employee of counterfeit or base coins or mutilated or forged currency
notes;
(m) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by an employer on account of
the failure of the employee to invoice, to bill, to collect or to account for the appropriate
charges due to the employer whether in respect of fares, freight, demurrage, wharfage
and cranage or in respect of sale of food in catering establishments or in respect of
commodities in grain shops or otherwise;
(n) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by an employer on account of
any rebates or refunds incorrectly granted by the employee where such loss is directly
attributable to his neglect or default;
(o) deductions, made with the written authorisation of the employee, for
contribution to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund or to such other fund as the
Central Government may, by notification, specify.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code and subject to the provisions of
any other law for the time being in force, the total amount of deductions which may be made
under sub-section (2) in any wage period from the wages of an employee shall not exceed
fifty per cent. of such wages.
(4) Where the total deductions authorised under sub-section (2) exceed fifty per cent.
of the wages, the excess may be recovered in such manner, as may be prescribed.
19. (1) No fine shall be imposed on any employee save in respect of such acts and
omissions on his part as the employer, with the previous approval of the appropriate
Government or of such authority as may be prescribed, may have specified by notice under
sub-section (2).
(2) A notice specifying such acts and omissions shall be exhibited in such manner as
may be prescribed, on the premises in which the employment is carried on.
(3) No fine shall be imposed on any employee until such employee has been given an
opportunity of showing cause against the fine or otherwise than in accordance with such
procedure as may be prescribed for the imposition of fines. 
(4) The total amount of fine which may be imposed in any one wage period on any
employee shall not exceed an amount equal to three per cent. of the wages payable to him in
respect of that wage period.
(5) No fine shall be imposed on any employee who is under the age of fifteen years.
(6) No fine imposed on any employee shall be recovered from him by instalments or
after the expiry of ninety days from the day on which it was imposed.
(7) Every fine shall be deemed to have been imposed on the day of the act or omission
in respect of which it was imposed.
16 of 1926.
Fines.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(8) All fines and all realisations thereof shall be recorded in a register to be kept in such
manner and form as may be prescribed; and all such realisations shall be applied only to such
purposes beneficial to the persons employed in the establishment as are approved by the
prescribed authority.
20. (1) Deductions may be made under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 18 only
on account of the absence of an employee from the place or places where by the terms of his
employment, he is required to work, such absence being for the whole or any part of the
period during which he is so required to work.
(2) The amount of such deduction shall in no case bear to the wages payable to the
employed person in respect of the wage period for which the deduction is made in a larger
proportion than the period for which he was absent bears to the total period within such
wage period during which by the terms of his employment he was required to work:
Provided that, subject to any rules made in this behalf by the appropriate Government,
if ten or more employed persons acting in concert absent themselves without due notice
(that is to say without giving the notice which is required under the terms of their contracts
of employment) and without reasonable cause, such deduction from any such person may
include such amount not exceeding his wages for eight days as may by any such terms be
due to the employer in lieu of due notice.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, an employee shall be deemed to be
absent from the place where he is required to work if, although present in such place, he
refuses, in pursuance of a stay-in strike or for any other cause which is not reasonable in the
circumstances, to carry out his work.
21. (1) A deduction under clause (c) or clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 18 for
damage or loss shall not exceed the amount of the damage or loss caused to the employer by
negligence or default of the employee.
(2) A deduction shall not be made under sub-section (1) until the employee has been
given an opportunity of showing cause against the deduction or otherwise than in accordance
with such procedure as may be prescribed for the making of such deductions.
(3) All such deductions and all realisations thereof shall be recorded in a register to be
kept in such form as may be prescribed.
22. A deduction under clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 18 shall not
be made from the wages of an employee, unless the house-accommodation amenity or
service has been accepted by him as a term of employment or otherwise and such deduction
shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the value of the house-accommodation amenity or
service supplied and shall be subject to such conditions as the appropriate Government may
impose.
23. Deductions under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 18 for recovery of advances
given to an employee shall be subject to the following conditions,  namely:—
(a) recovery of advance of money given to an employee before the employment
began shall be made from the first payment of wages to him in respect of a complete
wage period but no recovery shall be made of such advances given for travelling
expenses;
(b) recovery of advance of money given to an employee after the employment
began shall be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed;
(c) recovery of advances of wages to an employee not already earned shall be
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
24. Deductions under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 18 for recovery of loans
granted to an employee, regulating the extent to which such loans may be granted and the
rate of interest payable thereon, shall be such as may be prescribed.
Deductions for
absence from
duty.
Deductions
for services
rendered.
Deductions for
damage or
loss.
Deductions
for recovery
of advances.
Deductions
for recovery
of loans.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
25. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the Government establishments
unless the appropriate Government, by notification, applies such provisions to the Government
establishments specified in the said notification.
CHAPTER IV
P
AYMENT OF BONUS
26. (1) There shall be paid to every employee, drawing wages not exceeding such
amount per mensem as determined by notification by the appropriate Government, by his
employer, who has put in at least thirty days work in an accounting year, an annual minimum
bonus calculated at the rate of eight and one third per cent. of the wages earned by the
employee or one hundred rupees, whichever is higher whether or not the employer has any
allocable surplus during the previous accounting year.
(2) For the purpose of calculation of the bonus where the wages of the employee
exceeds such amount per mensem, as determined by notification, by the appropriate
Government, the bonus payable to such employee under sub-sections ( 1) and (3) shall be
calculated as if his wage were such amount, so determined by the appropriate Government or
the minimum wage fixed by the appropriate Government, whichever is higher.
(3) Where in respect of any accounting year referred to in sub-section (1), the allocable
surplus exceeds the amount of minimum bonus payable to the employees under that sub-
section, the employer shall, in lieu of such minimum bonus, be bound to pay to every
employee in respect of that accounting year, bonus which shall be an amount in proportion
to the wages earned by the employee during the accounting year, subject to a maximum of
twenty per cent. of such wages.
(4) In computing the allocable surplus under this section, the amount set on or the
amount set off under the provisions of section 36 shall be taken into account in accordance
with the provisions of that section.
(5) Any demand for bonus in excess of the bonus referred to in sub-section (1), either
on the basis of production or productivity in an accounting year for which the bonus is
payable shall be determined by an agreement or settlement between the employer and the
employees, subject to the condition that the total bonus including the annual minimum
bonus referred to in sub-section (1) shall not exceed twenty per cent. of the wages earned by
the employee in the accounting year.
(6) In the first five accounting years following the accounting year in which the employer
sells the goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services, as the case may be,
from such establishment, bonus shall be payable only in respect of the accounting year in
which the employer derives profit from such establishment and such bonus shall be calculated
in accordance with the provisions of this Code in relation to that year, but without applying
the provisions of section 36.
(7) For the sixth and seventh accounting years following the accounting year in which
the employer sells the goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services, as the
case may be, from such establishment, the provisions of section 36 shall apply subject to the
following modifications, namely:—
(i) for the sixth accounting year set on or set off, as the case may be, shall be
made in the manner illustrated in the First Schedule taking into account the excess or
deficiency, if any, as the case may be, of the allocable surplus set on or set off in
respect of the fifth and sixth accounting years;
(ii) for the seventh accounting year set on or set off, as the case may be, shall be
made in the manner illustrated in the First Schedule taking into account the excess or
deficiency, if any, as the case may be, of the allocable surplus set on or set off in
respect of the fifth, sixth and seventh accounting years.
Chapter not
to apply to
Government
establishments.
Eligibility for
bonus, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(8) From the eighth accounting year following the accounting year in which the employer
sells the goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services, as the case may be,
from such establishment, the provisions of section 36 shall apply in relation to such
establishment as they apply in relation to any other establishment.
Explanation 1.—For the purpose of sub-section (6), an employer shall not be deemed
to have derived profit in any accounting year,  unless—
(a) he has made provision for depreciation of that year to which he is entitled
under the Income-tax Act or, as the case may be, under the agricultural income tax law;
and
(b) the arrears of such depreciation and losses incurred by him in respect of the
establishment for the previous accounting years have been fully set off against his
profits.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of sub-sections ( 6), (7) and (8), sale of the goods
produced or manufactured during the course of the trial running of any factory or of the
prospecting stage of any mine or an oil-field shall not be taken into consideration and where
any question arises with regard to such production or manufacture, the appropriate
Government may, after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of representing the case,
decide upon the issue.
(9) The provisions of sub-sections (6), (7) and (8) shall, so far as may be, apply to new
departments or undertakings or branches set-up by existing establishments.
27. Where an employee has not worked for all the working days in an accounting year,
the minimum bonus under sub-section (1) of section 26, if such bonus is higher than eight
and one third per cent. of the salary or wage of the days such employee has worked in that
accounting year, shall be proportionately reduced.
28. For the purposes of section 27, an employee shall be deemed to have worked in an
establishment in any accounting year also on the days on which,—
(a) he has been laid off under an agreement or as permitted by standing orders
under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, or under the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947,  or under any other law applicable to the establishment;
(b) he has been on leave with salary or wages;
(c) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by accident arising
out of and in the course of his employment; and
(d) the employee has been on maternity leave with salary or wages, during the
accounting year.
29. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, an employee shall be disqualified
from receiving bonus under this Code, if he is dismissed from service for—
(a) fraud; or
(b) riotous or violent behaviour while on the premises of the  establishment; or
(c) theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any property of the  establishment; or
(d) conviction for sexual harassment.
30. Where an establishment consists of different departments or undertakings or has
branches, whether situated in the same place or in different places, all such departments or
undertakings or branches shall be treated as parts of the same establishment for the purpose
of computation of bonus under this Code:
Provided that where for any accounting year a separate balance-sheet and profit and
loss account are prepared and maintained in respect of any such department or undertaking
Proportionate
reduction in
bonus in
certain cases.
Computation
of number of
working days.
20 of 1946.
14 of 1947.
Disqualification
for bonus.
Establishments
to include
departments,
undertakings
and branches.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
or branch, then, such department or undertaking or branch shall be treated as a separate
establishment for the purpose of computation of bonus, under this Code for that year, unless
such department or undertaking or branch was, immediately before the commencement of
that accounting year treated as part of the establishment for the purpose of computation of
bonus.
31. (1) The bonus shall be paid out of the allocable surplus which shall be an amount
equal to sixty per cent. in case of a banking company and sixty-seven per cent. in case of
other establishment, of the available surplus and the available surplus shall be the amount
calculated in accordance with section 33.
(2) Audited accounts of companies shall not normally be questioned.
(3) Where there is any dispute regarding the quantum of bonus, the authority notified
by the appropriate Government having jurisdiction may call upon the employer to produce
the balance-sheet before it, but the authority shall not disclose any information contained in
the balance-sheet unless agreed to by the employer.
32. The gross profits derived by an employer from an establishment in respect of the
accounting year shall,—
 (a) in the case of a banking company, be calculated in the manner specified in
the Second Schedule;
(b) in any other case, be calculated in the manner specified  in the Third Schedule.
33. The available surplus in respect of any accounting year shall be the gross profits
for that year after deducting therefrom the sums referred to in section 34:
Provided that the available surplus in respect of the accounting year commencing on
any day in a year after the commencement of this Code and in respect of every subsequent
accounting year shall be the aggregate of—
(a) the gross profits for that accounting year after deducting therefrom the sums
referred to in section 34; and
(b) an amount equal to the difference between—
(i) the direct tax, calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 35,
in respect of an amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for the
immediately preceding accounting year; and
(ii) the direct tax, calculated in accordance with provisions of section 35,
in respect of an amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for such
preceding accounting year after deducting there from the amount of bonus
which the employer has paid or is liable to pay to his employees in accordance
with the provisions of this Code for that year.
34. The following sums shall be deducted from the gross profits as prior charges,
namely:—
(a) any amount by way of depreciation admissible in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 32 of the Income-tax Act or in accordance with
the provisions of the agricultural income tax law, for the time being in force, as the case
may be:
 Provided that where an employer has been paying bonus to his employees
under a settlement or an award or agreement made before the 29th May, 1965, and
subsisting on that date after deducting from the gross profits notional normal
depreciation, then, the amount of depreciation to be deducted under this clause shall,
at the option of such employer, which is to be exercised once and within one year from
that date, continue to be such notional normal depreciation;
Payment of
bonus out of
allocable
surplus.
Computation
of gross
profits.
Computation
of available
surplus.
Sums
deductible
from gross
profits.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(b) any amount by way of development rebate or investment allowance or
development allowance which the employer is entitled to deduct from his income
under the Income-tax Act;
(c) subject to the provisions of section 35, any direct tax which the employer is
liable to pay for the accounting year in respect of his income, profits and gains during
that year;
(d) such further sums as are specified in respect of the employer in the Fourth
Schedule.
35. Any direct tax payable by the employer for any accounting year shall, subject to
the following provisions, be calculated at the rates applicable to the income of the employer
for that year, namely:—
(a) in calculating such tax no account shall be taken of,—
(i) any loss incurred by the employer in respect of any previous accounting
year and carried forward under any law for the time being in force relating to
direct taxes;
(ii) any arrears of depreciation which the employer is entitled to add to the
amount of the allowance for depreciation for any succeeding accounting year or
years under sub-section (2) of section 32 of the Income-tax Act;
(iii) any exemption conferred on the employer under section 84 of the
Income-tax Act or of any deduction to which he is entitled under sub-section (1)
of section 101 of that Act, as in force immediately before the commencement of
the Finance Act, 1965;
(b) where the employer is a religious or a charitable institution to which the
provisions of section 41 do not apply and the whole or any part of its income is exempt
from the tax under the Income-tax Act, then, with respect to the income so exempted,
such institution shall be treated as if it were a company in which the public are
substantially interested within the meaning of that Act;
(c) where the employer is an individual or a Hindu undivided family, the tax
payable by such employer under the Income-tax Act shall be calculated on the basis
that the income derived by him from the establishment is his only income;
(d) where the income of any employer includes any profits and gains derived
from the export of any goods or merchandise out of India and any rebate on such
income is allowed under any law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes, then,
no account shall be taken of such rebate;
(e) no account shall be taken of any rebate other than development rebate or
investment allowance or development allowance or credit or relief or deduction (not
hereinbefore mentioned in this section) in the payment of any direct tax allowed under
any law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes or under the relevant annual
Finance Act, for the development of any industry.
36. (1) Where for any accounting year, the allocable surplus exceeds the amount of
maximum bonus payable to the employees in the establishment under section 26, then, the
excess shall, subject to a limit of twenty per cent. of the total salary or wage of the employees
employed in the establishment in that accounting year, be carried forward for being set on in
the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year
to be utilised for the purpose of payment of bonus in the manner illustrated in the First
Schedule.
(2) Where for any accounting year, there is no available surplus or the allocable
surplus in respect of that year falls short of the amount of minimum bonus payable to the
employees in the establishment under section 26, and there is no amount or sufficient amount
Calculation of
direct tax
payable by
employer.
10 of 1965.
Set on and set
off of
allocable
surplus.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
carried forward and set on under sub-section (1) which could be utilised for the purpose of
payment of the minimum bonus, then, such minimum amount or the deficiency, as the case
may be, shall be carried forward for being set off in the succeeding accounting year and so
on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year in the manner illustrated in the First
Schedule.
(3) The principle of set on and set off as illustrated in the First Schedule shall apply to
all other cases not covered by sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) for the purpose of payment
of bonus under this Code.
(4) Where in any accounting year any amount has been carried forward and set on or
set off under this section, then, in calculating bonus for the succeeding accounting year, the
amount of set on or set off carried forward from the earliest accounting year shall first be
taken into account.
37. Where in any accounting year,—
(a) an employer has paid any puja bonus or other customary  bonus to employee; or
(b) an employer has paid a part of the bonus payable under  this Code to an
employee before the date on which such  bonus becomes payable,
then, the employer shall be entitled to deduct the amount of bonus so paid from the amount
of bonus payable by him to the employee under this Code in respect of that accounting year
and the employee shall be entitled to receive only the balance.
38. Where in any accounting year, an employee is found guilty of misconduct causing
financial loss to the employer, then, it shall be lawful for the employer to deduct the amount
of loss from the amount of bonus payable by him to the employee under this Code in
respect of that accounting year only and the employee shall be entitled to receive the
balance, if any.
39. (1) All amounts payable to an employee by way of bonus under this Code shall be
paid by crediting it in the bank account of the employee by his employer within a period of
eight months from the close of the accounting year:
Provided that the appropriate Government or such authority as the appropriate
Government may specify in this behalf may, upon an application made to it by the employer
and for sufficient reasons, by order, extend the said period of eight months to such further
period or periods as it thinks fit; so, however, that the total period so extended shall not in
any case exceed two years.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where there is a dispute
regarding payment of bonus pending before any authority, such bonus shall be paid, within
a period of one month from the date on which the award becomes enforceable or the settlement
comes into operation, in respect of such dispute:
 Provided that if, there is a dispute for payment at the higher rate, the employer shall
pay eight and one third per cent. of the wages earned by the employee as per the provisions
of this Code within a period of eight months from the close of the accounting year.
40. (1) If in any accounting year an establishment in public sector sells any goods
produced or manufactured by it or renders any services, in competition with an establishment
in private sector, and the income from such sale or services or both, is not less than twenty
per cent. of the gross income of the establishment in public sector for that year, then, the
provisions of this Chapter shall apply in relation to such establishment in public sector as
they apply in relation to a like establishment in private sector.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), nothing in this Chapter shall apply
to the employees employed by any establishment in public sector.
Adjustment of
customary or
interim bonus
against bonus
payable under
this Code.
Deduction of
certain
amounts from
bonus
payable.
Time limit
for payment
of bonus.
Application
of this
Chapter to
establishments
in public
sector in
certain cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
41. (1) Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to—
(a) employees employed by the Life Insurance Corporation of India;
(b) seamen as defined in clause ( 42) of section 3 of the Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958;
(c) employees registered or listed under any scheme made under the Dock
Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948,  and employed by registered or listed
employers;
(d) employees employed by an establishment under the authority of any
department of the Central Government or a State Government or a local authority;
(e) employees employed by—
(i) the Indian Red Cross Society or any other institution of a like nature
including its branches;
(ii) universities and other educational institutions;
(iii) institutions including hospitals, chamber of commerce and social
welfare institutions established not for purposes of profit;
(f) employees employed by the Reserve Bank of India;
(g) employees employed by public sector financial institution other than a banking
company, which the Central Government may, by notification, specify, having regard
to—
(i) its capital structure;
(ii) its objectives and the nature of its activities;
(iii) the nature and extent of financial assistance or any concession given
to it by the Government; and
(iv) any other relevant factor;
(h) employees employed by inland water transport establishments operating on
routes passing through any other country; and
(i) employees of any other establishment which the appropriate Government
may, by notification, exempt having regard to the overall benefits under any other
scheme of profit sharing available in such establishments to the employees.
 ( 2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1) and notwithstanding anything
contained in any other provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply
to such establishment in which twenty or more persons are employed or were employed on
any day during an accounting year.
CHAPTER V
A
DVISORY BOARD
42. (1) The Central Government shall constitute the Central Advisory Board which
shall consist of persons to be nominated by the Central Government—
(a) representing employers;
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the members
specified in clause (a); and
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one-third of the total members of the
Board.
Non-
applicability
of this
Chapter.
Central
Advisory
Board and
State
Advisory
Boards.
44 of 1958.
9 of 1948.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

18
(2) One-third of the members referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be women and a
member specified in clause ( c) of the said sub-section shall be appointed by the Central
Government as the Chairperson of the Board.
(3) The Central Advisory Board constituted under sub-section (1) shall from time to
time advise the Central Government on reference of issues relating to—
(a) fixation or revision of minimum wages and other connected  matters;
(b) providing increasing employment opportunities for women;
(c) the extent to which women may be employed in such establishments or
employments as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf;
and
(d) any other matter relating to this Code,
and on such advice the Central Government may issue directions to the State Government as
it deems fit in respect of matters relating to issues referred to the Board.
(4) Every State Government shall constitute a State Advisory Board for advising the
State Government—
(a) in fixation or revision of minimum wages and other connected  matters;
(b) for the purpose of providing increasing employment  opportunities for women;
(c) with regard to the extent to which women may be employed in such
establishments or employments as the State Government may, by notification, specify
in this behalf; and
(d) in any other matter relating to this Code, which the State Government may
refer from time to time to the Board.
(5) The State Advisory Board may constitute one or more committees or sub-committees
to look into issues pertaining to matters specified in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (4).
(6)  The State Advisory Board and each of the committees and sub-committees thereof
shall consist of persons—
(a) representing employers;
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the members
specified in clause (a); and
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one-third of the total members of the
Board or committee or sub-committee, as the case may be.
(7)  One-third of the members referred to in sub-section (6) shall be women and one
among the members specified in clause (c) of the said sub-section shall—
(a) be appointed by the State Government as the Chairperson of the Board;
(b) be appointed by the State Advisory Board as the Chairperson of the
committee or sub-committee, as the case may be.
(8) In tendering its advice in the matters specified in clause ( b) or clause (c) of sub-
section (4), the State Advisory Board shall have regard to the number of women employed in
the concerned establishment, or employment, the nature of work, hours of work, suitability
of women for employment, as the case may be, the need for providing increasing employment
opportunities for women, including part time employment, and such other relevant factors as
the Board may think fit.
(9) The State Government may, after considering the advice tendered to it by the State
Advisory Board and after inviting and considering the representations from establishment
or employees or any other person which that Government thinks fit, issue such direction as
may be deemed necessary.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(10) The Central Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (1) and the State Advisory
Board referred to in sub-section (4) shall respectively regulate their own procedure including
that of the committees and sub-committees constituted by the State Advisory Board, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(11) The terms of office of the Central Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (1)
and the State Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (4) including that of the committees
and sub-committees constituted by the State Advisory Board, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER VI
P
AYMENT OF DUES, CLAIMS AND AUDIT
43. Every employer shall pay all amounts required to be paid under this Code to every
employee employed by him:
Provided that where such employer fails to make such payment in accordance with this
Code, then, the company or firm or association or any other person who is the proprietor of
the establishment, in which the employee is employed, shall be responsible for such payment.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section the expression "firm" shall have the
same meaning as assigned to it in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.
44. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Code, all amounts payable to an employee
under this Code shall, if such amounts could not or cannot be paid on account of his death
before payment or on account of his whereabouts not being known,—
(a) be paid to the person nominated by him in this behalf in accordance with the
rules made under this Code; or
(b) where no such nomination has been made or where for any reasons such
amounts cannot be paid to the person so nominated, be deposited with such authority,
as may be prescribed, who shall deal with the amounts so deposited in the manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) Where in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), all amounts payable to
an employee under this Code—
(a) are paid by the employer to the person nominated by the  employee; or
(b) are deposited by the employer with the authority referred to in clause (b) of
sub-section (1),
then, the employer shall be discharged of his liability to pay those amounts.
45. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint one or more
authorities, not below the rank of a Gazetted officer, to hear and determine the claims which
arises under the provisions of this Code.
(2) The authority appointed under sub-section (1), while deciding the claim under that
sub-section, may order, having regard to the circumstances under which the claim arises, the
payment of compensation in addition to the claim determined, which may extend to ten times
of the claim determined and endeavour shall be made by the authority to decide the claim
within a period of three months.
(3) If an employer fails to pay the claim determined and compensation ordered to be
paid under sub-section (2), the authority shall issue a certificate of recovery to the Collector
or District Magistrate of the district where the establishment is located who shall recover the
same as arrears of land revenue and remit the same to the authority for payment to the
concerned employee.
Responsibility
for payment
of various
dues.
Payment of
various
undisbursed
dues in case of
death of
employee.
5
Claims under
Code and
procedure
thereof.
9 of 1932.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
(4) Any application before the authority for claim referred to in sub-section (1) may be
filed by,—
(a) the employee concerned; or
(b) any Trade Union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 of which the
employee is a member; or
(c)  the Facilitator.
(5)  Subject to such rules as may be made, a single application may be filed under this
section on behalf or in respect of any number of employees employed in an establishment.
(6)  The application under sub-section (4) may be filed within a period of three years
from the date on which claims referred to in sub-section (1) arises:
Provided that the authority referred to in sub-section (1) may, entertain the application
after three years on sufficient cause being shown by the applicant for such delay.
(7) The authority appointed under sub-section (1) and the appellate authority appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 49, shall have all the powers of a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, for the purpose of taking evidence and of enforcing the attendance
of witnesses and compelling the production of documents, and every such authority or
appellate authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
46. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, where any dispute arises between
an employer and his employees with respect to—
   (a)   fixation of bonus or eligibility for payment of bonus under the   provisions
of this Code; or
  (b)  the application of this Code, in respect of bonus, to an  establishment in
public sector,
then, such dispute shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute within the meaning of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
47. (1) Where, during the course of proceedings before—
 (a)  the authority under section 45; or
 (b)  the appellate authority under section 49; or
 (c)  a Tribunal; or
 (d) an arbitrator referred to in clause (aa) of section 2 of the  Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947,
in respect of any dispute of the nature specified in sections 45 and 46 or in respect of an
appeal under section 49, the balance-sheet and the profit and loss account of an employer,
being a corporation or a company (other than a banking company), duly audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of
companies under section 141 of the Companies Act, 2013, are produced before it, then, the
said authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, as the case may be, may presume
the statements and particulars contained in such balance-sheet and profit and loss account
to be accurate and it shall not be necessary for the corporation or the company to prove the
accuracy of such statements and particulars by the filing of an affidavit or by any other
mode:
Provided that where the said authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, as
the case may be, is satisfied that the statements and particulars contained in the
balance-sheet or the profit and loss account of the corporation or the company are not
accurate, it may take such steps as it thinks necessary to find out the accuracy of such
statements and particulars.
16 of 1926.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
Reference of
disputes under
this Code.
14 of 1947.
Presumption
about
accuracy of
balance-sheet
and profit and
loss account
of
corporations
and
companies. 14 of 1947.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(2) When an application is made to the authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or
arbitrator, as the case may be, referred to in sub-section ( 1), by any Trade Union being a
party to the dispute or as the case may be, an appeal, and where there is no Trade Union, by
the employees being a party to the dispute, or as the case may be, an appeal, requiring any
clarification relating to any item in the balance-sheet or the profit and loss account, then
such authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, may, after satisfying itself that
such clarification is necessary, by order, direct the corporation or, as the case may be, the
company, to furnish to the Trade Union or the employees such clarification within such time
as may be specified in the direction and the corporation or, as the case may be, the company,
shall comply with such direction.
48. (1) Where any claim, dispute or appeal with respect to bonus payable under this
Code between an employer, not being a corporation or a company, and his employees is
pending before any authority,  appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, as the case may be,
as referred to in sub-section (1) of section 47 and the accounts of such employer audited by
any auditor duly qualified to act as auditor of companies under the provisions of section 141
of the Companies Act, 2013, are produced before  such authority, appellate authority, Tribunal
or arbitrator, then the provisions of section 47 shall, so far as may be, apply to the accounts
so audited.
(2) When the authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, referred to in sub-
section (1), as the case may be, finds that the accounts of such employer have not been
audited by any such auditor and it is of opinion that an audit of the accounts of such
employer is necessary for deciding the question referred to it, then, such authority, appellate
authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, may, by order, direct the employer to get his accounts
audited within such time as may be specified in the direction or within such further time as it
may allow by such auditor or auditors as it thinks fit and thereupon the employer shall
comply with such direction.
(3) Where an employer fails to get the accounts audited under sub-section ( 2) the
authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, referred to in sub-section (1), as the case
may be, may, without prejudice to the provisions of section 54, get the accounts audited by
such auditor or auditors as it thinks fit.
(4) When the accounts are audited under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3), the
provisions of section 47 shall, so far as may be, apply to the accounts so audited.
(5) The expenses of, and incidental to, any audit under sub-section (3) including the
remuneration of the auditor or auditors shall be determined by the authority, appellate authority,
Tribunal or arbitrator, referred to in sub-section ( 1), as the case may be, and paid by the
employer and in default of such payment shall be recoverable by the authority referred to in
sub-section (3) of section 45 from the employer in the manner provided in that sub-section.
49. (1)   Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the authority under sub-section (2)
of section 45 may prefer an appeal, to the appellate authority having jurisdiction appointed
by the appropriate Government, by notification, for such purpose, within ninety days from
the date of such order, in such form and manner as may be prescribed:
 Provided that the appellate authority may entertain the appeal after ninety days if it
satisfied that the delay in filing the appeal has occurred due to sufficient cause.
(2) The appellate authority shall be appointed from the officers of the appropriate
Government holding the post at least one rank higher than the authority referred under
sub-section (1) of section 45.
(3) The appellate authority shall, after hearing the parties in the appeal, dispose of the
appeal and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the appeal within a period of three months.
(4) The outstanding dues under the orders of the appellate authority shall be recovered
by the authority referred to in section 45, by issuing the certificate of recovery in the manner
specified in sub-section (3) of that section.
Audit of
accounts of
employers,
not being
corporations
or companies.
Appeal.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

22
50. (1)  Every employer of an establishment to which this Code applies shall maintain
a register containing the details with regard to persons employed, muster roll, wages, and
such other details in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2)  Every employer shall display a notice on the notice board at a prominent place of
the establishment containing the abstract of this Code, category-wise wage rates of
employees, wage period, day or date and time of payment of wages, and the name and
address of the Facilitator having jurisdiction.
(3)  Every employer shall issue wage slips to the employees in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
(4)  The provisions of sub-sections (1) to (3) shall not apply in respect of the employer
to the extent he employs not more than five persons for agriculture or domestic purpose:
Provided that such employer, when demanded, shall produce before the Facilitator, the
reasonable proof of the payment of wages to the persons so employed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "domestic purpose"
means the purpose exclusively relating to the home or family affairs of the employer and does
not include any affair relating to any establishment, industry, trade, business, manufacture
or occupation.
CHAPTER VII
F
ACILITATOR
51. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint Facilitators who
shall exercise the powers conferred on them under sub-section ( 4) throughout the State or
such geographical limits assigned to them, in relation to establishments situated in such
State or geographical limits, as the case may be.
(2)  The appropriate Government may, by notification, lay down an inspection scheme
which shall also provide for generation of a web-based inspection schedule.
(3) Every Facilitator appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be public
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
(4) The Facilitator may, within the local limits of his jurisdiction—
(a) supply information and advice to employers and workers concerning the
most  effective means of complying with the provisions of this Code;
(b) inspect the establishment based on inspection scheme referred to in
sub-section (2).
(5) Subject to the provisions of  sub-section (4), the Facilitator may,—
(a) examine any person who is found in any premises of the establishment,
whom the Facilitator has reasonable cause to believe, is a worker of the establishment;
(b) require any person to give any information, which is in his power to give with
respect to the names and addresses of the persons;
(c) search, seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or
portions thereof as the Facilitator may consider relevant in respect of an offence under
this Code and which the Facilitator has reason to believe has been committed by the
employer;
(d) bring to the notice of the appropriate Government defects or abuses not
covered by any law for the time being in force; and
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
Records,
returns and
notices.
Appointment
of Facilitators
and their
powers.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

23
(6) Any person required to produce any document or to give any information required
by a Facilitator under sub-section (5) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the
meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code.
(7) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall, so far as may be,
apply to the search or seizure under sub-section ( 5) as they apply to the search or seizure
made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.
CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
52. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under  this Code,
save  on a  complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government or an
officer authorised in this behalf, or by an employee or a registered Trade Union registered
under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 or a Facilitator.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class
shall try the offences under this Code.
53. (1) Any employer who—
(a) pays to any employee less than the amount due to such employee under the
provisions of this Code shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees;
(b) having been convicted of an offence under clause (a) is again found guilty of
similar offence under this clause, within five years from the date of the commission of
the first or subsequent offence, he shall, on the second and the subsequent commission
of the offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both;
(c) contravenes any other provision of this Code or any rule made or order made
or issued thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty thousand
rupees;
(d) having been convicted of an offence under clause (c) is again found guilty of
similar offence under this clause, within five years from the date of the commission of
the first or subsequent offence, he shall, on the second and the subsequent commission
of the offence under this clause, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to forty thousand rupees, or
with both.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), for the offences of non-
maintenance or improper maintenance of records in the establishment, the employer shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2),
the Facilitator shall, before initiation of prosecution proceeding for the offences under the
said clause or sub-section, give an opportunity to the employer to comply with the provisions
of this Code by way of a written direction, which shall lay down a time period for such
compliance, and, if the employer complies with the direction within such period, the Facilitator
shall not initiate such prosecution proceeding and, no such opportunity shall be accorded to
an employer, if the violation of the same nature of the provisions under this Code is repeated
within a period of five years from the date on which such first violation was committed and
in such case the prosecution  shall be initiated in accordance with the provisions of this
Code.
54. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Code is a company, every person
who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the
company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Cognizance of
offences.
16 of 1926.
2 of 1974.
Penalties for
offences.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Code has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means anybody corporate and includes—
(i) a firm; or
(ii) a limited liability partnership registered under the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008; or
(iii) other association of individuals; and
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
55. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
any offence punishable under this Code, not being an offence punishable with imprisonment
only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, on an application of the accused person,
either before or after the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by a Gazetted
officer, as the appropriate Government may, by notification, specify, for a sum of fifty per
cent. of the maximum fine provided for such offence, in the manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to an offence committed by a
person  for the second time or thereafter within a period of five years from the date—
(i) of commission of a similar offence which was earlier compounded;
(ii) of commission of similar offence for which such person was earlier convicted.
(3) Every officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall exercise the powers to compound
an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the appropriate Government.
(4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no
prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to
whom the offence is so compounded.
(6) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any
prosecution, such composition shall be brought by the officer referred to in sub-section (1)
in writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecution is pending and on such notice
of the composition of the offence being given, the person against whom the offence is so
compounded shall be discharged.
(7) Any person who fails to comply with an order made by the officer referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be punishable with a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of the maximum
fine provided for the offence, in addition to such fine.
(8) No offence punishable under the provisions of this Code shall be compounded
except under and in accordance with the provisions of this section.
6 of 2009.
Composition
of offences.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
56. No court shall entertain any suit for the recovery of minimum wages, any deduction
from wages, discrimination in wages and payment of bonus, in so far as the sum so claimed—
(a) forms the subject of  claims under section 45;
(b) has formed the subject of a direction under this Code; or
(c) has been adjudged in any proceeding under this Code;
(d) could have been recovered under this Code.
57. No suit, prosecution or any other legal proceeding shall lie against the appropriate
Government or any officer of that Government for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Code.
58. Where a claim has been filed on account of non-payment of remuneration or bonus
or less payment of wages or bonus or on account of making deductions not authorised by
this Code from the wages of an employee, the burden to prove that the said dues have been
paid shall be on the employer.
59. Any contract or agreement whereby an employee relinquishes the right to any
amount or the right to bonus   due to him under this Code shall be null and void in so far as
it purports to remove or reduce the liability of any person to pay such amount under this
Code.
60. The provisions of this Code shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in the terms of any award,
agreement, settlement or contract of service.
61. The appropriate Government may, by notification, direct that any power exercisable
by it under this Code shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any,
as may be specified in the notification, be also exercisable—
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Government, by such officer
or authority subordinate to the Central Government or by the State Government or by
such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government, as may be specified in
the notification;
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, by such officer or
authority subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the notification.
62. Where an employer is charged with an offence under this Code, he shall be entitled
upon complaint duly made by him, to have any other person whom he charges as the actual
offender, brought before the court at the time appointed for hearing the charge; and if, after
the commission of the offence has been proved, the employer proves to the satisfaction of
the court—
(a) that he has used due diligence to enforce the execution of this Code; and
(b) that the said other person committed the offence in question without his
knowledge, consent or connivance,
that other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to the like punishment
as if he were the employer and the employer shall be discharged from any liability under this
Code in respect of such offence:
Provided that in seeking to prove, as aforesaid, the employer may be examined on oath,
and the evidence of the employer or his witness, if any, shall be subject to cross-examination
Bar of suits.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Burden of
proof.
Contracting
out.
Effect of
laws,
agreements,
etc.
inconsistent
with this
Code.
Delegation of
powers.
Exemption of
employer
from liability
in certain
cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

26
by or on behalf of the person whom the employer charges as the actual offender and by the
prosecution.
63. Any amount deposited with the appropriate Government by an employer to secure
the due performance of a contract with that Government and any other amount due to such
employer from that Government in respect of such contract shall not be liable to attachment
under any decree or order of any court in respect of any debt or liability incurred by the
employer other than any debt or liability incurred by the employer towards any employee
employed in connection with the contract aforesaid.
64. The Central Government may, for carrying into execution of the provisions of this
Code in the State give directions to the State Government, and the State Government shall
abide by such directions.
65. Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed to affect the provisions of the
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 and the Coal Mines
Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948, or of any scheme made thereunder.
66. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous
publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Code.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of calculating the wages under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(b) the cases and circumstances in which an employee employed for a period of
less than the requisite number of hours shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full
normal working day, under section 10;
(c) the extent and conditions, which shall apply in relation to certain classes of
employees under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(d) the longer wage period for fixation of minimum rate of wages as referred in
section 14;
(e) the manner of deducting loans made from any fund constituted for the welfare
of labour under sub-clause (ii) of clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 18;
(f) the manner of recovery of excess of amount under sub-section ( 4) of
section 18;
(g) the authority to provide approval for imposition of fine under sub-section (1)
of section 19;
(h) the manner of exhibition of the acts and omissions to be specified in the
notice under sub-section (2) of section 19;
(i) the procedure for the imposition of fines under sub-section (3) of section 19;
(j) the form of the register to record all fines and all realisations thereof under
sub-section (8) of section 19;
(k) the procedure for making deductions for absence from duty under
sub-section (2) of section 20;
(l) the procedure for making deductions for damage or loss under sub-section (2)
of section 21;
(m) the form of the register to record all deductions and all realisations thereof
under sub-section (3) of section 21;
(n)  conditions for recovery of advance of money given to an employee after the
employment began under  clause (
b) of section 23;
Protection
against
attachment of
assets of
employer
with
Government.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
Savings.
42 of 2005.
46 of 1948.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
(o) conditions for recovery of advances of wages to an employee not already
earned under  clause (c) of section 23;
(p) deductions for recovery of loans and the rate of interest payable thereon
under section 24;
(q) manner of regulating the procedure by the Central Advisory Board and the
State Advisory Board, including that of the committees and sub-committees constituted
by the State Advisory Board, under sub-section (10) of section 42;
(r) the terms of office of members of the Central Advisory Board, the State
Advisory Board, including that the committees and sub-committees constitutes by
the State Advisory Board, under sub-section (11) of section 42;
(s) the authority and manner of depositing with such authority, various
undisbursed dues under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 44;
(t) form of single application in respect of a number of employees under sub-
section (5) of section 45;
(u) form for making an appeal to the appellate authority under sub-section (1) of
section 49;
(v) the manner of maintenance of a register by the employer  under sub-section (1)
of section 50;
(w) the form and manner of issuing wage slips under sub-section ( 3) of
section 50;
(x) the other powers to be exercised by the Facilitators under sub-section (5) of
section 51;
(y) the manner of imposing fine under sub-section (1) of section 55;
(z) the manner of composition of offence by a Gazetted Officer specified under
sub-section (4) of section 55;
(za) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under the
provisions of this Code.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions as aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall, as soon as
possible after it is made, be laid before the State Legislature.
67. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Code, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as may appear to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
a period of two years from the commencement of this Code.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
68. (1) The Payment of Wages Act, 1936, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Payment
of Bonus Act, 1965 and the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 are hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
enactments so repealed including any notification, nomination, appointment, order or direction
made thereunder or any amount of wages provided in any provision of such enactments for
any purpose shall be deemed to have been done or taken or provided for such purpose under
the corresponding provisions of this Code and shall be in force to the extent they are not
contrary to the provisions of this Code till they are repealed under the corresponding
provisions of this Code or by the notification to that effect by the Central Government.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of section 6
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply to the repeal of such enactments.
4 of 1936.
11 of 1948.
21 of 1965.
25 of 1976.
10 of 1897.
Repeal and
savings.
5
10

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 26 (7) and 36]
In this Schedule, the total amount of bonus equal to eight and one-third per cent. of the
annual wages payable to all the employees is assumed to be Rs. 1,04,167. Accordingly, the
maximum bonus to which all the employees are entitled to be paid (twenty per cent. of the
annual wages of all the employees) would be Rs. 2,50,000.
Year Amount equal to Amount payable as Set on or set T otal set on or
sixty per cent. or bonus off of the year set off carried
sixty-seven per carried forward forward
cent. as the case
may be, of
available surplus
allocable as bonus
Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Of
(year)
1. 1,04,167 1,04,167# Nil Nil
2. 6,35,000 2,50,000* Set on Set on (2)
2,50,000* 2,50,000*
3. 2,20,000 2,50,000* (inclusive of Nil Set on 2,20,000 (2)
30,000 from year-2)
4. 3,75,000 2,50,000* Set on Set on 2,20,000 (2)
1,25,000 1,25,000 (4)
5. 1,40,000 2,50,000* (inclusive of Nil Set on 1,10,000 (2)
1,10,000 from year-2) 1,25,000 (4)
6. 3,10,000 2,50,000* Set on 60,000 Set on Nil ## (2)
1,25,000 (4)
60,000 (6)
7. 1,00,000 2,50,000* (inclusive of Nil Set on 35,000 (6)
1,25,000 from year-4
and 25,000 from year-6)
8. Nil 1,04,167# (inclusive of Set on 69,167 Set off
(due to loss) 35,000 from year-6) 69,167 (8)
9. 10,000 1,04,167# Set off 94,167 Set off
69,167 (8)
94,167 (9)
10. 2,15,000 1,04,167# (after setting Nil Set off 52,501 (9)
off 69,167 from year-8
and 41,666 from year-9)
*Maximum amount admissible.
# Minimum amount admissible.
##The Balance of Rs. 1,10,000 set on from year-2 lapses.
29

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section  32(a)]
COMPUTATION OF GROSS PROFITS
Accounting year ending—
Item Particulars Amount of Amount of Remarks
No. sub-items main items
(in Rupees) (in Rupees)
1 2 345
30
*1. Net profit as shown in the Profit and Loss account
after making usual and necessary provisions.
2. Add back  provision for:
(a) Bonus to employees
(b) Depreciation
(c) Development rebate reserve
(d) Any other reserves
Total of Item No.2………..
3. Add back  also:
(a) Bonus paid to employees in respect of previous
accounting years.
(b) The amount debited in respect of gratuity paid
or payable to employees in excess of the
aggregate of—
(i) the amount, if any, paid to, or provided
for payment to, an approved gratuity
fund; and
(ii) the amount actually paid to employees
on their retirement or on termination of
their employment for any reason.
(c) Donations in excess of the amount admissible
for income-tax.
(d) Capital expenditure (other than capital
expenditure on scientific research which is
allowed as a deduction under any law for the
time being in force relating to direct taxes)
and capital losses (other than losses on sale of
capital assets on which depreciation has been
allowed for income-tax).
(e) Any amount certified by the Reserve Bank of
India in terms of sub-section ( 2) of section
34A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10
of 1949).
(f) Losses of, or expenditure relating to, any
business situated outside India.
Total of Item No.3………..
4. Add also  income, profits or gains (if any) credited
directly to published or disclosed reserves, other
than—
(i) capital receipts and capital profits (including
profits on the sale of capital assets on which
depreciation has not been allowed for income-
tax);
Rs. ..............
Rs. ..............
 
 **
 **
 **
 **

31
(ii) profits of, and receipts relating to, any business
situated outside India;
(iii) income of foreign banking companies from
investment outside India.
Net total of item No. 4…….
5. Total of item Nos.1, 2, 3 and 4…
6. Deduct :
(a) Capital receipts and capital profits (other than
profits on the sale of assets on which
depreciation has been allowed for income-tax).
(b) Profits of, and receipts relating to, any business
situated outside India.
(c) Income of foreign banking companies from
investments outside India.
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any) debited directly
to published or disclosed reserves, other than—
(i) capital expenditure and capital losses
(other than losses on sale of capital assets
on which depreciation has not been
allowed for income-tax);
(ii) losses of any business situated outside
India.
(e) In the case of foreign banking companies
proportionate administrative (overhead)
expenses of Head-Office allocable to Indian
business.
(f) Refund of any excess direct tax paid for
previous accounting years and excess
provision, if any, of previous accounting years,
relating to bonus, depreciation or development
rebate, if written back.
(g) Cash subsidy, if any, given by the government
or by any body corporate established by any
law for the time being in force or by any other
agency through budgetary grants, whether
given directly or through any agency for
specified purposes and the proceeds of which
are reserved for such purposes .
Total of Item No. 6 ……
7. Gross profits for purposes of bonus (item No. 5
minus item No. 6)
1 2 345
Rs. ..............
Rs. ..............
Rs. ..............
Rs. ..............
Explanation.—In sub-item ( b) of item 3, “approved gratuity fund” has the same meaning assigned to it in
clause ( 5) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act.
*Where the profit subject to taxation is shown in the Profit and Loss account and the provision made for
taxes on income is shown, the actual provision for taxes on income shall be deducted from the profit.
**If, and to the extent, charged to profit and loss account.
***If, and to the extent, credited to profit and loss account.
****In the proportion of Indian Gross Profit (item No. 7) to Total World Gross Profit (as per consolidated
profit and loss account adjusted as in item No. 2 above only).
 ***
 ***
 ***
 ***
 ***
 ***
 ****

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 32(b)]
COMPUTATION OF GROSS PROFITS
Accounting year ending—
Item Particulars Amount of Amount of Remarks
No. sub-items main items
(in Rupees) (in Rupees)
1 2 345
32
1. Net profit  as per profit and loss account.
2. Add back  provision for:
(a) Bonus to employees.
(b) Depreciation.
(c) Direct taxes, including the provision (if any)
for previous accounting years.
(d) Development rebate / Investment allowance /
Development allowance reserve.
(e) Any other reserves..........
Total of item No.2………..
3. Add back  also:
(a) Bonus paid to employees in respect of previous
accounting years.
(aa) The amount debited in respect of gratuity paid
or payable to employees in excess of the
aggregate of—
(i) the amount, if any, paid to, or provided
for payment to, an approved gratuity
fund; and
(ii) the amount actually paid to employees
on their retirement or on termination of
their employment for any reason.
(b) Donations in excess of the amount admissible
for income-tax.
(c) Any annuity due, or commuted value of any
annuity paid, under the provisions of section
280D of the Income-tax Act during the
accounting year.
(d) Capital expenditure (other than capital
expenditure on scientific research which is
allowed as a deduction under any law for the
time being in force relating to direct taxes)
and capital losses (other than losses on sale of
capital assets on which depreciation has been
allowed for income-tax or agricultural income-
tax).
(e) Losses of, or expenditure relating to, any
business situated outside India.
Total of item No.3………..
Rs. ..............
Rs. ..............
*
*
*
*
*

33
1 2 345
Rs. ..............
Rs. ..............
Rs. ..............
Rs. ..............
4. Add also income, profits or gains (if any) credited
directly to reserves, other than—
(i) capital receipts and capital profits (including
profits on the sale of capital assets on which
depreciation has not been allowed for income-
tax or agricultural income-tax);
(ii) profits of, and receipts relating to, any business
situated outside India;
(iii) income of foreign concerns from investment
outside India.
Net total of item No. 4…….
5. Total of item Nos.1, 2, 3 and 4…
6. Deduct :
(a) Capital receipts and capital profits (other than
profits on the sale of assets on which
depreciation has been allowed for income-tax
or agricultural income-tax).
(b) Profits of, and receipts relating to, any business
situated outside India.
(c) Income of foreign concerns from investments
outside India.
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any) debited directly
to reserves, other than—
(i) capital expenditure and capital losses
(other than losses on sale of capital assets
on which depreciation has not been
allowed for income-tax or agricultural
income-tax);
(ii) losses of any business situated outside
India.
(e) In the case of foreign concerns proportionate
administrative (overhead) expenses of Head-
Office allocable to Indian business.
(f) Refund of any excess direct tax paid for
previous accounting years and excess
provision, if any, of previous accounting years,
relating to bonus, depreciation, taxation or
development rebate or development
allowance, if written back.
(g) Cash subsidy, if any, given by the Government
or by any body corporate established by any
law for the time being in force or by any other
agency through budgetary grants, whether
given directly or through any agency for
specified purposes and the proceeds of which
are reserved for such purposes.
Total of item No. 6 ……
7. Gross profits for purposes of bonus (item No. 5
minus item No. 6)
Explanation.—In sub-item ( aa) of item 3, “approved gratuity fund” has the same meaning assigned to it in
clause ( 5) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act.
*If, and to the extent, charged to profit and loss account.
**If, and to the extent, credited to profit and loss account.
***In the proportion of Indian Gross Profit (item No. 7) to Total World Gross Profit (as per consolidated
profit and loss account, adjusted as in item No. 2 above only).
**
**
**
***
**
**

THE  FOURTH  SCHEDULE
[See section  34(d)]
Item Category of employer Further sums to be deducted
No.
12 3
34
(i) The dividends payable on its preference share capital for the
accounting year calculated at the actual rate at which such dividends
are payable;
(ii) eight and a half per cent. of its paid-up equity share capital as at
the commencement of the accounting year;
(iii) six per cent. of its reserves shown in its balance-sheet as at the
commencement of the accounting year, including any profits
carried forward from the previous accounting year:
Provided that where the employer is a foreign company within
the meaning of clause (42) of section 2 of the Companies Act,
2013 (18 of 2013), the total amount to be deducted under this
item shall be eight and a half per cent. on the aggregate of the
value of the net fixed assets and the current assets of the company
in India after deducting the amount of its current liabilities (other
than any amount shown as payable by the company to its Head
Office whether towards any advance made by the Head Office or
otherwise or any interest paid by the company to its Head Office)
in India.
(i) The dividends payable on its preference share capital for the
accounting year calculated at the rate at which such dividends are
payable;
(ii) seven and a half per cent. of its paid-up equity share capital as at
the commencement of the accounting year;
(iii) five per cent. of its reserves shown in its balance sheet as at the
commencement of the accounting year, including any profits
carried forward from the previous accounting year;
(iv) any sum which, in respect of the accounting year, is transferred
by it—
(a) to a reserve fund under sub-section ( 1) of section 17 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949); or
(b) to any reserves in India in pursuance of any direction or
advice given by the Reserve Bank of India,
whichever is higher:
Provided that where the banking company is a foreign company
within the meaning of clause (42) of section 2 of the Companies
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), the amount to be deducted under this
item shall be the aggregate of—
(i) the dividends payable to its preference shareholders for the
accounting year at the rate at which such dividends are payable
on such amount as bears the same proportion to its total
preference share capital as its total working funds in India bear to
its total world working funds;
(ii) seven and a half per cent. of such amount as bears the same
proportion to its total paid-up equity share capital as its total
working funds in India bear to its total world working funds;
(iii) five per cent. of such amount as bears the same proportion to its
total disclosed reserves as its total working funds in India bear to
its total world working funds;
(iv) any sum which, in respect of the accounting year, is deposited by
it with the Reserve Bank of India under sub-clause ( ii) of clause
(b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11 of the Banking Regulation
1. Company, other than a
banking company
2. Banking Company

35
12 3
Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), not exceeding the amount required
under the aforesaid provision to be so deposited.
(i) Eight and a half per cent of its paid-up capital as at the
commencement of the accounting year;
(ii) six per cent. of its reserves, if any, shown in its balance-sheet as
at the commencement of the accounting year, including any
profits carried forward from the previous accounting year.
(i) Eight and a half per cent. of the capital invested by such society
in its establishment as evidenced from its books of account at the
commencement of the accounting year;
(ii) such sums as has been carried forward in respect of the accounting
year to a reserve fund under any law relating to co-operative
societies for the time being in force.
Eight and a half per cent. of the capital invested by him in his
establishment as evidenced from his books of account at the
commencement of the accounting year:
Provided that where such employer is a person to whom Chapter XXII-A
of the Income-tax Act applies, the annuity deposit payable by him
under the provisions of that Chapter during the accounting year shall
also be deducted:
Provided further that where such employer is a firm, an amount equal
to twenty-five per cent. of the gross profits derived by it from the
establishment in respect of the accounting year after deducting
depreciation in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of section
34 by way of remuneration to all the partners taking part in the conduct
of business of the establishment shall also be deducted, but where the
partnership agreement, whether oral or written, provides for the payment
of remuneration to any such partner, and—
(i) the total remuneration payable to all such partners is less than
the said twenty-five per cent. the amount payable, subject to a
maximum of forty-eight thousand rupees to each such partner;
or
(ii) the total remuneration payable to all such partners is higher than
the said twenty-five per cent. such percentage, or a sum calculated
at the rate of forty-eight thousand rupees to each such partner,
whichever is less, shall be deducted under this proviso:
Provided also that where such employer is an individual or a Hindu
undivided family—
(i) an amount equal to twenty-five per cent. of the gross profits
derived by such employer from the establishment in respect of
the accounting year after deducting depreciation in accordance
with the provisions of clause ( a) of section 34; or
(ii) forty-eight thousand rupees,
whichever is less by way of remuneration to such employer, shall also
be deducted.
In addition to the sums deductible under any of the aforesaid Items such
sums as are required to be appropriated by licensee in respect of the
accounting year to a reserve, if any, shall also be deducted.
3. Corporation
4. Co-operative society
5. Any other employer
not falling under any of
the aforesaid categories
6. Any employer falling
under item No. 1 or item
No. 3 or item No. 4 or
item No. 5 and being a
licensee defined in clause
(39) of section 2 of the
Electricity  Act, 2003
(36 of 2003).
Explanation.— The expression “reserves” occurring in column ( 3) against Item Nos. 1( iii), 2( iii)
and 3( ii) shall not include any amount set apart for the purpose of—
(i) payment of any direct tax which, according to the balance-sheet, would be payable;
(ii) meeting any depreciation admissible in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of
section 34;

36
(iii) payment of dividends which have been declared,
but shall include—
(a)  any amount, over and above the amount referred to in clause ( i) of this Explanation, set apart
as specific reserve for the purpose of payment of any direct tax; and
(b) any amount set apart for meeting any depreciation in excess of the amount admissible in
accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of section 34.

37
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Second National Commission on Labour, which submitted its report in June, 2002
had recommended that the existing set of labour laws should be broadly amalgamated into
the following groups, namely:––
(a) industrial relations;
(b) wages;
(c) social security;
(d) safety; and
(e) welfare and working conditions.
2. In pursuance of the recommendations of the said Commission and the deliberations
made in the tripartite meeting comprising of the Government, employers’ and industry
representatives, it has been decided to bring the proposed legislation, namely, the Code on
Wages, 2017. The proposed legislation intends to amalgamate, simplify and rationalise the
relevant provisions of the following four central labour enactments relating to wages,
namely:––
(a) the Payment of Wages Act, 1936;
(b) the Minimum Wages Act, 1948;
(c) the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965; and
(d) the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976.
3. The amalgamation of the said laws will facilitate the implementation and also remove
the multiplicity of definitions and authorities without compromising on the basic concepts
of welfare and benefits to workers. The proposed legislation would bring the use of
technology in its enforcement. All these measures would bring transparency and
accountability which would lead to more effective enforcement. Widening the scope of
minimum wages to all workers would be a big step for equity. The facilitation for ease of
compliance of labour laws will promote in setting up of more enterprises thus catalysing the
creation of employment opportunities.
4. The salient features of the Code on Wages, 2017, inter alia, are as follows:––
(a) it provides for all essential elements relating to wages, equal remuneration,
its payment and bonus;
(b) the provisions relating to wages shall be applicable to all employments
covering both organised as well as un-organised sectors;
(c) the power to fix minimum wages continues to be vested in the Central
Government as well the State Government in their respective spheres;
(d)   it enables the appropriate Government to determine the factors by which the
minimum wages shall be fixed for different category of employees.  The factors shall be
determined taking into account the skills required, the arduousness of the work assigned,
geographical location of the workplace and other aspects which the appropriate
Government considers necessary;
(e) the provisions relating to timely payment of wages and authorised deductions
from wages,which are presently applicable only in respect of employees drawing wages
upto eighteen thousand rupees per month, shall be made applicable to all employees
irrespective of wage ceiling.  The appropriate Government may extend the coverage of
such provisions to the Government establishments also;

38
(f) it provides that the wages to employees mayalso be paid by cheque or
through digital or electronic mode or by crediting it in the bank account of the employee.
However, the appropriate Government may specify the industrial or other
establishment, where the wages are to be paid only by cheque or  through digital or
electronic mode or by crediting the wages in the bank account of the employee;
(g) it provides for national minimum wage for different geographical areas so as
to ensure that no State Government fixes the minimum wage below the national minimum
wage, notified for that area by the Central Government;
(h) in order to remove the arbitrariness and malpractices in inspection, it empowers
the appropriate Government to appoint Facilitators in the place of Inspectors, who
would supply information and advice the employers and workers concerning the
most effective means of complying with the provisions of the proposed legislation. It
has also been provided that the inspections are carried out through a transparent/
web based inspection scheme.
(i) it empowers the appropriate Government to determine the ceiling of wage
limit for the purpose of eligibility of bonus and calculation of bonus, by notification,
which will make it easier to revise ceilings;
(j) in the place of number of authorities at multiple levels, it empowers the
appropriate Government to appoint one or more authorities to hear and decide the
claims under the provisions of the proposed legislation;
(k) it enables the appropriate Government to appoint an appellate authority to
hear appeals so as to ensure speedy, cheaper and efficient redressal of grievances
and settlement of claims;
(l) it provides for graded penalty for different types of contraventions of the
provisions of the proposed legislation;
(m) it provides that the Facilitator shall give an opportunity to the employer
before initiation of prosecution proceedings in cases of contravention, so as to comply
with the provisions of the proposed legislation. However, in case of repetition of the
contravention within a period of five years such opportunity shall not be provided;
(n) it provides for compounding of those offences which are not punishable
with imprisonment;
(o) it provides that where a claim has been filed for non-payment of remuneration
or bonus or less payment of wages or bonus or on account of making deduction not
authorised by the proposed legislation, the burden shall be on the employer to prove
that the said dues have been paid to the employee;
(p) it enables the appropriate Government to constitute Advisory Boards at
Central and State levels to advice the Central Government and the State Governments,
respectively, on matters relating to wages, women employment, etc.;
(q) the period of limitation for filing of claims by a worker has been enhanced to
3 years as  against existing time period verying from 6 months to 2 years, to provide a
worker more time to settle his claims.
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; BANDARU  DATTATREYA.
The  3rd August, 2017.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to define certain expressions used in the Code, which, inter
alia, include “accounting year”, “Advisory Board”, “appropriate Government”, “employee”,
“employer”, “Tribunal”, “wages” and “worker”.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the prohibition of discrimination on ground of
gender. It also provides that no employer shall, for the purpose of prohibiting the
discrimination among employees on ground of sex in matters relating to wages, shall reduce
the rates of wages of any employee.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for determination of disputes with regard to same or
similar nature of work. The dispute shall be decided by such authority as may be notified by
the appropriate Government.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of minimum rates of wages. The
wages less than the minimum rates of wages notified by the appropriate Government for a
State or any part thereof shall not be paid to any employee.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide for fixation of minimum wages. Such fixation of
minimum wages by the appropriate Government shall be subject to the powers of the
Central Government to fix national minimum wages. The minimum wages shall be for time
work, piece work, and for the period by hours or day or month.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide components of the minimum wages.  Any minimum
rate of wages fixed or revised by the appropriate Government may, inter alia, consist of
basic rate, cost of living allowance and value of the concessions, if any.
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to provide the procedure for fixing and revising minimum
wages.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide the power of Central Government to fix national
minimum wages. Different national minimum wages may be fixed for different States or
different geographical areas.  The Central Government before fixing the national minimum
wage may obtain the advice of the Central Advisory Board.
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to provide, inter alia, for wages of employee who works
for less than normal working day. An employee, where his failure to work is caused by his
un-willingness to work and not by omission of the employer to provide him with work, shall
not be entitled to receive wages for a full normal working day.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide wages for two or more classes of work. It
provides that an employee who does two or more classes of work to each of which different
rate of minimum wages is applicable, the employer shall pay to such employee in respect of
the time respectively occupied in such class of work, wages at not less than the minimum
rate in force in respect of each such class.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to provide minimum time rate wages for piece work.
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to provide for fixing hours of work for normal working day,
day of rest and payment for work on day of rest by the appropriate Government.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of wages for overtime work which
is in excess of the number of hours constituting a normal working and the overtime rate shall
not be less than twice the normal rate of wages.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of all wages in current coin or
currency notes or by cheque or by crediting the wages through digital or electronic mode in
the bank account of the employee except as may be notified by the appropriate Government
in specified industrial or other establishment in which wages to be paid only by cheque or
by crediting in bank account.
39

40
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to provide for fixation of wage period for employees which
shall not be more than a month either as daily or weekly or fortnightly or monthly and the
said wage periods may be fixed different for different establishments.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to provide time limit for payment of wages on monthly
basis, daily basis, weekly basis and fortnightly basis. In case of removal, dismissal,
retrenchment, resignation from service or in the case of un-employment due to closure of
the establishment, the wages payable to an employee shall be paid within two weeks. The
appropriate Government may provide time limit apart from the time limit provided in this
clause.
Clause 18 of the Bill provides for deductions which may be made from the wages of an
employee. No deduction from the wages shall be made except those as are authorised under
the proposed legislation. The upper ceiling of deduction is fifty per cent. of the wage in any
wage period.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide the imposition of fines by the employer on any
employee. The fine shall be imposed on any employee only in accordance with the approval
and procedure as specified in the clause.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to provide for the deductions for absence from duty. The
amount of such deductions shall in no case bear to the wages payable to the employee in
respect of the wage period for which the deductions is made in a larger proportion than the
period for which he was absent bears to the total period within such wage-period during
which by the terms of his employment he was required to work. An employee shall be
deemed to be absent from the place where he is required to work if, although presence in
such place, he refuses in pursuance of a stay-in strike for any other cause which is not
reasonable in the circumstances, to carry out his work.
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to provide deductions for damage or loss. The deductions
for damage or loss shall not exceed the amount of the damage or loss caused to the employer
by negligence or default of the employee. The deductions shall not be met until the employee
has been provided an opportunity of showing cause against the deductions or otherwise
than in accordance with the procedure prescribed by rules.
Clause 22 of the Bill provides for deductions for services rendered. Such deductions
shall not be made from the wages of employee unless the house accommodation, amenity or
service has been accepted by him as a term of employment or as otherwise. Such deductions
shall also not exceed an amount equivalent to the value of such amenity or service supplied.
The appropriate Government may impose conditions for such purpose.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to provide for deductions for recovery of advances.
Certain conditions have been provided in the said clause subject to which the deductions
shall be made for the recovery of advance of money given to an employee before and after
the employment began.
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide deductions for recovery of loans and the
manner for such recovery shall be provided in the rules.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions relating to payment of
wages provided in Chapter III in the proposed Code shall not be applicable to Government
establishments unless the appropriate Government applies such provisions to any
Government establishment as may be specified by it by notification.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to make provisions for eligibility for bonus. The threshold
limit for payment of the bonus is the wages not exceeding such amount per mensem as
determined by notification, by the appropriate Government. Where the wages of the employee
exceeds such amount per mensem, as determined by notification, by the appropriate
Government, the bonus payable to such employee shall be calculated as if the wages of
such employee were such amount, so determined by the appropriate Government or the

41
minimum wages fixed by the appropriate Government, whichever is higher. The other details
regarding the payment of bonus have also been provided in this clause.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to provide for proportionate reduction in bonus in case
where an employee has not worked for all the working days in an accounting year, etc.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to provide for computation of the number of working days
for the purposes where an employee has not worked for all the working days in an accounting
year. Provisions have been made in this clause to cover certain days as working days as
specified therein.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to specify certain disqualifications, on the basis of dismissal
from service for fraud, etc., for receiving bonus.
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to provide for the purposes of computation of bonus that
the establishment shall include its departments, undertakings and branches, where for any
accounting year a separate balance sheet and profit and loss account are prepared and
maintained in respect of any such department or undertaking or branch, then, such department
or undertaking or branch shall be treated as a separate establishment for the purpose of
computation of bonus for the accounting year, such department, undertaking or branch
was, immediately before the commencement of that accounting year treated as part of the
establishment for the purpose of computation of bonus.
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of bonus out of allocable surplus.
It also empowers the appropriate Government to notify the authority having jurisdiction for
calling upon the employer to produce the balance sheet before it.
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to provide for the computation of gross profit in the case
of a banking company in accordance with the Second Schedule and in any other case in the
manner specified in the Third Schedule.
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to provide for the computation of available surplus in
respect of any accounting year.
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to specify the sums which shall be deducted from the gross
profits as prior charges which includes the sums specified in the Fourth Schedule.
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to provide for the calculation of direct tax payable by the
employer. Such direct tax for any accounting year shall be calculated at the rate applicable
to the income of the employer for that year subject to the provisions specified in that clause.
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to provide for set on and set off of allocable surplus. It
provides as to how the allocable surplus exceeding the amount of maximum bonus payable
to the employee shall subject to the limit of 20 per cent. of the total salary or wages of the
employee in that accounting year be carried forward for being set on in the succeeding
accounting years up to and inclusive of fourth accounting year for the purpose of payment
of bonus in the manner illustrated in the First Schedule to the proposed Code. It further
provides that where for any accounting year, there is no available surplus or the allocable
surplus in respect of that year, falls short of the amount of the minimum bonus payable to
the employees and there is no amount or sufficient amount carried forward and set on which
could be utilised for the purpose of the minimum bonus, then, such minimum amount or the
deficiency shall be carried forward for being set off in the succeeding accounting years and
so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year in the manner illustrated in the First
Schedule. It also provides that the applicability of the First Schedule in other cases and for
the taking in to account at first instance the amount of set on or set off carried forward from
the earliest accounting year.
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to provide for the adjustment of customary or interim
bonus payable under the proposed legislation.
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to provide for deduction of the amount of loss caused by
the employee on account of misconduct from the amount of bonus payable by the employer

42
to the employee in respect of the concerned accounting year only and the employee shall
be entitled to receive the balance, if any.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to provide the time limit for payment of bonus. The bonus
payable to an employee shall be paid by crediting in the bank account of the employee by
his employer. It also specifies regarding the extension of period for payment of bonus in
certain cases and the upper limit of the extension which shall not exceed two years and in
case of a dispute for payment at higher rate, the employer shall pay eight and one third per
cent. of the wages earned by the employee as per the provisions of the proposed legislation
within the time limit.
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to provide for the application of the provisions of Chapter
IV regarding the payment of bonus to establishments in public sector in certain cases as
specified in the said clause.
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to provide for the non-applicability of the provisions of
Chapter IV regarding the payment of bonus in certain cases which, inter alia,  include
employees employed in Life Insurance Corporation of India, Indian Red Cross Society or
any other institution of a like nature including its branches, Reserve Bank of India, etc. It
also provides that the provisions regarding the payment of bonus shall apply to such
establishments in which twenty or more persons employed or were employed on any day
during an accounting year.
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to provide for Central Advisory Board to be constituted by
the Central Government which shall be tripartite in nature having representatives from
employees, employers and independent persons as well as there will be one third
representation of women in this Board and the said Board shall advice the Central Government
on issues referred to it. It also provides that every State Government shall also constitute a
State Advisory Board for advising the State Government, inter alia, on fixation or revision
of minimum wages, increasing employment opportunities, etc. The State Advisory Board
may constitute one or more committees or sub-committees to look into issues pertaining to
matters specified in the clause. One third members of the State Advisory Board shall be
women.
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to provide the responsibility for payment of various dues
of the employees. In case of failure to pay the dues, the concerned company or firm or
association or any other person who is the proprietor of the establishment shall be
responsible for the payment of dues.
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to provide for payment of various undisbursed dues of the
employee in case of his death. Such dues will be paid to the persons nominated by the
employee and where there is no such nomination or for any reasons such amount cannot be
paid to the person nominated, then, the dues shall be deposited with the Authority specified
in the rules, who shall deal with the amount in the manner provided in such rules. Where the
dues are paid by the employer in accordance with this clause by the employer, then, he shall
be discharged of his liability to pay the dues.
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to provide for appointment of Authority by the appropriate
Government to decide the claim of employees which arises under the provisions of the
proposed legislation. The said authority shall have powers to award payment of claim
amount along with compensation which may extend up to ten times of the claim amount.
Further, if an employer fails to pay the amount of claim and compensation awarded by the
Authority, then, the said Authority shall issue a recovery certificate to the Collector or
District Magistrate of the district where the establishment is located who shall recover the
same as arrears of land revenue and remit the same to the authority for payment to the
concerned employee. Any application before the authority for claim referred above may be
filed by the employee concerned or Facilitator or by any Trade Union of which the employee
is a member.

43
Clause 46 of the Bill provides that if a dispute arises between an employer and his
employees with respect to the bonus payable under the proposed legislation or the application
of this Code, in respect of bonus, to an establishment in public sector, then, such dispute shall
be deemed to be an industrial dispute under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to provide that if in any dispute referred to the authority,
appellate authority, a Tribunal or an arbitrator, any corporation or a company (other than a
banking company) submits to the said authority, appellate authority, a Tribunal or an arbitrator,
the documents like balance sheet and profit and loss account duly audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India or by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies
under Companies Act, 2013, then, such documents shall be presumed to be accurate and it
shall not be necessary for the corporation or company to prove the accuracy of such
statements. However, when an application is made to the said authority, appellate authority,
Tribunal or arbitrator by any employee or a Trade Union being a party to the dispute
requiring any clarification to the said statements, then, on order of the authority, appellate
authority, Tribunal or arbitrator the concerned corporation or company, as the case may be,
shall clarify the same.
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to provide for audit of accounts of employers not being
corporations or companies. Where an employer fails to get the accounts audited then there
is provision for getting the accounts audited by such auditor or auditors as the authority
thinks fit and the expenses of and incidental to such audit including the remuneration of
auditor or auditors shall be determined by the authority and be paid by the employer. In
case of failure of payment, this clause contains the provision for the recovery of such
expenses.
Clause 49 of the Bill makes provisions for appeal against the order of the authority.
Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to provide for records, returns and notices. The said clause
makes provisions for the maintenance of register by the employer containing the details
with regard to persons employed, muster roll, wages, and such other details in the manner
to be specified in the rules by the appropriate Government. It also provides for the display
of a notice on the notice board at a prominent place at the establishment containing the
abstract of the proposed legislation, category-wise wage rates of employees, wage period,
day or date and time of payment of wages and the name and address of the Facilitator
having jurisdiction. There is provision for issue of wage slip. The employer who employs
not more than five persons for agriculture or domestic purpose is exempted from the provision
but when demanded, he shall produce before the Facilitator the reasonable proof of the
payment of wages to the persons employed.
Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to provide for appointment of Facilitators and their powers.
The Facilitator may supply information and advise to employer and workers concerning the
most effective means of complying with the provisions of the proposed legislation. The
said clause also empowers the Facilitators to inspect the establishment based on inspection
scheme.
Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to provide for cognizance of offences under the provisions
of the proposed legislation. The cognizance of the offences shall be taken by the court on
a complaint. No court inferior to the Metropolitan Magistrate or Magistrate of the First
Class shall try the offences.
Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to provide penalties for offences. Enhanced penalties shall
be imposed on the offender who is again found guilty of similar offence already committed
by him, for which he has been convicted. The Facilitator shall, before initiation of prosecution
proceedings, give an opportunity to the employer to comply with the provisions of the
proposed legislation. The prosecution proceedings shall not be initiated against the employer
who complies with the said provisions within the period specified. Such opportunity shall
not be accorded to an employer, if the violation of the same nature of the provisions of

44
proposed legislation is repeated within a period of five years from the date on which the first
violation was committed.
Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to provide for offences by companies. If the offence is
committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in
charge of and was responsible to the company for the conduct of business of the company,
as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly. Protection has been provided where offence
has been committed without the knowledge or where all due diligence to prevent the
commission of the offence has been exercised. The director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company with the consent or connivance of whom the offence has been
committed shall also be deemed to be guilty.
Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to provide for composition of offences. Only the offences
for which there is no punishment with imprisonment shall be compounded. The compounding
money shall be a sum of fifty per cent. of maximum fine. There is no compounding for a
similar offence compounded earlier or for commission of which conviction was made
committed for the second time or thereafter within a period of five years.
Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to provide bar of suits. The matters in which the court shall
not entertain the suit, inter alia, relate to the recovery of minimum wages, any deduction
from wages, discrimination in wages and payment of bonus.
Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to provide for protection of action taken in good faith by
the appropriate Government or any officer of that Government under the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to provide regarding burden of proof. The burden of
proving that the dues on account of remuneration or bonus, etc., have been paid shall be on
the employer.
Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to provide that any contract or agreement whereby an
employee relinquishes the right to any amount or the right to bonus due to him under the
provisions of the proposed legislation shall be null and void in so far as it purports to
remove or reduce the liability of any person to pay such amount.
Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to provide for overriding effect in respect of laws,
agreements, etc., which are inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Such laws, agreements, etc., shall not affect the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to provide for delegation of powers. The appropriate
Government may, by notification, delegate the powers exercisable by it in the proposed
Code with or without any condition to the officer or authority subordinate to that Government,
etc., as may be specified in the notification.
Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to provide for exemption of employer from liability in
certain cases. The employer who is charged with an offence under the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall be entitled upon complaint duly made by him, to have any other
person whom he charges as the actual offender, brought before of the court at the time
appointed for hearing the charge and if used he proves that he has, after the commission of
the offence has been proved, due diligence to enforce the execution of the provisions of the
proposed legislation and the other person committed the offence without his knowledge,
consent or connivance, then, that other person shall be convicted of the offence and the
employer shall be discharged.
Clause 63 of the Bill seeks to provide for protection against attachment of assets of
employer with Government.
Clause 64 of the Bill seeks to provide for the powers of the Central Government to
give directions to the State Government for carrying into execution of the provisions of the
proposed legislation and such directions shall be binding.

45
Clause 65 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions of the proposed legislation
shall not effect the provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005 and the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948, or of any
scheme made there under.
Clause 66 of the Bill seeks to confer power upon the appropriate Government to make
rules. Such powers are of general nature for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation and also the matters on which such rules may be made have been specified.
There is provision for laying the rules, as the case may be, before the Parliament or the State
Legislature.
Clause 67 of the Bill seeks to confer power upon the Central Government to make
provisions published in the Official Gazette and not inconsistent with the provisions of the
proposed legislation for removing the difficulty. Such powers shall not be exercised after
expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of the proposed legislation and
every order published under this clause shall be laid before the each House of Parliament.
Clause 68 of the Bill seeks to provide for repeal of certain enactments, namely, the
Payment of Wages Act, 1936, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Payment of Bonus Act,
1965 and the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, and saving of things done and action taken
there under.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that no employer shall pay to any employee wages less
than the minimum rate of wages notified by the appropriate Government for the area,
establishment or work as may be specified in the notification.
2. Sub-clause (5) of clause 6 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government may,
by notification, fix factors by which the minimum wages so fixed be multiplied for different
types of work.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to fix the
national minimum wage, by notification. Proviso to the said clause further provides that
different national minimum wages may be fixed for different States or different geographical
areas.
4. Clause 25 of the Bill exempts the application of the provisions of this Chapter III of
the Bill to Government establishments unless the appropriate Government, by notification,
applies such provisions to any Government establishment specified in the said notification.
5. Sub-clause (1) of clause 45 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to
appoint by notification, one or more authorities, not below the rank of a Gazetted officer, to
hear and determine the claims which arises under the provisions of this Bill.
6. Sub-clause (1) of clause 49 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to
appoint appellate authority having jurisdiction to hear appeals preferred by any person
aggrieved by an order passed by the authority under sub-clause ( 2) of clause 45.
7. Sub-clause (1) of clause 51 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to
appoint Facilitators who shall exercise the powers conferred on them under sub-clause (4)
of the said clause throughout the State or such geographical limits assigned to them, in
relation to establishments situated in such State or geographical limits, as the case may be.
8. Sub-clause (2) of clause 51 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to lay
down an inspection scheme by notification, which shall also provide for generation of a
web-based inspection schedule.
9. Sub-clause (1) of clause 55 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to
specify a Gazetted Officer for the purpose of compounding offences in accordance with the
provisions of the said clause.
10. Sub-clause (1) of clause 66 empowers the appropriate Government, subject to the
condition of previous publication, to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause ( 2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made. These matters, inter alia, include: (a) the manner of calculating the wages
where such rates are fixed by the hour or by the day or by the month under sub-section (4)
of section 6; (b) the cases and circumstances in which an employee employed for a period
of less than the requisite number of hours constituting a normal working day shall not be
entitled to receive wages for a full normal working day under section 10; ( c) the extent to
which, and subject to such conditions, the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall
apply in relation to certain classes of employees, under sub-section ( 2) of that section;
(d) the manner of fixation of minimum rate of wages by the hour, by the day or by such a
longer wage  period under section 14; ( e) manner of deducting loans made from any fund
constituted for the welfare of labour under sub-clause (ii) of clause (f) of sub-section (2) of
section 18; (f) the manner of recovery of excess of amount under sub-section (4) of section
18; (g) the authority to provide approval for imposition of fine under sub-section (
1) of
section 19; ( h) the manner of exhibition of the acts and omissions to be specified in the
notice under sub-section ( 2) of section 19; ( i) the procedure for the imposition of fines
46

47
under sub-section (3) of section 19; ( j) the form of the register to record all fines and all
realisations thereof under sub-section ( 8) of section 19; ( k) the procedure for making
deductions for absence from duty under sub-section (2) of section 20; (l) the procedure for
making deductions for damage or loss under sub-section (2) of section 21; (m) the form of
the register to record all deductions and all realisations thereof under sub-section ( 3) of
section 21; (n)  conditions for recovery of advance of money given to an employee after the
employment began under  clause (b) of section 23; (o) conditions for recovery of advances
of wages to an employee not already earned under  clause (c) of section 23; (p) deductions
for recovery of loans and the rate of interest payable thereon under section 24; (q) manner
of regulating the procedure by the Central Advisory Board referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 42 and the State Advisory Board referred to in sub-section ( 4) of the said section
including that of the committees and sub-committees constituted by the  State Advisory
Board under sub-section (10) of section 42; (r) the term of members of the  Central Advisory
Board,  the State Advisory Board including the  committees and sub-committees constituted
by the  State Advisory Board under  sub-section ( 11) of section 42; ( s) the authority and
manner of depositing with such authority various undisbursed dues in case of death of
employed person under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 44; ( t) form of a single
application in respect of a number of employees under sub-section (5) of section 45; (u) the
form for making an appeal to the appellate authority by the  aggrieved person under sub-
section (1) of section 49; ( v) the manner of maintenance of a register by the employer  to
maintain the details of persons employed, muster roll, wages and such other details under
sub-section (1) of section 50; (w) the manner of issuing wage slips under sub-section (3) of
section 50; (x) the other powers to be exercised by the Facilitators under sub-section (5) of
section 51; (y) the manner of composition of offence by a Gazetted Officer specified under
sub-section (4) of section 55; and ( z) any other matter which is required to be or may be
specified under the proposed legislation.
11. Sub-clause (
3) of clause 66 provides that every rule made by the Central Government
is required to be laid before each House of Parliament.
12. Sub-clause (4) of clause 66 provides that every rule made under the said clause is
required to be laid before State Legislature.
13. The matter in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure or
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the laws relating to wages and bonus and
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bandaru Dattatreya, Minister of State for Labour and Employment )
GMGIPMRND—1808LS(S3)—07-08-2017.