1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"16A. Every citizen, who has attained the age of eighteen years, shall have the
right to employment:
Provided that any such citizen, who is not provided with employment, shall be
entitled to unemployment allowance at such rate as Parliament may, by law, determine.".
Bill No. 163 of  2015
Short title.
Insertion of new
article 16A.
Right to
employment.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after sixty-seven years of independence, twenty-seven per cent. of India's
population is living below poverty line and a large section of people die of starvation every
year. Although poverty has been checked to a large extent, yet a large section of our society
is unemployed and they have no source of income. In the absence of adequate employment
opportunities, youth take to other courses to sustain themselves by joining extremist, terrorist
and criminal activities and also indulge in other anti-social activities such as kidnapping,
robbery, hijacking, etc., which is not good for unity and integrity of the nation. Therefore,
time has come to amend the Constitution to make right to employment a fundamental right,
so that the young generation do not indulge in anti-national activities. Besides, making right
to employment a fundamental right of the citizens, the Bill also provides for payment of
unemployment allowance to all unemployed citizens till they are provided with employment.
This will help young generation financially, discourage them from indulging in anti-national
activities and engage them in nation building activities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA  SHETTY
May 7, 2015.
2

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making right to employment a fundamental right of the
citizens. It further provides that every such citizen who is not provided with employment
shall be entitled to get unemployment allowance at such date as Parliament may, by law,
determine. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five
thousand crore is likely to be involved initially.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

GMGIPMRND—1186LS(S3)—14-07-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)