1
THE NATIONALISATION OF INTER-STATE RIVERS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI K. NA V ASKANI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for nationalisation of inter-State rivers for the purpose of equitable
distribution of river water amongst the States and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nationalisation of Inter-State Rivers Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "inter-State river" means a river which has its source in one State and passes
through two or more States including the State in which the river has its origin before
it submerges into the sea and also includes a lake, tank or rivulet, which has its source
from an inter-State river; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No. 163 of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
State shall have exclusive right over an inter-State river or to its use.
4. On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall
have exclusive right and control over all inter-State rivers.
5. (1) Every State Government and Union Territory Administration shall forward its
requirement of water for all purposes, including requirement for irrigation and drinking
purposes, to the Central Government and also its requirement for electricity.
(2) While forwarding its requirement, every S tate Government and Union Territory
Administration shall indicate the rivers, which are not inter-State rivers, and their status and
any dam constructed within the State on any river, including an inter-State river, and its
capacity for storage of water and electricity generated from each of such rivers.
(3) Every State Government shall also indicate the average rainfall in the State during
the last three years in different seasons and the amount of rainfall during the current year.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to distribute river water of every
inter-State river to the States within which such river pass through.
(2) While distributing river water, the Central Government shall take into consideration
the following factors:—
(a) population and area of each interested State;
(b) land available for farming in each State;
(c) requirement of water for drinking, agricultural and other purposes in each
State;
(d) length of inter-State river passing through each State; and
(e) requirement and availability of electricity in each State.
7. The Central Government shall take such steps as it may consider necessary for
checking floods and soil erosion caused by inter-State rivers.
8. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no State Government shall
construct any hydro-electrical plant or project on any inter-State river.
(2) The Central Government shall have exclusive right and control to construct any
power plant meant for power generation on any inter-State river and shall distribute
electricity in such ratio, among the State through which the inter-State rivers pass, as may
be prescribed.
(3) Every State Government shall pay to the Central Government in such ratio as may
be prescribed for the electricity it receives from any hydro-electrical plant or project constructed
on an inter-State river.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
No State to
have exclusive
right over an
inter-State
river.
Central
Government
to have right
and control
over inter-
State rivers.
State
Governments
to forward
requirements
of water/
electricity.
Central
Government
to distribute
inter-State
river water.
Steps to check
flood and soil
erosion.
Central
Government
to construct
hydro-
electrical
plants on
inter-State
rivers.
Power to make
rules.
5
15
20
10
25
30
35
40

3
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a union of States. There are many rivers, big or small flowing through many
States before they submerge into the nearest sea. Today half of our population do not have
access to potable water. Water is also not available for irrigation and other purposes. As a
result, production of agricultural products has been considerably reduced.
It has been observed that many States through which a river flows, fight for considerable
share of river waters and try to deprive the just and due demand of other States. Consequently,
many cases are pending in tribunals for settlement. It is a common knowledge that  tribunals
take a long time before  delivering judgment. In the meantime, the affected States fight each
other for their share of water from the inter-State rivers and as a result, there is always
strained relation among the States.
Therefore, it is proposed that only the Central Government shall have exclusive right
and control over all inter-State rivers and it shall distribute river water according to pre-
determined formula for allocation of waters. It is also proposed that the Central Government
shall have exclusive right over electricity projects constructed on inter-State rivers and also
have the responsibility to check erosion and floods caused by these rivers. This measure will
not only enable distribution of river water among the different States without affecting the
interests of the concerned States but also enable proper utilisation of available resources.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; K. NAVASKANI
June  26, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall take such steps as it
may consider necessary for checking floods and soil erosion caused by inter-State rivers.
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall construct hydro-electrical plants or
projects on inter-State rivers. Though there is a provision that every State Government shall
pay to the Central Government in such ratio as may be prescribed for the electricity it
received, yet some expenditure will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated  that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees seven hundred crore will be
involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seven hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,  the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for nationalisation of inter-State rivers for the purpose of equitable distribution
of river water amongst the States and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri K. Navaskani, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1239LS(S3)—09.07.2019.