, , 8 AUo 1'985 
--'-- --. 
~ INTRODUcm IN LoIC SABRA ON 
BOI No. 183 of 1885 
-THE INLAND WATERWAYS AtrrHO~TY OF INDIA BILL, 1985 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPI'ER II 
INLAND WATDWAYS AtrmoRITY OF INDIA 
3. Constitution and incorporation of the .Inland Waterways Aulhority 
of India. 
4. Conditions of service of memben;. 
5. Powers of Chairman and Vice-Chairman. 
6. Hemoval, etc., of members. 
7. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Authority. 
8. Secretary and other officers. 
9. Advisory Committees. 
10. Authority to act on business principles. 
CHAPTER III 
PROPERTY AND CQNTRACTS 
11. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Central Government to the 
Authority. 
12. Contracts by the Authority. 
13. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority. 
CHAPTER IV 
FUNCTIONS AND POWERs OF THE AUTHORITY 
14. Functions of the Authority. 
15. Amendment of schemes. 
16. Power to fix maximum and minimum rates for passenger fares 
and freigh" for goods. 

(ii) 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
CLAUSES -\ ~ ,. 
17. Levy and collection of fees and charges. 
18. Grants and loans by the Central Government. 
19. Constitution. of the Fund . 
• ' 20. Budget. .. 
21. Investment ~ funds. 
22. Annual report. 
23. Accounts and audit. 
24. Annual report and auditors' report to be laid before ParliameDt. 
CHAPTER VI 
MlscELLANEous 
25. Power of Central Government to issue directions. 
26. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Authority. 
27. Application, etc., of certain laws. 
28. Power to enter. 
29. Delegation. 
30. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority. 
31. Members, officers and employees of the Authority to be public 
servants. 
32. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
33. Power of Central Government to supersede the Authority. 
34. Power to make rules. 
35. Power to make regulatioJU. .,... . 
. . 
36. Rules and regulations to be. laid before ParUi,ment. 
37. Power to remove diftlculties. 
38. Amendment of Act 49 of 1982. 

BW No. 183 of 1_ 
THE INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA BItt· 1985 I , . , 
A 
BILL 
eo provide for the constit1Ltion of an authority tor the regulation GRd 
development of inland waterways for pU7'pOses of shipping aftd 
navigption and for matters connected th(Irewith or incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted ·by PlU"liament in the Thirty-silCth Year of the Republic 
of India a'S follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S . 1. (1) This Act may be called the Inland Waterways Authority .of 
IlJ.Clia Act. 198~A 
10 
(2) It- shall come into force on such date as the QentralGovemment 
may, by notification in the Official Guette, appoint. . 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) Ilappurtenant land" means all lands appurtenant to a natipnal 
waterway, whether denuu-cated or not; 
(b) "Authority" means the Inland Waterways Author~ty of India 
constituted under section 3; 
(c) uchannel" means any waterway, whether natural or artificial; 
15 (d) IIconservancy" includes dredging, training, closure, diversion' 
or abandoning channels; 
(e) I'conservancy meuU1es" means mea&~ for p~ of 
conservancy, but· does not include measures for protection of banles 
:::~ 
Com~· • 
me •• 
ment 
Deftni· 
tions. 

CoDatltu-
lion and' . 
~ 
ration Of 
the In-
land. 
Water-
ways 
Autho-
IIty or 
India. 
2 
against floods or for restricting banks which have become eroded 
mainly on account of reasons not connected with shipping and 
navigation; 
(f) "infrastructure" includes structu.res such as docks, wharves. 
jetties, landing stages, locks, buoys, inland ports, cargo handliDg 5 
equipment, roa.d and rail access and cargo storage 8pIlCeS, ~d the 
expression "infrastructural facilities" shall be construed accordinW; 
(g) "member" means a member of the Authority appointed 
under sub-section (3) ,)f section 3; 
(h) "national waterway" means the inland waterway declared 10 
by section 2 of the National Waterway (Allahabad-Haldia Stretch of 
the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River) Act, 1982, to be a national ""of UI82. 
waterway. 
ExplanatiOn.-If Parliament declares by law any other water-
way to be a national waterway, then from the date on which such 15 
declaration takes effect, such other waterway-
(i) shall be deemed also to be a national waterway within 
the meaning of this clause; and 
l, (ii) ,the provisions of this Act shall. with necessary modifi-
cations (including modifications for construing any reference tc 20 
the commencement of this Act as a reference to the date afore-
said) apply to such national waterway; 
(i) "navigable channel" means a channel navigable during the 
whole or a part of the year; . 
.. (j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 25 
Act; 
(k) "regulations" means regulations made by the Authority 
under ,this Act; and 
(1) "rules" means rules made by the Central Government lDlCler 
this Aet. 
CHAPTER II 
INLAND WATDWAYS AUTHORITY OF lNmA 
3 .. (;1) With effect from such date as the Central GqverlllD8llt DUlJ'. 
bJ DOtiftcation in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, then sbaJJ 
be eautituted 'or the purposes of this Act aD Authority,.o be called the 35 
Inland Waterways Authority of India. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corpo.rate by the name aloreaald, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject tID 
the proVisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, 'and to contract· and shall by the said name sue .fa 
and be sued. 
(8) The Authority shall consist 'of the following ~ber&, name1y:-
(a.) a Chairman; 
(b) a Vice-Chairman; and 
'(c) 'Such number of persons, not exceeding fiVe, 
to be appointed by the Central Government. 
45 

3 
(4) The Awtharity may associate with itself, in such manner, and for 
such purposes as may be determined by regulations, any person whose 
assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the provisions 
of this ·Act and a person so associated 'Shall have the right to take part 
5 in the discussions of the Authority relevant to the purpose for which he 
has been associated, but shall not be entitled to vote. 
4. The term of olke and other conditions of service of the members 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
5. (1) The Chairman of the Authority shall, in addi1ion to presiding 
10 over the meetings of the Aq.thority, exercise and discharge such powers 
and duties of the Authority as may be delegated to him by the Autherltty 
and such, other powers and duties 'as may be p.rescribed. 
(2) The Vice-Chairman of·the Authority shall exercise and discharge 
such of the powers and duties of the Chairman as may be PI;eecri'bed or 
15 as may 'be delega1ed. to him by ;the Chairman. 
20 
6. (1) The Central Government may remove from the Authority any 
member, who, in its opinion,-
(4) refuses to act, 
(b) has become incapable to act, 
(c) has so abused his office as to render his continuance in office 
detrimental -to the public interest, or . 
(d) is otherwise unsuitable to continue as a member. 
(2) The Central Government may suspend any member pending an 
enquiry against him. 
25 (3):N'0 ord~ of removal under this section shall be made unless Ithe 
member concerned has been given an opportunity to submit his explana. 
tion to the CentQU Government and when such order is passed, the seat-
of the member removed shall be declared vacant. 
(4) A member who has been removed under this section shall not be 
30 eligible for re-appoiniment as a membe;r or in any capacity under the 
AuthOrity. , 
7, No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalida1led merely 
by reason of-
(4) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of. the 
35 Authority; or 
(b) any defect in-the appointment of a person acting as a member 
of the Authority; or 
(c) any ir;reguIarity in the _ procedure of the Authority no'!: 
affecting the merits of the case, 
Condi-
tions of 
service 
ofmem-
bers. 
Powers of 
Chair-
man and 
Vice--
Chairman. 
Removal, 
etc., of 
members. 
Vacancy, 
etc., not 
ta invaU-
date pro-
ceedings 
of the 
Authority. 
40 8. (I) The Authority may appoint the Secretary and such other Secretary 
- oIBeers and employees as it eonsiclers neeessary for the eflieient dis- and othCM' 
charge of Ws functions under this Act. oftlcers. 
(2) The terms and coaditioDS of service of the Seeretary ami oth.r 
0'" and employe.. of tlie Authority shall be such as may be deter-
45 mined by repletions. -

Acivisory 
Cca-
mittees. 
Autho-
rity to 
Rcton 
business 
prine!-
pI .. 
Tranaf« 
of ,auete 
and lla-
bUiUes 
of the 
Central 
GOVETIl-
men~to 
the . 
Aut.hority. 
4 
9. (1) Sub.j..:t to any niles made ill this behalf, the Au*,,~*t' mRY 
iNa tiDaeto time iCODStitute such AdvillOl')" ~ .. 88 may be, 
,. •• ...,. for the emdent cJilehaqo of its functions. 
.. 
(Z) Ever¥ Advisory Conunittee shan consist of .uch numbel' of perIODS 
CODDeded. with .hippiDg and navigation and allied aepeets as the 5 
Authority may deem fit. 
18. In the discharge of its fWlCtions under this Act, the Authority 
shall act, sO far as may be, on business principles. . 
CHAPTER 'III 
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS 
11. (1) As from such day as the Central Government may appoint by 
notification in the Oftlcial Gazette,-
10 
(4) all properties and other assets vuted in :the Central Gov-
ernment for the pu,rposes of Inland Water Transport Directorate, and 
administered by the Chief Engineer-cum-Administrator, Inland Water 15 
Transport Directorate, immediately before such day shall vest in the 
Authority; 
(b) aU debts, obligations and liabIlities incurred, ald contracts 
entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by. with, 
or 'for the Central Government immediately before such day for or 20 
in connection with the purposes of Inland Water Trlmspo,rt Directo-
rate shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into and engaged 
to be done by, with or fo;r the Authority; , 
(c) all non-recur.rong expenditure incurred by the Central Gov-
ernment for or in connection with the purposes of Inland Water 2~) 
Transport Directorate up to such day and declared to be capital . 
expenditure by the Central Government shall, subject to such terms 
and conditions as may be determined by the Central Government, 
be treated as capital provided by the Central Government to the 
Authority; 30 
(do) all SUIQ.'S of money due to the Central Government in relation 
to Ipland. Water 1)-ansport Direc:torate immediately before such day 
shall be deemed to be due to ,the Authority; 
(e) aU sUits and ,other legal proceeding, with respect to -any 
matter in relation to Inland Water Transport Directorate which 35 
having been instituted by or against the Central Government are 
pending, or which could have been so instituted, immediately before 
such date shall on and after such date be contiI\ued or instituted by 
or agamst the Authority; apd . 
(J) every employee holding any office under the Central Gov- 40 
emment immediately before such day solely or mainly far or in 
connection with 'Such affairs of the Inland Water Transport Direc~ 
torate as are relevant Jto the functions of the Authority under this 
Act shall be treated as on deputation with the Authority but. s~ll' 
hold his oftlcein the Authority by the same tenure and' upon the 
same terms and conditions of service as respects rerounelatjpn, leave, 45 
p.rovident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits as he would 
ha,ye;l~.e1d suc:h oftice. ,if the Authority had not ,been constituted, and 
sba.1l c:ontip,ue. to dQ so until the Central 'Government, eitJaer on ita 
own motion or at the request of the Authority, recalls such employee ~o 
• 

to its service or until the Authority, with the concurrence of the 
Central Government, duly absorbs sueh employee. in its, regular 
service, whichever is earlier: 
Provid~d that during the period of deputation of any sUch employee 
5 with ·the Authority, the Authority shall pay to the Central Government 
In respect of every such employee, such contribution towards his leave 
salary, pension and gratuity as the Central Government may, by order, 
determine: 
Provided further that any such employee, who has, in respect of the 
10 proposal of the Authority to absorb him in its regular service, intimated 
Within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Authority his 
intention of not becoming a regular employee of the AuthOrity, shall not 
be absorbed by the Authority in its regular service. 
(2) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of the properties, rights 
15 or liabilities of the Central Government have been "transferred to the 
Authority or as to which of the employee:; serving under the Central 
Government are to be treated as on deputation with the Authorltr, under 
this section, such dispute or doubt shall be decided by the Central Gov-
ernment in consultation with the Authority and the decision of the 
20 Central Government thereon shall be final. 
(3) NotWithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
14 of 1947. Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the absorption 
of any employee by the Authority in its regular service under this section 
shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that ·Act or 
25 other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal 
or other authority. 
12. Subject to the provisions of section 13, the Authority shall be 
competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the dis-
charge of its functions under this Act. 
30 13. (1) Every contract shall, on behalf.of the Authority, be made by 
the Chainnan or such other member or such officer of the Authority as 
may be generally or specially empowered in this behalf 'by the Authority 
and such contracts or class of contra~ts as may be specified in the regu-
lations shal1 be sealed with the common seal of the AuthOrity: 
35 Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the 
Central" Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf 
shall be made unless it has been prev.iously approved by the Authority: 
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of im-
movable property or for the lease of any such property for a term ex-
·40 ce'eding thirty years and no other contract exeeeding such value or 
amount as the Central Government may, from. time to time by order, 
fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously approved 
by the Central Government. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the form aad manner 
45 in which any contract shall be made under this Act shall be such as may 
be· pr~scribed by regulations. 
(3) No contract' which is not in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act and the reirulations shall be binding on the AuthOrity. 
Con-
tracts by 
the 
Autho-
rity. 
Mode of 
executio, 
·contracts 
on be-
hall of 
the 
Authority. 

Func-
tions of 
the' 
Autho-
rity. 
6 
CHAPTER IV 
FUNCTIONS AND POWERs OF 'I'HE AUTHORITY 
14. (1) The Authority may-
(a) carry out surveys and investigations for the development, 
maintenance I8Ild better utilisation of the national waterways and the 5 
appurtenant land for shipping and navigation and prepare schemes 
in this behalf; 
• 
Cb) provide or permit setting up of infrastructural facilities for 
national waterways; 
(~) carry out conservancy. measures and training works and do 10 
all other acts necessary for the safety and convenience of shipping 
and navigation and iniprovemeut of the national waterways; 
(d) control activities such as throwing rubbish, dumping or re-
moval of material, in or from the bed of the national waterway and 
appurtenant land, in so far as they may affect safe and emcient, 15 
shipping and navigation, maintenance of navigable channels, river 
training and conservancy measures; 
(e) remove or alter any obstruction or· impediment in the lIa-
tional waterways and the appurtenant land which may impede tbe 
safe navigation or endanger safety of infrastructural facilities or 20 
conservancy measures wbere . such obstruction or impediment has 
been lawfully made or has become (lawful by reason of long con-
tinuance of such obstruction or impediment or otherwise, after 
making compensation to person suffering damage by such removal 
or alteration; 25 
(1) provide for the regulation of navigation and traffic (includ-
ing the rule of the road) on national waterways; 
(g) regulate the construction or alteration of structures on, 
across or WIder the national waterways; 
(It) disseminate navigational meteorological information ahout 30 
national waterways; 
(i) ensure ct)-ordination of inland water transport on national 
waterways with other modes of transport; and 
(j) establish and maintain pilotage on national waterways. 
(2) Tbe Authority may also- 35 
(a) advise the Central Government on matters relating to ill-
land water transport; 
(b) study the transport requirement with a view to co-ordinllt-
ing inland water transport 'with other modes of transpor~ 
(c) ca'rry out hydrographic surveys and publisb river charts; 40 
(d) assist, on such terms and conditions as may be mutually 
agreed. upon, \Bny State Government in formulation and implemen-
tation of scheme for inland water transport development; 
(e) develop consultancy services and provide such services, on 
such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed 'Upon, wlndia 4-5 
and abroad in relation to planning and development of waterways 
fer shipping and navigation or any facUity thereat; 
(f) conduct research in matters relating to inland water trans-
port including .development of craft design, mechanisation of country 
craits, technique 01' towage, landing and terminal facilities, port 50 
installations and survey techniques; 

7 
(g) lay down standards for ,classification of inland waterwap; 
(h) arrange programme of technical training for inIaIld water 
traJatiport person~el wit,hin and outside the country; and 
(i) perform such other functions as may be Decessary to carry 
5 out the provisions of this Act. 
(3) Any dispute arising out of or concerning the compensation re· 
ferred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) shall be determined according 
to the law relating to like disputes in the case of land required for public 
purposes. 
10 (4) Every scheme, prepared by the Authority to carry out functions 
under sub-sections (1) and (2), involving capital expenditure exceeding 
the emount as may be pre~ibed, shall be submitted to the Central Gov-
ermnent for approval. 
(5) The Central Government may either approve the scheme sub-
15 mitted to it under sub-section (4) without modification or with such 
modification" as it may considC:!r necessary or reject the scheme with di-
rections to the Authority to prepare a fresh scheme according to such 
directions. 
15. The Authority shall not make any material change in the scheme 
20 approved under sub-sectiOlIl (5) of section 14 without the prior approval 
of the Central Government. 
Explar.ation.--For the purposes of this section, "material change" 
means an incree,se in the cost of the scheme by more than twenty per 
cent. of its cost or a change in the benefit and cost ratio which either 
25 makes the cost component in the ratio exceeds the benefit or reduces the 
benefit component b'y more than twenty per cent. 
16. The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government and by notification in the Official Gazette, in respect of any 
system of national waterways or of any stretch of any national waterway, 
30 or of run between any two stations on a national waterway-
35 
(a) fix the maximum or minimum rate per kilometre which may 
be charged for passenger fares for passengers of any class travelling 
on inland mechanically propelled vessel; 
(b) fix the maximum or minimum rates or both such rates per 
kilometre which may be charged for freight on goods of any deSCrip-
tion carried in inland mechanically propelled vessels; and 
(c) declare what shan be deemed to be the distance between any 
two statiollS 011 a national waterway for the purpose of calculating 
passengers' fares or freight on goods whe.re maximum or minimum 
rates or both such rates have been fixed under this section. 
CHAPTER V 
FIN ANCE, ACCOUNTS AND A UDrr 
17. (1) The Authority may. with the previous approval of the Centrlll 
Government, levy fees and charges at such rates as may be laid down 
45 by regulations made in this behalf for services or benefits rendered in 
relation to the use of the national waterways for the purposes of shipping, 
navigation, 'jnfl'astructural facilities, including facilities for passengers 
and facilities relating to the berthing of vessels, handling of cargoes and 
storage of cargoes. '. ' .. 
Amend-
ment of 
schemes. 
Power to 
fix maxl-
mum and 
minimum 
rates 
for pas-
s~nger 
fares and 
frf'ight 
for goods. 
r.evy and 
co.l1ection 
otfees . 
and 
chargeS. 

Gran1.t 
and ' 
loans by 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Constitu-
tion 
of thE: 
Fund. 
liudgel, 
Invest-
mentol 
funds. ' 
Annual 
report. 
Accoants 
and 
audit. 
Annual 
report 
and 
audi-
torS' 
report 
to be 
laid 
before 
ParDa-
menl. 
8 
(2) The fees and charges levied under sub-section (1) shall be 
collected in such manner as may be determined by regulations. 
18. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliameat by law in this behalf, make to the Authority arants and loanB 
of such sums of lOOney as that Government may consider necessary. 
19. (1) Thrre shall be constituted a fund to be called the Inland 
Waterways Authority of India Fund and there shall be credited thereto-
({I) any grants and loans made to the Authority by the Central 
GoVel'llmelit under section 18; 
5 
(b) all .fees and charges,received by the Authority under this Act; 10 
and 
(c, all sums received by the Authority from such other sources 
as may be decided upon by the Central Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting-
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, 15 
officers and other employees of the Authority; 
(b) expenses of the Authority in the discharge of its functions 
under section 14; and 
(c) expenses on cbjects and ,fOf purposes authorised by this Act. 
20. 1'h(': Al!thority shaH prepare, in such form and at such time each 20 
financial year as may be prescribE:d, its budget for the next financial 
year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Authority 
and forward the same to the Central Government. 
21. The Authority may invest its funds (including any reserve fund) 
in the securities of the Central Government or in such other manner .. ~5 
may be prescribed. 
12. ThE; Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time each 
financial year as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full ac-
count of its activities during the previous financial year, and submit a 
copy thereof to the t;entral Govel1'lment. 30 
23. The accounts of the Authority shall be maintained, and audited 
in such manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India, be prescribed and the Authority shall furnish, to the 
Central Gov~nment, before such date as may be prescribed, its auditecl 
copy of accounts together with the auditors' report thereon. 
, 35 
:!t. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and audi-
tors' report to be laid, as, soon as may be after they are received, before 
each House f)fP~rliamel1l 

1 of 1894. 
15 of 190P. 
311 01. lQ1)3. 
1S of 1908, 
38 of 1963. 
] ot J:H7. 
150fl1}08. 
~8 of 196. 
. ',:,' ,.' " 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
25. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the 
Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this 
_ 5 Act, be b.)und by such direction.:; on questions of policy as the Central 
Government may give in writing to it from time to time: 
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given 
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given undp.r this 
su b-seC'tion. 
10 (:~) The dedsion of the Central Government whether a question is 
one of policy or not shall be final. 
26. Any land required by the Authority for discharging its functions 
under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose and such 
iand may be arquired for the Authority under the provisions of the Land 
15 Acquisition Act, 1894 or of any other corresponding law for the titne 
being in forc'e. 
27. (1) Thf> provisions of this Act shaH be in addition to the DrovI-
sions of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 and the Major Port Trusts Act: 1.963 
and in particular nothing in thi!'l Art shall affect any jurisdiction, 
20 functions, powers or duties required to be exercised, performed or dis-
charged by-
(a) the conservator of any port or by any officer or authority 
under the Indian Ports Act, 1908, or 
(b) the Board of Trustees for any maior port or hy any officer 
or authority under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, 
in or in relation to any portion of an inland waterway (including the 
national waterway) falling within the limits of such port or major 
port. 
(2) Nothing in this Act shnll affect the operation of the Inland 
30 Vessels Act, 1917 or any other Centra' Act (other than the Indian Ports 
Act, ]908 and the Major Port Tru~t~ Art '0(3) or any State or provinCial 
Act in force immediately before the (,,")!nmencement of this Act with 
respect to shippin!! and navigation on any national waterway bllt any 
jurisdiction. functions, powers or duties required to be exercised, pet"-
~5 formed or discharged bv thp. Sbte Government or any officer or authority 
l!Iubordill'lle to the Statp' GOVNnrnent under any such Act in so far as 
luch jurisdiction. functions. POWf'ts or duties relates or relate to shippinlt 
and navigation or such n1t.i.onal waterway or any matter incidental 
thereto or oth~.'rwise connected therewith shall, after such commence-
4? ment, be ~xercised, performed or discharged by the Authority, 
Power of 
Cc.>ntral 
C1overn-
ment to 
issue 
direc-
tions. 
Compul-
:::ory 
3cquisi-
tionof 
land 
for the 
Authol'i1y. 
Appli-
cation, 
etc., of 
ecrtain 
laws. 
28. Sub1ect to any rules made in this behalf, any person generally t>r I'O'WE'I' to . 
specially fl~thorised 'by the Authnrity in this behalf, may, whenever it enter. 
Is necessary so to do for any of the purpost's of this Act, at all reasonable 
41 
times, enter upon any land or premises and-
(a) mAke any inRpection,' survey, measurement, valuation 
inquiry; 
(b) take levels; 
or 

Delel8-
tloo. 
Authenti-
eation of 
orders 
and 
other 
Instru-
mentsof 
the 
Authority. 
Members, 
otBcers 
and 
employees 
of the 
Authority 
'to be' 
pubHp. 
·servants. 
Protec-
tiOD of 
action 
taken in 
nuod 
iaith. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to super-
sede the 
Aatbolity. 
10 
(e) dig or bore into sub-soil; 
(d) set out boundaries and intended lines of work; 
(e) mark such level boundaries and lines by placing marks and 
cutting trenches; or 
(f) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed: 5 
Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed 
court or garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent 
of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such occupier at least 
twenty.:four hcurs' notice in writing of his intention to do so. 
ZI. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate 10 
to the Chairm&n or any other member or to any officer of the Authority, 
subject ,to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in 
the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the 
powers under section 35) as it may deem necessary. 
30. All orders and decisions of. the Authority shall be authenticated 15 
by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by 
the Authority in thiR behalf and :'\11 other instruments executed by the 
Authority shalt he authenticated by the signature of ~m officer of the 
Authority authorised by the Authority in this behalf, 
31. All members, officers and other employees of the Authority shaD 20 
be deemed, when acting Or purporting to act in pUl'suance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, to be pubHc servants within the meaning of sec~ 
tion 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860. 
32. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings ~hall lie 
against the. Government or any officer of the Government or any member, 25 
officer or employee of thf' Authority for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations 
made thereunder. ' 
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Authority 
for any damage caused. or likely to be caused by anything in good faith 30 
done or purported to be done under this Act or the rules or regulationll, 
and in particular, it shall not be the responsibility of the Authority 
to provide for relief measures necessitated by floods' or by breaches and 
failures of. works. 
33. (1) If, at any time the Central Government is of opinion-
(a) that on aceount of a grave, emergency, the AuthOrity is 35 
un:lblf' to discharge the functions a~d dutieg imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act; or 
(b) that the Authority has perSistently made default in comply-
ing with any direct~on issued by the ~ntral Governmen~ under thi'll 40 
Act orin the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by 
or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of which default 
the financial position of the Authority or the administration of any 
national waterway has deteriorated; or 
(e) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the 45 
public interest so to do, 
the {'.entl'al Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette. 

11 
I1lpersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, .. 
may be specified in the notificatiun: 
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-aection for 
the reasons mentioned in clause (b). the Central Government shaU give 
5 a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause why it should 
hot be superseded' and shall consider the explanations and objections, if 
any, of the Authority. 
10 
15 
(2) Upon the pUblication of a notification under sub-section (1) 
superseding the Authority,-
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, 
vacate their offices aR such: 
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which tnay, by or under 
the prOvisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behaU 
of the Authority, shall, until the Authority is reconstituted under 
sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or 
persons as the Central Go~rnment may direct; 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Au,thority. shall, 
until the Authority is reconstituted under sub-section (.!), vest in 
the Central Government. 
20 (3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specifted in the 
notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may-
(a) extend the period of supers~sion for such further term, not 
exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary; or 
(b) reconstitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in 
25 such case ony persons who vacated their offices under clause (a) of 
sub-sectfon (2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment: 
Provided that the Centrnl ['TOvernment may, at any time before the 
expiration of the period of supersession, whether as Originally specified 
under sub-section (1) or as extended under this sub-section, take action 
30 under clause (b) of this sub-section. 
(4) The Central Government ShRl1 camle a notification iSRUed under 
sub-sertion (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section 
and the circumstances leadin~ to such action to be laid before such House 
of ParUr.ment at the earliest opportunity. 
35 34. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the p!lrposes of ihis Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the ~eneralitv of the foregoing power, such 
rule may provide for al,1 or any of the fonowing matters, namely:-
(a) the term of office and other conditions of service of the mem-
4.0 bers of the Authority unc1er sPC'tion 4; 
45 
'f 
(b) the powers and duties of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman 
under section 5; 
(e) the matters with .respect· to the Advisory Committee re-
ferred to in sub-section (1) of section 9; . 
Cd) the amount reqUired to be prescribed under sub-section (4) 
of section 14; 
(e) the form in which, and the time ~t which, the Authority 
shall prepare its budget under section 20 Rnd its annual report 
llT1~f'r section 22; 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

Power to 
blake 
regl..la-
\lona. 
12 
(f) the manner in which the Authority may invest its fundi 
under ser.tjon 21; 
(g) the manner in which the accounts of the Authority shall be 
maintained and audited under section 23; 
(h) the· conditions and restrictions with respect to exercise or 5 
the power to enter under section 28 and the matters referred to in 
clause (1) of that section; and 
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in 
respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules. 
35. (1) The Authority' may, \\ith the previous approval of the Central 10 
Government, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules generally to carry out the purposes 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following 15 
matters, namely:- ' C 
(a) the manner in which and the purposes for which, the Autho-
rity may a9Socia'te with itself any person under SUb-section (4) of 
section 3; 
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and 20 
other offtcers and employees of the Authority under sub-section (2) 
of section 8; 
(e) the contracts or class of contracts which are to be sealed 
with the common seal of the Authority and the form and manner in 
which a contract may be made by the Authority; 25 
Cd) the mann?r in which. and the conditions subiect to which, 
any functions in relation to the matters referred to in sub-sections (1) 
and (2) of section 14 may be pe.rformed; 
(e) the rule of the road on a national waterway; 
(f) the safe, efficient and convenient use, manag-ement and con- 30 
trol of the infrastructures and infrastructural facilities; 
(q) the reception, porterage, storal!'" and rem ova} of ~oods 
brought on ~ national waterway, and the procedu.t'? b be followed 
for taking charge of goods which may have been damaged before 
landing, or may be alleged to have been so damaged; 35 
(h) regulating, declaring and defininJ,l the docks, wharfs, jetties, 
1andin~ stages on which goods shall be landed from vessels and 
shipped on hOArd VP.RRP.hl: 
0) regulating ,the manner in which and the conditions under 
which the loading and unloading of vessels on a national waterway 40 
shall he cRlTied out; and 
H) the exclusion from a national waterway of di'Sorderly or 
other undesirable persons and of trespassers, 
(3) any regulation made under any of the clause~ (c\ to (1) of lIub-
sec:tton(2) may provide that a contravention thereof shall be puni~rableo 
with ftn~ which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the casp. of a 45 

13 
continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to 
twenty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues 
after conviction for the first such contravention. 
aG. EverY'rule and every· regulation made under this Act shall. be 
5 laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately, following the session or the succes-
sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
10 the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation 
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect. as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or re-
15 gulation. 
37. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the otr.cial 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the diftlculty: 
szo Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the ex-
piry of five years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
38. In the National Waterway (Allahabad-Haldia Stretch of the Ganga-
SZ5 Bhagirathi-Hooghly River) Act, 1982,-
(a.) in section 3 for the word'S "Central Government", the word 
IIUnion" shall be substituted, and for the words "to the extent here-
inafter provided", the words and figures "to the extent provided in 
the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985" shall be substi-
30 tuted; 
(b) sections 4 to 15 shall be omitted. 
Rules 
and relu-
laU",ns 
to be 
laid be-
fore 
Parlia-
ment 
POW"-'.u 
remove 
difficul-
ties. 
Amend. 
mentol 
Act. of 
1882. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Several committees set up by the Government of India have recom-
mended declaration of important navigable waterways as national water-
ways and acceleration of their development for promotion of inland 
water transport in view of its low cost and for securing certain other 
advantages such as energy efti.ciency, generation of employment among 
weaker sections of community nnd less pollution. 
2. The National Transportation Policy Committee has observed that 
the existing setup of Inland Water Transport Di.rectorate in the Minis-
try of Shipping and Transport is not geared to undertake and discharge 
the responsibility for proper' development of National Waterways as 
this is merely an advisory body without any powers to allocate funds 
for development schemes and their execution. To overcome this diffi-
culty tbe committee recommended settin up of an independent authority 
for the development, maintenance and .regulation of National Waterways. 
It is, therefore. proposed to set up an Inland Waterways Authority of 
India which would be an independent authority for the development, 
maintenance and regulation of National Waterways for shipping and 
navigation and also to organise studies and investigation on waterways 
under consideration for declaration as national waterways. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
Nzw DELHI; Z. R. ANSARI. 
The 9th August, 1985. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 (3) 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 38-IWT (2) 183-NW (iii), dated the 14th August, 
1985 from Shri Z. R. Ansari, Minister of State of the Ministry of Shipping 
and Transport to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]. 
The President" having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Inland Waterways Authority of India Bill, 1985, recommends under 
article 117 (3) of the Con'Stitution the consideration of the Bill by Lot 
Sabha. 
14 
,. 

Notes on clauses 
Cz4u.se 2 seeks to define certain words and expressions used in the 
Bill. 
Clause 3.-Sub-clause (1) provides fo~ constitution of the Inland 
Waterways Au1¥loI'ity of India from such date as may be specified by 
the Central Government by a notification. -
Sub-clause (2) makes such Authority a body corporate with powers 
to acquire property, etc. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that the Authority shall consist of a, Chairman, 
a Vice-Chairman and not more than five members. 
Sub-clause (4) empowers Lhe Authority to associate with it any person 
whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any Of the 
provh;~ons of the Bill. 
Clause 4 provides that the terms of office and other conditions of 
service of members of the Authority may be prescribed. 
Clause 5 lays down the powers and duties of the Chairman and the 
Vice-Chairman. 
Clause 6.-Sub-clause (1) empowers the Central Government to 
remove from the Authority any member on the grounds of refusal to act, 
incapacity or abuse of his office. 
Sub-clause (2) confe.rs power upon Central Government to suspend 
any member of the Authority pending an enquiry against him. 
Sub-clause (4) prohibits the reappOintment under the Autho-
rity of any member who has been removed under sub-ciause (1). 
Cla'use 7 provides that any vacancy, defect or irregularity in the 
constitution, appointment or procedure of the Authority shall not invali-
date the proceedings of the Authority. 
Clause 8 provides for the appointment of the Secretary, othe.r officers 
and employees of the Authority and their terms and conditions of service. 
Cta'use 9 empowe,rs the Authority to constitute Advisory Committees 
as may be necessary for performing its functions. 
Clause 10 provides that the Authority shall be guided by businew 
principles in the discharge of its functions. 
Clause 11 provides for transfer of assets and liabilities vested in the 
Central Government for the purpOses of Inland Water Transport 
Directorate on such day as may be appointed by the Central Government. 
The clause further provides that,-
(a) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts 
entered into by the Central Government in connection with the 
15 

J6 
Inland Water Transport Directorate shall ,be deemed to have been 
incurred or en1'ered into by or for the Authority; 
(b) all sums of money due to the Central Government in rela-
tion to Inland Water Transport Directorate shall be deemed to be 
due: to the Authority; 
(c) all suits or legal proceedings with respect to any ,matter in 
relation to Inland Water ·transport Directorate which have, _n or 
could have been instituted by or against the Central Government 
may be' instituted against the Authority; 
(d) every employee holding an office under the Central Govern-
ment mainly for or in connection with the affairs of the Inland Water 
'Transport lJirectorate' shall be treated as on deputation with the 
Authority and shall hold his office ,1 the Authority by the same 
tenure. and upon tbe ,qme terms. and conditions of service as 
respects remuneration, lea\'e, etc., and shall continue to do so until 
the Central Government recalls such employee or such employee is 
absorbed by the Authority; and 
(e) absorption of any employee by the Authority under this 
clause shall not entitle him to any compensation under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947). 
Clause 13 'Seeks to lay down the procedure for -execution of contracts 
on behalf of the Authority. 
Clause 14 lays down the functions of the Authority which, inter alia, 
include carrying out of surveys, conservancy, :measures, removal or 
alteration of any obstruction in the national waterways, providing the 
regulation of navigation on nationll waterways, ensure co-ordination of 
Inland Water Transport on, national waterways and advising the Central 
Gove.mment on matters relating to inland water transport, etc. This 
clause also anthorilres the Authority to formulateachemes. 
Clause 15 provides that tbe Authority shall not make any material 
change in the scheme approved under sub-clause (5) of claWle 14 without 
thf' priOI' approval uf the Central Government. 
CLa'use16 confers power on the Authority to fix maximum and mini-
mum rates for carriage of passengers and freight on national waterway. 
Clauses 17 to 24 contain usual provisions relating to levy and collection 
o( fees, grants and loans, funds, budget, investment of funds, annual 
report and llc('()Unts nnd audit of t~!·~~ Authority. 
Clau~~f> 2;10 pl'oyidf';; that .tlw Authority shall he hound hy any direc-
t.ions on . .qYestion~ :of policy O'S may be given to it by the Central Gov-
(~rnment f.ram time to time. 
ClaltSe 26 lays down that any land required by the Authority for 
discharging of its functions under this ·B11l shall be deemed to be needed 
for public purpose and such land may be acquired for the Authority 
under lhe provisions of the Lanrl Acquidtion Act, 1894 (1 of 1894). 

'7 
Clause 27 provides that the provisions of the Bill shall be in addition 
to the provisions of the Indian Port~ Act and the Major Port Trusts Act 
and shall not affect any jurisdiction. runetions, powers or dutie~ .required 
to be exercised by any ofticer or authority under those Acts. Likewise 
the provjsions of the Bill shall not affect the o\.)~tation of the Inland 
Vessels Act or any other Central Act or State or Provincial Act· in force 
immediately before the commencement' of' this Act with respect to 
shipping and navJgation on any national waterway. 
Clause 28 seeks to empower any person generally or specially &utho--
risedby the AuthOrity to enter, inspect, su.rvey or take levels of any land 
or premises necessary. for the purpose of this. Bill at all rea'Sonable time.t;. 
Clause 29 provides for delegation of powers and functions by the 
Chairman to any other member or any officer of the AU,thority. 
Clause 30 provides for authentication of orders of the Authority. 
Cla1k'lC? :n seeks to declare all members, officers and other emploYees 
of the' Authority Il!ol pl1hlie s~rvants when nctinIT or purporting to act in 
purslta1W(' of any of th;· rroviBion~ of the Bill. 
ClulI,s(! 3~ seeks to ~ive protection to any member, officer or employee 
of the Authority in respect of any thing done or intended to be done in 
good faith in pursuance of this Bill or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder. 
Clause 33 seeks to make provision for sup'arsession of the Authority 
in the circumstAn':!es stated therein and its reconstitution after such 
supersession. 
Clause 34 confers upon the Central Government power to make rules 
in respect of term of office and the other cond!tions of ,ervice. the form 
for preparing budget and annual report. establishment of fund-;, etc. 
Clause 35 confers powers on. Authority to m~ke, with the previpl1s 
approval of the Central Government. regulations generally to carry out 
the purposes of this Bill. 
Clttttse 36 provides laying of rules and regulations on the 'fable of 
ooth the- Houses of Parliament. 
Clause 37 seeks to empower the Central Government to remove any 
difficulty 'which may. arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. 
CM.use 38 seeks to amend the National Water'Nay (Allahabad-Halctia 
Stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River) Act, 198'.2. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 (1) of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Inland 
Waterways Authority of India. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the term 
of office and other conditions of service of the members of the Authority. 
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the Secretary and other officers of the 
Authority. Clause 9 of the Bill provide'.~ for the constitution of advisory 
committee for assisting the Author!ty. Clause 14 (1) I'lnd (2) of the Bill 
seeks to entrust the responsibility to reiU1ate and d~velop the national 
waterways for the purposes of sliipp'.n~ and navigation to the Inland 
Waterways Authority of India under the Central Government. ,Conse-
quently three distinct functions, !lamely, development, maintenance and 
regulation will devolve on the said Authority. The financial implications 
are indicated in the succeding paragraphs. 
2. Considering there is no orl',anil:;ed and sustained inland water 
tran!'Iport traffic llt present on the wRterwnvs :md bulk of the visualised 
traffic will be diverted traffic, on'y minimal infrastructural facilities are 
considered necessary. No e]aboratp mechanized handling facilities at 
the river terminals or sophisticat(>d river markinm:: are Rt pr~sent visua-
lised. To start with. only floating landing facilities at almo!'!t al1 the 
contemplated river terminal!':, with minimum shf'lre facPities like sheds, 
open storage facilities, road approach, water and el~ctric supply are 
proposed to be provided. Locations for terminl'11s in thf> nRtional water-
ways have been identified. It is not possible tn formu1afe an e~timate 
of capital investment in the entire lencth of th", natl""Rl waterwavl'. 
It is estimated that the expenditure with l'f'!S""ct tn the sl'Iio minimal 
infrastructural facilities will be of the order of R!'l. ~5 crores. This expen-
diture will be of a non-recurring natl1re. 
3. The order of annual r~curriT1ry, ('o~ts 'by wa" nf oev".'opmp'lt. main-
tenance and regUlation of the waterwav whkh has ~l:!'eady been de-
clared to be a nationa' w~terwav (,.f'. tho Ana'!vib:1~-R~lrh\ ~tretch of 
the Ganga-Bhl'lgirathi-Hoo!'-"hlv r;ver) ;ncluoinfT thf> exnenditure with 
reStlec~ to settlement of dic;pntf><; 11'''H~F>r ('lansp 14 (:n. thf' Ar~visory 
Committees !If't up und~.r ('la11e;p 19 (1' ::mr1 the P'X'T1pnoihm:' nn members 
nno the stliff un~-er clausp. 4 and R ano I ....... ,:ontin~p'''(''f'e; of thp Allt"oritv 
will initiallv R'Oprn'X'imatf' to about Fe; . ., ,..~n,.4"C;. Arlt'!5~;on"" f'~nf>n~iture 
would bf! in.volverl when. Parli'lment "('clarer! hv blW !'l'lV other wliterway 
to be It nRtinne' wllterwav hut. ~t. is '10" n,.,!:~~b''''' tn m~~p "1'1v ec;timate o~ 
4hp. pvnp.nt'!ituI"P w"i!"" wr",M hp ~m".,'vp~ 1lC; thn+ wnttlr1 r1p."pl'V~ unon 
thp ,..irt'l1,.."dAnrf''1 (i",..l11"P"" +h'" ''''''~'' ~nrl nth"..· fPAbl'1-'''\ with rm:nect 
+0 <:11(," wn+e",l'lv. 1'h,. "rn,,:~m'c: ,.,~ th,. ~;1' '~n T1nt. ;nVfl'w' nnv otl,P.T 
e~PM1rtltu1'P nf 11 1'eCumn!! or "II"In-r eMll"T';n,.,.,J'ltul'E!. 

• MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Inland Waterways Authority of 
India to fix rates for passenger fare and cargo freight on national water-
ways. 
Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to provide, among other matters, the term of office and other 
conditions of service of members of the Authority, powers and duties 
of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, the constitution of the Advisory 
Committees, the form in which the Authority may prepare its budget and 
Annual Report and maintain its accounts and the manner Of audit of 
accounts, the manner in which the Authority may invest its funds, and 
the conditions and restrictions with respect to the power to enter upon 
any land or premises. 
Clause 35 of the Bill confers power upon the Authority to make, with 
the previous approval of the Central Government, regulatiuns, inter 
al~4, regulating the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and 
other officers and employees of the Authority, the contracts or class of 
contracts which may be sealed with the common seal, the rule of the 
road on the national waterways, exclusion from the national waterways 
of disorderly and other undesired persons and trespassers. 
The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made 
are generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is 
hardly practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delega-
tion of legislative power is, therefore, normal in character. 
19 

Declara-
tion as to 
expedi-
ency of 
control by 
the Union 
of Ganga-
Bbagirathi-
Hooghly 
river 
for 
certain 
purposes. 
Defini-
tions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THJ NATIONAL WATERWAY (A.u.&HAB~JA STarcH 
OF THE GANGA-BHAGIRATHI-HOOGHLY RIVER) Ac:r. 1982 
(49 OF 1982) 
• • * • • 
3. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the pUblic interest that 
the Central Government should take under its control the regulat.ion and 
development of Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghl y river fpr purposes of shipping 
llndnavigation on the national waterw;:y to the extent hereinafter 
prOVided. 
4. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requirell,-
(a) "Advisory Committee" means an Advisory Committee 
constituted under section 8; 
(b) "appurtenant land" means all lands appurtenant: to the 
national waterway, whether demarcated or not; 
(c) "channel" means, any wate,rway, whether natural or artificial; 
(d) "conservancy" includes dredging, training, closure, diversion 
or abandoning channels; 
(e) "conservancy measures" mean'S measures for purposes of 
conservancy, but does not include measures for protection of banks 
against floods or for restoring banks which have become ero,ded 
mainly on account- of reasons not connected with shipping and 
navigation; 
(1) "infrastructure" includes structures such as docks, wharves. 
jetties, landing stages, locks, buoys, inland ports, cargo handling 
equipment, road and rail access and cargo storage spaces, and the 
expression "infrastructural facilities" 'Shall be construed accordingly; 
(g) "national waterway" means the waterway decla.red by section 
2 to he n national waterway; 
(It) "navigation chaf,lnel" means a channel navigable during the 
whole 01' a part of the' year; 
(i) "'presc.t'ibed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(j) "rules" means rules made by the Central Government under 
this Act. l-
110 

21 
5 (1) It shall be -the responsibility of the Central· Government to 
regul.te and de.velop the national .waterway and to secure the effioient 
.utilisation .of -the . waterway for shipping and navigation. 
(2) In particular and without pr~judice to the generality d.f the 
Jor~going .provision, the Central Government may-
lWiIponsi-
bility for 
reauIation 
.and de-
vewp-
rmentof 
national (a) carry out. surveys and investigations :Cor the development, 'water-
maintenance and better utilisation of the national waterway and the way, 
appurtenant . land for shipping and navigation, and prepare plans in 
this behalf; 
(b) make and op-an new navigable channels; 
(c) clear, widen, deepen or divert or otherwise improve the 
channels; 
(d) provide or permit setting up of infrastructural fac!lities; 
(e) carry out conservancy meaSU1'es and training works and do 
all other acts-neeassary for the safety and convenience of shipping 
and navigation and improvement of the national waterway; 
(f> control activities such as throwing rubbish, dumping or 
removal of material, in or from the bed of the national waterway 
and appurtenant land, in so far as they may affect, safe and -efficient 
shipping and navigation, maintenance of navigable channels, river 
training and conservancy measures; 
(g) remove or alter any obstruction or impediment in the 
national waterway an1 the appurtenant land which may impede the 
saf.e navigation or endanger safety of infrastructural facilities or 
conservancy measures where such obstruction or hnpediment has 
been lawfully made or has become lawful by reason of long conti-
nuance of such obstruction or imPediment or otherwi9'e, after making 
compeO'.ltion to person suffering d:.lmage by such removal or 
alteration; 
(h) prOVide far the regulation of navigation and traffic (inClud-
ing the rule of the road) on the national wat-arway; 
(i) regulate the construction or alteration of structures on, across 
or under the national waterway; 
(j) pe.rform such other fu~ctions as may be necessary to carry 
out the purposes of this Act. 
(3) Any dispute arising out of or concerning the compensation 
r~ferred to in clause (g) of sub-'section (2) shall be determined according 
to . the law relating to like disputes in the case of land required for public 
purpoleS, 

Rights 
etc., of 
Central 
Govern_ 
ment with 
respect 
to nation-
al water-
waY,lands 
and in-
frastrue-
tureap-
purtenant 
thereto. 
Applica-
tion, eae., 
ot 
certain 
laws. 
V. ~.L) '.i.\1l~ Lt:llt..I.'I!l \"iuveL'1l1Ucnt nUlY, U It cU!1.\i.l.Ue":1I 1~ llt:I.:t::iSW'y OJ: 
C;:XPt=Ul\:llL ",o~u ,",0 J,U.I. 1.!1e PUqJOdtlli U.l \'U.I./li .n.~L, lH'L·\.!CLUi:U'.I.y' 101' tb'C: 
pW'l'~t: 0.1. Ullictuu:gmg ll.S l'e.:opunSlLl!llty WlQtll' sec\..&OIl ~, .eXtU:Ci&e any 
.I U.I.'.I.lSWCLIOU, l'lGll~ 0.1. lJOwel' WILu ,l't:.:;ilecL \.0 looe na~~onl:U WGl.C:l'way 0.1: calli 
.I.i;UlU:i 01' :.nU'al>u.UCLU.l.~ appunenallL l..I.le.l.'eto WWC.l.l .It COUlu nave eA:el'C.l.lieu 
11 1m: 11(.L1.10Ua1 watw'way emu tne lanas ana mlrasttuCl.U!'tl appUl'\t:!llC.l.llL 
LUt:,L'tlLO nail oeen vel:il.eu 1n Yla1. Govenunent iJy \lUIi 8ub-l:ie~l..on. 
\2) 1f allY dispute al.'lses ali to wheth:c!I' any lanct ur 'Ii'Ll'UC.UCt: is Iii land 
01' lUln411i"'·UCl.U.l.'e appw. .. I.tl1liUlL to \.ne .na1.10nal wal.e,,'way, we (;ent.nu 
\.Jovt:.I.·llmell1. ana tlle o1.ilel' party or pa.rtles \0 \.ile UlIIipULe llinall enuea-
voW' ·~o l'eliolve ".De wspute IJY negoLlCltlOllS 01' cotlcllial.ioll m :ouch mcmner 
as may be prescl'ibed. 
\J) .i~01.w.ithstandmg any1.hing contaln\:!d in sub-seclion (2), if the 
Centred Government conSlilen:; Whether before :.nitiating action ior .resolv-
ing a dISPUlot! by negou .. uollS 01' ~oJlciliatlon or aL any stage aiter inll.lat-
ing sucn action, thaL loile ilispuie lS of SUe!l a nature that it is necessary 
or expedient. to refer H to al'klitration, the Cent.J:al Government shall, in 
such iOl'm and in such manner as may be prescribed, reler the matter in 
dispute to an arbitrator who shall be appointed by the Chief Ju-stice of 
India. • -. ,. ~ .. -".,., .. ~ ... 
(4) The arbit.rator may appomt two or more persons as alisessors to 
assist him in the proceedings b-eiore him. 
(5) The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the 
parties to the dispute and 'iOhall be given effect to by them. 
(6) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 shall apply to any arbitration 
und~r this section. 
7. (1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions 
of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and in particular nothing in this Act 
shall affect any jurisdiction, functions, powers or duties required to be 
exercised, per10rmed or discharged under the Major Port Trusts Act, 
1963 by the Board of Trustees for the major port of Calcutta or by any 
officer or authority in, or in relation to, the portion of the national water-
way falling within the limits of the said port. 
(2) Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of the Inland Vessels 
10 of 1940. 
3M of 1963, 
Act, 1917 or any other Central Act (other than the Major Port Trusts 1 of 1917. 
Act, 1963) or any State or Provincial Act in force immediately before 38 of 1963 
the commencement of this Act with respect to shipping and navigation 
on the waterway declared by section 2 to be a national waterway but any 
jurisdiction, functions, powers or duties required to be exercised, perform-
ed or discharged by a State Government,or any officer o.r authority su~-
dinate to a State Government,. under any such Act in so far as such 
jurisdiction, functions, p'owers or duties relates or relate to shipping and 
navigation on the said waterway or any matte.r incidental thereto or other-
wise connected therewith, shall after such commencement be exercised, 
performed or discharged by the Central Government. 
(3) The Centul Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any jurisdiction, functions, powers or duties which it 
may exercise, perform . or discharge by virtue of tHe provisions ofaub-
• 

section (2) under any Act referred to in that sub-section shall, subject to 
such conditio.ns, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised, 
perfo.nned or discharged. also by-
(4) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Govern-
ment, or 
(b) such State Government or offi~r or authority subordinate to 
a State Government, 
as may be specified in the notificafliOll. 
8. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Cont.ral Govern-
ment may from time to time CODItitute one or more Advisory Committees 
to advise the Central Government on matters concerning the administra-
tion of this Act. 
(2) The AdVisory Committee or the Advisory Committees referred to 
in sub-section (1) shall consist of such number of persons to repra'Sent the 
interests connected with shipping and navigation and allied aspects as the 
Central Government may deem fit. 
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, levy fees at such rates as may be laid down bY' rules made in this 
behalf :£or services or benefits rendered in relation to the use of the national 
waterway for the purposes of navigation, infrastructural facilities, includ-
ing facilities for passengers and faciliti·es relating to berthing of vessels, 
handling of cargoes and storage of cargoes. 
(2) The fees levied under sub-section (1) shall be collected in 'Such 
manner as may be prescrib-ed. 
10. Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any officer subordinate to 
the Central Government Or to a State, Government or to any authority 
subordinate to the Central Government or a State Government who is 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in 
purposes of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or pre-
mises and-
(a) make any inspection, survey, meaSU1'ement, valuation or 
inquiry, 
(b) take levels, 
(c) dig or bore into sub-soil, 
(d) set out boundaries and intended lines of work, 
(e) mark such level boundaries and lines by placing marks and 
cutting trenches, or 
(f) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no such officer shall enter any building or any enclosed 
court or garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent 
of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such occupier at least 
twenty-four hours' notice in writing of his intention to do so. 
Fees for 
lenice. 
ot"... 
fits reo-
deredin 
the 
naional 
water-
way. 
Power to 
enter. 

Penalties. 
Power to 
delegate. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
in gOOd 
faith. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
11. Whoever-
(a) destroys, pulls down, removes, injures or defaces any pillar, 
"Post or stake or marks fixed on the national waterway and the 
appurtenant land, or any notice or other matter put up, inscribed or 
placed under this Act, or 
(b) obstructs any person from exercising his powers .and per-
forming his functions under this Act, or 
(c) damages any works or property belonging to the Centr"l 
Government, or 
(d) fails to furnish any information required for the purposes of 
this Act, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or 
with both. 
l2'. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any function, power (except the powers under sec-
tions 14 and 15) or duty which it may perform, exercise or discharge 
under this Act shall, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be speci-
fied in the notification, be performed, exercised or discharged also by-
(a) such officer of authority subordinate to the Central Govern-
ment, or 
(b) such State Government or officer or authority subordinate 
to a State Government, 
as may be specified in the notification. 
13. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or a State Government or an authority SUbordinate 
to such Government or an officer subordinate to such Government or 
authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
dOne in pursuance of the provisions of this Act. 
14'- (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, m~ke rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may prov.ide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to whiCh, 
any function in relation to the matters referred to in section 5 may 
be performed; 
(b) the rule of the road on the national waterway; 
(c) the safe, efficient and conveni~nt use, management and con-
trol of the infrastructures and infrastructural facilities; 
(d) the reception; porterage, storage and .removal of goods 
brought on the national waterway, and the procedure to be followed 
for taking charge of goods which may have been damaged before 
landing, or may be alleged to have been so damaged; . 
(e) regulating, declaring and defining the docks, wharves, jetties, 
landing 'Stages on which goods shall be landed from vessels and 
shipped on board vessels; 

25 
(1) regulating the manner in which, and the conditions under 
which, the loading and unloading of vessels on the national waterway 
shall be carried out; 
(g) the exclusion from the national waterway of disorde.rly or 
other undesirable persons and of trespassers; . 
(h) the manner in which the Central Government shall endea-
vour to resolve, under sub-section (2) of section 6, the disputes 
referred to therein, the form and manner in which such disputes may 
be referred, under sub-section (3) of that section to arbitration and 
the procedure to be followed in such arbitration proceedings; 
·(i) the composition of the Advisory Committees, the term of 
office of members of such committees, the allowances, if any. payable 
to them, and the manner in which the Advisory Committees shall 
conduct their business;-
(j) the rates at which fees for services and benefits referted to in 
section 9 may be levie'd and the manner in which such fees· shall be 
collected; 
(k) the conditions and restrictions with respect to the exercise 
of the power to enter under section 10 and the matters referred to 
in clause <I) of that section; 
(l) the periodical inspection of the national waterway and the 
submission of the inspection reports to the Central Government; 
(m) the reports on works carried out on the national waterway; 
.(n) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in 
respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules. 
(3) Any rules made under this Act may pra.vide that a breach the.reof 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees 
and where the breach is a continuing one with further fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees for every day after the first during which 
such breach continues. 
(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more succ~ssive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houes agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be ot no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however. that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 
15. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving affect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order pUblished in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as Jloon as may 
be. after it is made; before each House of Parliament . 
• • • • • 
Removal 
of diffi-
culties. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of an authority for the regulation and 
development of inland wate.rways for purposes of shipping and navi-
gation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Z. R. AnsAri, 
Minwter of. StAte of the 
MimBtry of ShiPiMg And 
Transport) 