As INTRODUCED IN LoK SARIA ON 
:;' ; 
. ~ '-.6 l~, ~q 
(.~ /0 
.1 
Bill No. 1:Q oil J,t81 
THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND 
PlUVILEGES) BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
" 
to . determine t'h,e emQluments, allowances and privileges of Governors. 
13. it eQActe" by Parliament in the Tb,J.rty-second Year 01 the Republic 
of 1ndtl& as fOttOwa:- Short 
1. (1) ThIs Act may be called the Governors (Emoluments, Allow.. title, ex-
aacat and PrtvUegea) Act, 1981. tent . . and com-
5 (,I) It utendi to the whole of India except the State of Jarrunuand mence-
Kubmir. ment. 
10 
IS 
(3) It shan come into force on such ~e as the Central Government 
may, by notifietlti6n' in the ~ial Gazette, appoint. 
Deftnl-I. In tbfJ Act, unleu the context otherwise requires,- tiODB. 
(4) "Govemor" means the Governor, or any person discharging 
tHe fUnctions of the Governor, of any State or of two or more States; 
. (b) "maintenance" ,-
I; . (i) in relation to official residences, includ.es the provision 
!l, .. ~; \ f 1 thoIMt11t rt.. and water· k;.~~ 0 e,ec._&.T/I.- , 
(ii) in relation to motor vehicles, includt!s the pay and 
aUoWiID'CII' atchWfttunt and t1ieprovtsion of oU and petrol or 
otIllJ' fuel; " " . . 

~.a.' ~ ! 
:,~ : . (c) "members of the family", in relation to a Governor, means 
the spouse and the dependent children ot the Governor; 
Emolu-
meJ\ts. 
Leave 
allow-
auee. 
Use, and 
mainten-
ance of 
ofBdal 
resl-
deJl.ef\ •. 
House-
hOld 
eatablillh-
~t. 
(d) "official residences", in relation to a Governor, means such 
residences as may be specifieci by the President. by noti1lcatioD in 
the Official Gazette, as the offlcial residences of the Governor and 5 
includes the staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto 
and the iarderw thereof j 
(e) "rules" means rules made under thi$ Act; 
(1) "State" does not include a. Union territory. 
3. There shall be paid to every Governor emoluments at the rate of 10 
rupees five thousand five hundred' per mensem: 
Provided that if a Governor at the time of his appointment;7" 
(a) is in receipt of a pension (other than disability or wound 
pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government 
of India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the Govern-
ment of a State or any of its predecessor Governments his emolu- 15 
ments shall be reduced,,-
(i) by the amount of that pension; and 
(ii) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of 
a portion of the pension due to him in respect of such previous 20 
service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of th8t 
, 'portion of the pension; and 
(iii) if he has, before such appointment, received a retire-
ment gratuity in respect of such previous service, by the pen-
sion equivalent of that gratuity; or 25 
(b) is in receipt of any' benefit by way of contributory provident 
fund, his emoluments shall be reduced by the pension~uivalent of 
such . benefi t. . 
~. (1) Subject to anY' rules made in: this behalf~ the President shall 
grant such leave to a Governor as he may consider necessary. 30 
(2) Wh~re a Governor is granted leave by the President, he shall, 
during the period of such leave, be paid leave allowance at such rate 
as the President may by order determine: 
Provided that such le.ave allowance shall be reduced to the exteDt, 
if any, to which the emohimentl of the ~vernor ~ liabl. to b. reduced 35 
under the proviso to section 3. . 
-
5. A Governor shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to the un 
of his offiCial residences throughout his tenn of oftice and no icharge shall: 
fallon the Governor personally in respect of the furnishing' or the 
maintenance of such residences. 
6. Subject to 'any rules made:.in tlUs bthal(no·~h.rke .shall fallon 
a Governor personally in respect ot pay ~ ~owanceA or pension or 
other emoluments paid. to, or facWti~ IfOvi~ ,.r'l tl)e memben of 
the household establishment 'provided to the ·G~v.rnor. ..: . i 
'j" , 
~ ~' . J 
40 

~ 
Medica;\, 
treat-
ment. 
7. Subject to any rul~s made in this behalf, a Governor and the mem-
bers o~ his family shall be entitled during the term of his office and 
thereafter also, to free mectical attendance, accommodation and treat-
ment in the, hospitals maintained by the Central Government or the 
5 Government of any State. 
8. (1) A Governor shall be entitled to use without payment of rent Convey-
or hire, such number of m0tor vehicles as the President may by order anee. 
determine. . 
(2) No charge shall fan on a Governor personally in respect of the 
10 maintenance of the motor vehicles referred to in sub-section (1). 
(3) The use of the motor vehicles referred to in sub-section (1) by 
the members of the family' of a Governor shall be regulated by rules 
made in this behalf. 
9. Subject to 'any rules made in this behalf, a Go~ernor shall 
15 entitled 'to' travelling 'allowance for himself and the members of 
family a~d fox: the transport of his anrl his family's effects-
be Travel-
his ain, 
lI11ow-
anceon 
auump-
tion or 
vacation 
of oftke. 
20 
'(a) in respect of the journey for assuming office from'the place 
where he is ordinarily residing to the place of his duty; and 
(b) in respect of the journey on relinquishing office from the 
place of his duty to the place where he would ordinarily reside 
thereafter or if he is to take up any other office under the Govern-
ment (including the office of the Governor of another State) after 
such relinquishment, to the place of duty with respect to such other 
office. 
25 10. Subject to any rules made in this behalf, a Governor shall be 
entitled to such allowances for renewing the furnis~ings and for the 
maintenance 'of the official residences, as the President may by. order 
Allow-
determine. 
ances for 
renew-
ing furni-
shings and 
for . lL For the purpose of enabling a Governor to discharge convenient- main ten-
30 ly and with dignity the duties of his office, he shall be,- ance of 
35 
official 
,(i) entitled to such other privileges as may be prescribed by residences, 
rules made in this behalf, and Other 
(ii) p~id, subject to any rules made.in this behalf, such amount, 
as the' President may, by general or special order. determine by 
, way of the following, namely:-
, '(0) entertainment allowance; 
(b) hospitality grant; 
,(c) household establishment expenses; 
'(d) office expenr:;p.s; 
privileges 
and 
allow· 
ances. 
40 ,(e) contract allowance, i.e., an allowance for miscellaneous 
ex~; 
• (t). tour' expenses; and 
..... , 
(g) such other allowances or expenses as may be provided for 
by rules. 

,). \' .. ; 
\', .-
Addi-
tional 
expeDHlc 
PoWer to 
make 
rut.. 
4 
12. (1) Where, in the case of any Governor, the President is aaUaAed 
that the amopnt authorised under .this Act by way of any allaweneeior 
for meeting" any expenses with respect to any matterreq~to ,be iJI-
creased or that a need has arisen to sanction expenses :with res~ to 
any matter for which provision, though permlssibl~, _ nqt ~ made 5 
in the rules made under this Act, he may by special order increase such 
amount or sanction such expenses to such ex'tent as may be specified in 
s~ch order. 1'-
(2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) so as to h.ave 
retrospective effert. 10 
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as 800ft 
as maybe after it is made, before both Houses of Parliament. 
13 .. (1) The President may; by notification in .the Oflci~ e ..... , 
make rules for the purpose of giving eflect to the pr0\9.BioDtl .Qfttdl;N:t. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- 15 
IO'Ingpower, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(0) grant of leave to a Governor under section 4; 
(b) matters relating to' the household establishment pl'ovided 
to a Governor under section 6; 
(c) medical attendance, accommodation and treatment of a 
Governor and the members of his family under section 7; 
(d) the use of motor vehicles by the :members of tbe ·ftUnl1y 
of a Governor under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
go 
(e) the travelling allowance on assumption or vacation of dftlce 25 
of a Governor under section 9; 
(f) allowances for renewing the furnishings and for the mail)- 'J 
tenance of the official residences under section 10; 
(g) the privileges to which a Gove;n;lor is entitled -.nd *e al-
lowances or expenses payable to a Governor under sec.tiQll 11. 
(J) Every rule made by the President under tthis Act sh8ll be 1a1d, 
30 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of farlia,:plnt, 
while it is in session, for a total p'eriod of thirty days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessioni, anti if; 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the .... iOll or 35 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in tbe rule or . both 'House8 agree that the rule moUld not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified· fOrm 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, tb.at any ~ UWdi-
ftcation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing prevlo~ly ~one under that rule. 4° 

5 
14. (1) Every special order issued, before the commencement of this " "d 
Act, by the President in regard to the allowances, expenseJ (induding ti:~ ... 
medical expenses) or privileges of any Governor (other than the Gov. 
ernor of Nagaland) sball, 'DDtwithstantltll,g,that Buchor4er was mad£: with 
5 retrospective effect, or is inconsistent with any general order iswed 
under 1mylaw rib ~ io 1ho1e Duttt4!rs, 'be as valid and tmective 
as if 8uchspeciat '01'der f6rmed 'part of this 1Sub-:section and 'this sUb-
section ba'd ,been lin 'force art alIma:terial ,times. 
(2) Every general or special order issued, before the commeacemen.t 
10 of thif: Act, by the Presidoot in regard to the allowances, expenses {-i.-
eluding medical expenses) or privileges ot the Governor of Nagalanci 
shall, notwithstanding that .such order was made with retrospectiYe 
effe~,be as valid and effective as if it formed part ol this sub-section 
and this sub-section had been in force at all material times. 
15 11. lIotbing coutained 'ill itilis Act or the TUles made thereunder shall SavlD.J, 
have .etJeet 'So as to ldimibisn 'the ·emolmntmts and tfnowancesof any 
GoVerDOl' dmliJtg 1btB tel'lll .fit 'O'ftice. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Clause (3) of article 158 of the Constitution provides that a Govemor 
shall be entitled to su~h emoluments, allowances and privileges as may 
be determined by Parliament byiaw and until proV'isionin that behalf 
is so made, such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified, 
in the Second Schedule to the Constitution. Under this Schedule the 
Governor· is entitled to emoluments of rupees 5,500 per mensem, whilst 
the allowances and privileges of the Governor are to be the same as those 
admissible to the Governors of the corresponding provinces before the 
commencement of' the Constitution. 
2. In the absence of any law enacted by Parliarnent, the allowances 
and privileges of the Governors were first regulated under' the Govern-
ment of India (Governors' Allowances and Privi1e~s) Order' (hereinafter 
referred to as GAP Order) 1950, made on the 10th January, 1950. There-
after, similar orders were issued from time to time in the wake of the 
reorganisation of States. 
3. These GAP Orders, in many respects have become obsolete and 
even anachrOnistic. Moreover, the GAP Order of 1950, which relates to 
the States of Uttar Prauesh, West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa and Assam can 
be amended only through a legislation by Parliament, as it had been 
issued before the commencement of the Constitution. The Bill seeks to 
replace the existing GAP Orders by a comprehensive legislation as en-
visaged in clause (3) of article 158 of the Constitution. This would en-
able the reflxation of the ceilings on expenditure on Raj Bhavans keeping 
in view the necessity to maintain the dignity of the office of the Governor 
and at the same time, to make them more realisti<! in the light of the 
present' day situation. . It may also be mentioned that over the years in 
several cases, on account of the increase in prices, it had become im-
possible to restrict the expenditure within the limits prescribed under the 
GAP Orders, particularly those of 1950 and 1957, and additional expendi-
ture had, therefore, to be inCurred on the Raj Bhavans. Further, the 
GAP Orders did not provide for expenditure on medical treatment of the 
Governors and additional expenditure had also to be incurred on this 
ground also. The President had, therefore, to issue orders for regularis-
ing such additional expenditure. It is proposed to avail of the present 
opportunity to include a suitable validating provision. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above o.bjects. 
ZAIL SINGH. 
NEW Da.m; 
The 11th Decem,be r, 1981, 
-, -, , 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to empower the President to sanction by a 
special order (which may be made with retrospective effect) additional 
expenses of the nature mentioned therein. In the light of the working of 
the existing Government of India (Governors' Allowances and Privileges) 
Orders, it is considered necessary to make a provision for special orders 
to ccvercontingencies and situations of an exceptional nature wherein it 
might become unavoida~ly necessary for a Governor to incur expendi-
ture in excess of that provided in the rules or to incur expenditure with 
respect to a matter which could have been, but which has not actually 
been, provided for in the rules. Provision has been made in the clause 
for the laying of the order~ thereunder before both Houses of Parlia-
ment. The delegation of power UIIlder the clause may not be of the 
normal nature, but is necessary to meet exceptional contingencies and 
situations. 
2. Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the President to make rules for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act. Sub-clause (2) of 
that clause specifies the matters in respect of which rules may be made 
under this clause. These relate to matters relating to the. household 
establishment of the Governor, medical attendance and "treatment of the 
Governor and the members of his family, the use of motor vehicles by 
the members of the family of the Governor, travelling allowance on 
assumption or vacation of office, allowance for renewing the furnishings 
and for maintenance of the official residences, privileges to which the 
Governor is entitled and the allowances or expenses payable to the Gov-
ernor. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are of ad-
ministrative detail and procedure, and as such; the delegation 0'1 legis-
lative power is of a normal character. 

A 
BILL 
, 
tQ determine the emQluments, aUawances and privil~ -of Governors. 
($ia~i Zail Singh, Minilter of Home AI"fr'.) 