Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 163 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
 Sඁඋං Jൺ඀ൽൺආൻං඄ൺ Pൺඅ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, the existing entries 7 to 22 shall be 
re-numbered as entries from 8 to 23, respectively, and before entry 8 as so re-numbered, the 
following entry shall be inserted, namely:
     “7. Indian Sign Language.”.
Short title.
Amendment 
of the Eighth 
Schedule.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
For the Deaf and mute community, sign language is not simply a means of communication 
it is crucial for securing basic rights and it is a part of belonging to a community. While the 
estimates of Deaf and mute community in India vary from 1.3 million to 18 million. Measured 
conservatively, the World Health Organisation estimates around 6.3 million people in India 
have complete or partial hearing disability. However, of these, less than 2% are believed to 
have been formally trained in the use of Indian sign language. As a consequence, Indian sign 
language has been declared “potentially vulnerable” by UNESCO.
Indian sign language has been an endeavour at bringing standardization in the way 
the deaf and mute population communicates in India. To this end, commendable initiatives 
have been taken. Indian Sign Language Research and Training Centre was established 
as the pivot institution to promote the use of Indian Sign Language. It created an Indian 
sign language dictionary which presently accounts for around 10,000 words drawing from 
the vocabulary of deaf community around the country. National Education Policy, 2020 
intends to formalize and promote the use of ISL. As a consequence, NCERT has initiated 
the inclusion of ISL in the mainstream educational content. 
However, accessibility and availability of quality content, lack of opportunities in 
professional education in Indian sign language continue to be the primary impediment in 
the empowerment of the community. A formal constitutional recognition by bringing Indian 
sign language under the Eighth schedule will go a long way in the empowerment of deaf 
and mute community. At the same time mainstreaming of ISL will also aid the rest of the 
population's taking up ISL enabling them to interact with the deaf community. Once the 
language gets officially recognized, the coming up of enabling infrastructure becomes easier. 
The proposed constitutional amendment will also aid the proper implementation of 
section 16 of the “Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016” that entrusts upon the 
State to create enabling conditions for the deaf community to access education. Bringing 
Indian sign language under the Eighth Schedule will ensure the access to fundamental rights 
including Right to Freedom of Speech and Expression under article 19, Right to equality 
under article 14, right to life and liberty under article 21 and ensure dignity for the deaf 
community in India. 
The Convention on the Rights of the Persons with Disabilities to which India is a 
party, makes it clear that the recognised sign language has equal status as any other spoken 
language. Hence, this bill will also be in line with India’s commitment to the international 
convention. 
It will help to foster a sense of belonging for the community and promote inclusivity, 
linguistic diversity, educational and employment opportunities, access to information and 
services and strengthen the identity and cultural heritage of the deaf community in India. 
Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                           JAGDAMBIKA PAL
November 11,  2024.

ANNEXURE 
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ]
Eං඀ඁඍඁ  Sർඁൾൽඎඅൾ
LANGUAGES
 *     *          *                *                 *
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
 *     *          *                *                 *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)