1
THE VEHICULAR POLLUTION REDUCTION BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BAIJAYANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for incentives to State Governments and Municipal Corporations to take
effective steps towards reduction of vehicular pollution in urban areas.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the V ehicular Pollution Reduction Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the V ehicular Pollution Regulation and Assessment
Authority constituted under section 6;
(b) "Carpool-only lane" means a lane of a road that is exclusively reserved for
the use of powered vehicles carrying a minimum of four passengers including the
driver, or, in the case of motorcycles, a minimum of two passengers including the
driver;
(c) “Eligible vehicle” means a powered vehicle intended to be used on roads
and which meets any of the following descriptions,—
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 163 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
(i) an electric vehicle, that is, a vehicle that is powered entirely by electric
power stored in a battery which is recharged through an electrical outlet;
(ii) a hybrid vehicle, that is, a vehicle that is a partly powered through
battery power and partly through an internal combustion engine;
(iii) a plug-in hybrid vehicle, that is, a vehicle that can be powered in the
same way as a hybrid vehicle, and through electric power stored in a battery
which is recharged through an electrical outlet;
(iv) a fuel cell vehicle, that is, a vehicle powered by an engine where the
only byproduct that is produced is water;
(v) a natural gas vehicle, that is, vehicle that is powered by compressed
natural gas or liquefied natural gas;
(vi) a biofuel vehicle, that is, a vehicle that is powered by biofuels:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
lay down requirements, including technical specifications, minimum or maximum engine
capacity, engine efficiency or composition of fuel emissions, for any of the above
description, fulfillment of which shall be necessary for a vehicle to fall within the
meaning of eligible vehicle; and
(d) "traffic signal synchronization" means the traffic engineering technique
where traffic signals are designed, monitored and operated in order to coordinate the
times taken for signals to change for a series of roads and junctions, so as to minimise
stops and delays for vehicles.
3.  Any Municipal Corporation shall be entitled to receive from the Central
Government a grant of one hundred crore rupees or of such higher amount, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette specify, if it satisfies and five of the
following eight conditions,—
(a) there is a system for collecting a fixed daily fee as congestion fee from
vehicles that enter congested areas within the municipality;
(b) the Municipal Corporation has introduced carpool-only lanes on major roads
in the municipal area;
(c) the Municipal Corporation provides rebates to residents of the municipal
area for purchase of eligible vehicles;
(d) the Municipal Corporation provides free electric recharging facilities for
cars to residents of the municipal area;
(e) there is a system which bars entry into the municipality area of vehicles
older than ten years;
(f) the Municipal Corporation has implemented a system of traffic signal
synchronization within the municipal area;
(g) the Municipal Corporation provides the following benefits to eligible
vehicles—
(i) permit eligible vehicles to use carpool-only lanes irrespective of the
number of occupants of the vehicle; and
(ii) exempt eligible vehicles from parking fee at public parking facilities in
the municipal area; and
(h) the Municipal Corporation provides the following benefits to owners of
eligible vehicles,—
(i) full or partial waiver of fees, charges or other types of dues taken by
the municipal corporation from the user of vehicles;
Conditions
for a
Municipal
Corporation
to receive
grant.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) full or partial waiver of toll fee at toll fee collection points under the
administrative control of the municipal corporation; and
(iii) credits for expenses on the fuel for eligible vehicles that can be set-
off against fees, charges or other types of dues taken by municipal corporation.
4. A State Government shall be entitled to receive from the Central Government a
grant of three hundred crore rupees or of such higher amount, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette specify, if that State Government satisfies any
two of the following conditions,—
(a) impose an additional penalty on all vehicles which do not fall within the
category of eligible vehicles.
(b) exempt eligible vehicles from the requirement of registration in the State
after relocation in that State if such eligible vehicles have previously been registered
in any other State;
(c) adopt policies which require persons working in private or Government
offices, organizations, agencies or businesses in the State to work from home for
atleast one working day every week.
5.  A State Government shall be entitled to receive from the Central Government a
grant of five hundred crore rupees or of such higher amount, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette specifies, if—
(a) the State has five or less Municipal Corporations and all Municipal
Corporations within the State are eligible to receive grant under section 3; or
(b) the State has more than five but not more than twenty Municipal Corporations
and not less than three-fourths of all the Municipal Corporation within the State are
eligible to receive grant under section 3; or
(c) the State has more than twenty Municipal Corporations and not less than
one-half of all Municipal Corporations within the State are eligible to receive grant
under section 3.
6. (1) The  Central Government shall, within one month of the coming into force of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the
Vehicular Pollution Regulation and Assessment Authority.
(2) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and representatives from the Union
Ministries of Finance, Road Transport and Highways and the Environment, Forests and
Climate Change, to be appointed by Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services of Chairperson
and other members of the Authority shall be such as may prescribed.
7. (1) The Authority shall determine whether a Municipal Corporation or a State
Government satisfies the conditions laid down under sections 3, 4 and 5.
(2) The decision of the Authority under sub-section (1) shall be final.
(3) While making a determination under sub-section (1), the Authority shall take into
consideration the steps taken by a Municipal Corporation or a State Government towards
achieving the intended objectives behind each of the conditions mentioned in sections 3, 4
and 5.
8. (1) The Authority may, from time to time, issue specifications, for each of the
conditions mentioned in sections 3, 4, and 5.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision,  the Authority shall
have the power to—
(a) prescribe parameters for identifying congested areas in a municipal
corporation;
Conditions for
a State
Government
to receive
grant.
Grant for
State
Government
achieving
state-wide
compliance
with
conditions.
The Vehicular
Pollution
Regulation and
Assessment
Authority.
Authority to
determine
satisfaction of
conditions.
Power of the
Authority to
issue
specifications.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(b) prescribe parameters for fixing congestion fee to be levied by a municipal
corporation;
(c) demarcate roads for carpool-only lanes;
(d) prescribed the minimum rate of rebate to be given to the owners for purchasing
eligible vehicles;
(e) prescribe performance parameters for traffic signal synchronization;
(f) prescribe the minimum rate of waiver in fees, charges or other types of dues to
the municipal corporation to be given to the owners of eligible vehicles; and
(g) prescribe the minimum additional cost to be realised by way of the imposition
of any additional penalty on all vehicles other than eligible vehicles.
(3) A specification issued under sub-section (2) shall not be modified or revoked till
the completion of a period of one year from the date of issue of specification:
Provided that the Authority shall have no restrictions on issuing specifications on other
aspects during such time.
9. (1) Every State Government  and Municipal Corporation shall have the right to
submit their proposal of steps to be taken to the Authority for an advance determination of
whether such steps, if implemented, would satisfy the conditions laid down in sections
3, 4 or 5.
(2) The Authority shall provide such an advance determination within three months of
receiving the proposal from the State Government or the Municipal Corporation.
(3) For the purpose of becoming eligible for the grants specified in sections 3,4 or 5,
obtaining of an advance determination shall not affect the requirement of obtaining a
determination under section 7.
10. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person in respect of anything
which is in good faith done, or intended to be done, under or in pursuance of the provisions
of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Advance
determination
of proposal.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
V ehicular pollution is one of the biggest crisis that is unfolding in our country today.
Rapid urbanisation and the lack of adequate city planning for a long time have together
contributed to a situation where large numbers of pollution-spewing  cars clog our roads,
putting the health of our citizens under siege. Further complicating the situation is the fact
that many laws and regulations that apply to the use of vehicles are made at the State and
local Government levels, thus providing for a diverse array of disparate interests. The situation
calls for drastic but co-ordinated action.
This Bill seeks to streamline the interests of municipal corporations, State Governments
and the Central Government when it comes to taking steps towards reducing vehicular
pollution. It provides a mechanism where the Municipal Corporation and State Government
can become eligible for financial grants if they undertake efforts towards curbing vehicular
pollution within their jurisdiction. While incidental benefits such as a reduction in road
congestion may also result on enactment of this Bill. The need is to take concerted effort to
act against the menace of pollution caused by vehicles.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
May 5, 2016.

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for providing grants to municipal corporations by the
Central Government on fulfillment of certain conditions regarding reduction of vehicular
pollution. Clause 4 provides for grants to the State Governments by the Central Government
on fulfillment of certain conditions regarding reduction of vehicular pollution. Clause 5
provides for grants to the State Governments by the Central Government for achieving State-
wide compliance with conditions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of the Vehicular Pollution
Reduction Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees one thousand crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crores is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for incentives to State Governments and Municipal Corporations to take
effective steps towards reduction of vehicular pollution in urban areas.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1389LS(S3)—11-07-2016.