1
THE COMMERCIAL CROP WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for commercial crop workers
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Commercial Crop  Workers (Welfare)  Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) "commercial crop" includes rubber, coffee, tea, cashew, spices, cardamom
and such other crops as the Central Government may notify under section 4;
(iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
Short title
and extent.
Bill No.  163  of  2014
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(iv) "commercial crop worker" means any person engaged in any work relating
to commercial crop including its cultivation and harvesting and who receives wages,
either in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind, for that work.
3. The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities to the commercial
crop workers:—
(i)  dwelling units of reasonable area at subsidized cost;
(ii) water, electricity connection and such other basic amenities, as may be
prescribed, at subsidized rates;
(iii) old age pension after completing sixty years of age at the rate of rupees
three thousand per month;
(iv) disability allowance at the rate of rupees three thousand per month in case
a worker becomes incapacitated during the work;
(v) free healthcare facilities to workers and their families;
(vi) free educational facilities to the children of the workers upto twelfth
standard; and
(vii) free life insurance cover of rupees one lakh to cover cases of death or
permanent physical disability of workers.
4. The Central Government may, in consultation with concerned State Government,
notify a crop as a commercial crop in that State for the purposes of this Act.
5.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
6.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made,  the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Facilities to
workers.
Central
Government
to notify a
commercial
crop.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
Provisions of
the Act to be
in addition to
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A large number of workers engaged in commercial crops sector toil  hard  for long
hours for abundant growth of commercial crops. However, their living conditions are
miserable and there is no scheme for their welfare. It is, therefore, essential that steps are
taken for improvement of their living conditions by enacting an appropriate law aimed at their
overall welfare.
It is, accordingly, proposed to provide certain basic facilities to commercial crops
workers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
November 12, 2014.
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide certain
facilities to the commercial crop workers. Clause 5 provides for payment of adequate funds to
the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act. While some of the expenditure shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Funds of  the respective States, the Central Government shall
also provide adequate funds to the States for the purposes of this Bill. Moreover, the
expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India.  It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for commercial crop workers
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2875LS(S3)—03-12-2014.