1
THE TODDY INDUSTRY WORKERS WELFARE BILL, 2016
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of toddy industry workers and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Toddy Industry Workers Welfare Act, 2016.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 164  of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Board" means the Toddy Industry Workers Welfare Board constituted
under section 4;
(b) "employer" means by person who employs, whether directly or through
another person, or whether on behalf of himself or any other person, one or more
employees and who has a license for the manufacture, distribution, transport, storage
or sale of toddy;
(c) "excise tree" includes the trees of mohwa, coconut, palm, palmyra, date,
bagani, sago, sendhi or any tree of the species of palm or palmyra, from the fermented
or unfermented juice of which toddy can be prepared;
(d) "Fund" means the Toddy Workers Welfare Fund constituted under section 3;
(e) "manufacture" means process of preparation and collection of toddy;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "scheme" means the Toddy Industry Workers Welfare Scheme formulated
under section 6;
(h) "toddy" means fermented or unfermented juice drawn from an excise tree;
and
(i) "wages" means emoluments which are earned by a worker while on duty or
on leave with wages in accordance with the terms of the contract of employment and
which are paid or payable in cash to him, but does not include,—
(i) the cash value of any food concession; and
(ii) overtime allowance, bonus and commission; and
(j) "worker" means a person who is employed on wages in  connection with the
manufacture, distribution, transport, storage or sale of toddy and who gets his wages,
directly or indirectly, from the employer and includes any person employed by or
through a contractor or through an agent in connection with the manufacture,
distribution, transport, storage or sale of toddy.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
Fund to be known as the Toddy Industry Workers Welfare Fund for the Welfare of toddy
workers.
(2) The Fund shall consist of—
(a) contribution by the Central Government and every State Government in
such ratio as may be prescribed;
(b) contribution by the employer as follows—
(i) an amount equal to ten per cent. of the wages for the time being
payable to each worker; and
(ii) an amount equal to ten per cent. of the wages for the time being
payable to each worker towards gratuity; and
(c) contribution from workers in such ratio as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the Toddy
Industry Workers Welfare Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, having adequate knowledge of toddy industry;
Definitions.
Constitution
of Toddy
Industry
Workers
Welfare
Fund.
Constitution
of the Toddy
Industry
Workers
Welfare
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) three persons from amongst the States where toddy trees are grown in
large scale; and
(c) one person representing the toddy industry workers, to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Board shall be responsible for administration of the Fund.
5. The Fund shall be utilized for—
(i) providing free educational facilities to the children of workers;
(ii) payment of such amount, as may be prescribed, in case a worker decides to
set up his own establishment connected with the toddy industry;
(iii) providing free healthcare facilities to workers and their families;
(iv) providing concessional accommodation facilities to the workers;
(v) payment of disability allowance to worker who get injured during work;
(vi) payment of old age pension and gratuity at such rates, as may be prescribed,
to workers who have attained the age of sixty years or abvoe;
(vii) payment of life insurance premium of toddy industry workers; and
(viii) payment of family pension after  the death of a worker:
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate
a scheme for the welfare of toddy workers to be known as the Toddy Industry Workers
Welfare Scheme.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the
Scheme, from time to time, for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
7. Every State Government and Union territory administration shall conduct a survey
of toddy industry workers in the State and forward the information to the Central
Government.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Utilization of
Fund.
Formulation
of Toddy
Industry
Workers
Welfare
Scheme.
State
Government
to conduct
survey of
toddy industry
workers.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Toddy Industry Workers Welfare
Fund. Clause 4 provides for the constitution of a Toddy Industry Workers Welfare Board to
administer the Fund. Clause 5 provides utilisation of Fund for the welfare of Toddy Workers.
Clause 7 provides that every State Government and Union Territory administration shall
conduct a survey of toddy industry workers in the State and forward the information to the
Central Government. Clause 8 provides for the formulation of a welfare scheme for Toddy
Workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred
crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Toddy workers are among the poorest sections of society and are wholly unorganized.
Tapping is seasonal that keeps them engaged only for five months. There are area restrictions
on them as they are allowed to sell toddy within a limited radius of the extract point. Also
mushrooming of Indian made foreign liquor shops in every nook and corner. including
villages, is affecting their livelihood.
The free flow of illicit liquor too had its bearing on the toddy tappers community.
They are struggling even to feed their children properly and cannot ensure quality based
education due to skyrocketing price rise. Lack of finance and inadequate facilities are the
main problems faced by the toddy tappers.
Toddy tappers are switching over to other trades as toddy has ceased to be a part of
social life of villagers. The number of toddy yielding trees have come down and the drop in
the number of tappers is also proportionate. The problem is lack of initiative from the
Government and the non-existence of a proper marketing network.
Their working conditions are not safe. After they become unfit to work further, they
suffer a lot. No social security provision is available for them. There is no separate provision
for payment of compensation to the toddy workers for injury sustained during the course of
employment or to his legal heirs in the event of his death as a result of injuries so sustained.
It has, therefore, been proposed to constitute a Toddy Industry Workers Welfare
Fund for the welfare and overall development of toddy industry workers in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
May 13, 2016.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of toddy industry workers and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1085LS(S4)—11-07-2016.