" 
As INmODUCID IN LOK SABHA ON 
THE' DOCK WORKERS 
Bil NOa 164 of 1985. 
(SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) 
BILL, 1985 
\ 
f 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSlIS 
1. Short title extent, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Inspectors. 
4. Powers of IMpedors. 
5. Power of Insuector where employment of dock workers are 
dangerous. 
6. Facilities to bl:! afforded to an Inspector. 
7. Restrictions on disclosure of information. 
a. Appeal. 
9. Advisory Committee. 
10. P(\wer of appropriate Government to direct inquiry into cases 
of &ccidents or diseases. 
11. ObJigation of dock workers. 
12. Po,,,'er to €xempt. 
13. Protection of action taken in g~od faith. 
14. Pe1'18jties. 
J~. Determination of the persons responsible for the oift'nce in 
certain cases. 
16. Power of court to make orders. 
17. Provision relating to jurisdiction. 
18. Provision rer{arding flne. 
1&. Protection to persons acting under this Act. 
20 .. Power to make rules. 
21. Power to make regulations. 
22. General provision relating to rules· and regulations. 
23. Amendment of Act 9 of 1~. 
24.l\epeal. 
~.Savings. 
(T) 

5 
10 
15 
"MD. 1 •. "'''' .. 
THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE') . : 
B.lLL,I_ 
A 
BILL 
to p"oVide for tile .safety, h",Zth 4114 .welfare oj dQck wp:rkerB and for 
matte7'.B connected therewith. 
1. (1) Tbit; Act may.be called the Dock WQrk~1'$ ($4feiy, Health and Short 
Welfare) Act, 1985. title, ,I 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. extent. 
(3) It _a1J..~.iIIM. faIIae on .auch,date.as"'· CaNI ,Go,*,DmeIlt 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
(4) It shall noi apply to any ship of war of any nationality. 
2. In this -Act, wUess the CODiext .ot.berw~e requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means, in relati.on to ~ .wajor 
port, the Central Government, and, in relation to any other port, the 
St:ak! QOV9Rlment; 
(b) "cargo" includes ~ytbing carried or to be ~rr1ed in a.hip 
or other ve!sel; . 
(c) "Chief InspectOT" means. the Chief ~tor of Dac:k s.tety, 
appOinted 'under 'sub-section (1) of section 3; 
. (d) "dock work" me~ any work in or 94thin ,the vJ,;tnity of 
'an)' port tn 'eottnection With, or requi,r:e4 1.or, or.~~ to, ,the 
loading, unloading, movement or storage of carlOW into or from 
commence-
ment 
and app!-
cation. 

InapeC!-
tort. 
Power 
ofJDapec-
\01'1. 
. 
2 
ship or ether vessel, port, dock, stDrage place or landing place, 
and includes-
(i) wo.rk in connection with the preparation of ships or 
other vessels for receipt or discharge of cargoes or leaving port; 
~d 5 
(ii) chipping, painting or cleaning of any hold, tank, 
structure or lifting machinery or any other storag~ area in board 
the ship or in the docks; 
(e) "dock worker" means a person employed or to be employed 
directly or by or through any agency (including a contractor) with ]0 
or without knowledge of the principal employer, whether for 
remuneration or not, on dock work; 
<f) "employer", in relation to a dock worker, means the person 
by whom he is employed or is to be employed on dock work, whether 
for l't"muneration or not; 15 
(g) "principal employer", in relation to a dock worker employed 
or . to be employed by or throUSh any agency (including a contrac-
tor), means the person in connection with whose work he is 
employed or is to be employed by such agency; 
(h) "regulation" means a regulation made under this Act. 20 
3. (1) The appropriate .Govel'llmen.t may, by DoUAeatloD In the Oltelal 
GaZette, appol!tt slieh person as It thinks ft~ to be"'e Chief IDspeetor 
of Dock Safety and slieh persons as It' thinks At to be Inspectors sub-
onJlDate to the Chief ImIpeetor for the purposes of this Aet at 8IIcb 
ports as may be speeifted in the notiAcation. 25 
(2) The Chief Inspector shaD also exercise the powers of an 
IDspeetor, . 
(3) The Chief Inspector and all Inspeetors shall be deemed to 
be pubUe l81'Vant;l within the .. eaalar of the indian Penal code. 
4. An Inspector may, at any port for which he is appointed,-
(a) enter, with such assistance (if any), as he thinks fit. any 
ship, dock, warehouse or other premises, where any dock work is 
being carried on, or where he has· reason to believe that any dock 
work is being carried on; 
30 
(b) make examination of the ship, dock, lifting machinery, 35 
cargo gear, stagings, transport equipment, warehouses or other 
premises; used or to be used, for any dock work; 
(c) require the production of. any register, muster roll or other 
document relating to the . employment of dock workers and examine 
such document; 40 
(d)' take on the spot or otherwise such eViden~e of. any person 
whiCh he 'may' deemneceuary: 
4S of 1860. 

~rovidefl . that· ~no. penon: shall be compelled under this section to 
answer any question or live ,ny evidence tending to \Jlcriminate 
himself; 
(e) take copies. of .registers, records or· other documents or 
portions thereof as he may consider relevant in respect of any offence 
which he has reason to believe has been commit.ted or for the pUl'pOIiIe 
of any inquiry; 
<1) take' photograph, sketch, sample, measu~e or record as he 
may consider necessary for the purpose of any examination or 
10 .tnquiry; 
20 
(9) hold a., inquiry \nto the causes of any accident which he 
has reason to believe was the result of the collapse or failure of 
lifting machinery, transport equipment, staging Or nort-compliance 
with any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations; . 
(h) issue show caUse notice relating to the safety, heulth and 
welfare provisions arising under this Act or the regulations; 
(i) prosecute, conduct or defend before any court any complaint 
or other proceedings arising under this Act or the regulations; 
(j) exercise such other powers as may be conferred upon him 
by the regulations. 
5. (1) If it a.ppears to an Inspector that any place at which any dock 
work is being carried on is in such a condition that it is dangerous to 
life, safety or health of dock workers, he may, in writing, serve on the 
owner or on the person in charge of such place an order prohibiting 
25 any dock work in such place until measures have been taken to. remove 
t~e cause of the danger to his satisfaction. 
Power , 
olIN-
pector 
where 
employ- I 
mentof 
dock 
worker. 
are dan- .. 
(2) An Inspector serving an order under sub-section (l) shall gerous. 
endorse a copy to the Chief Inspector who may modify 'or cancel the 
order without waiting ~or an appeal. 
30 •. The owner or the person in charge of the place at which any dock 
work Is being cRrried on, shall afford the Chief Inspector or the Inspector 
all reasonable facilities for making any entry, inspection. survey, 
measurement, examination or inquiry under this Act or the regulations. 
'I. (1) All copies of, and extracts from, registers or other records in 
35 relation to any dock wo.rk and all other information required by the 
Chief Inspector or an Inspector or by anyone assisting him, in the course 
of the insPection or investigation carried out for the purposes of this 
Act or the regulations shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be 
disclosed to Rny person or authority unless such discloSure is for the 
40 purpose of any action or proceeding under this Act or the regulations 
or under any other law or unless the Chief Inspector or the Inspector 
considers such disclosure necessary to ensure the health, IJ8fety or wel-
fare of any dock worker. 
(2) 'The Chief Inspector or the Inspector shall not disclose the source 
45 of any complaint bringing to his notice a defect or breach of any legal 
Facilities 
to be 
afforded 
to an 
Inspec. 
tor. .,' 
Reetrlc-
tionlon 
disclo-
aureof 
informa-
fiO:1. 

Appell. 
Advilory 
Com-
mittee •. 
pro1ilifml 8ftd if., Vittt or iDapectl.cm is to,be madle mcoaaeoUon with 
such a eomplalnt, he.hall give no intimation to the employer that the 
visit is made in conseque~ce of receipt of such a complaint: 
ProVided that the restrictions imposed under this sub-sect1on shall 
not *J)ply to any case where the complainant himself bas exJ)l'eIItIed his 5 
wUUhgness to have the aource of complaint disclosed.. ' 
(3) If the Chief Inspector or an Inspector or any other person referred 
to insub-sectiort (1) discloses, contrary to the provisions of this s4::tion. 
any information as aforesaid, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with ,both. 10 
8. Any person aggrieved by an order under section 5 may, within 
1\.fteen days from the ~te on which the order is communicated to' him, 
prefer an appeal to the Chief Inspector or where such oider is by the 
Chief Inspector, to such authority as maybe specified by the reguiations 
and the Chief l'ns~tor or such authority 8hall, 'after giving the 'appellant IS 
an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously 
as possible: 
ProVided that the Chi~f Inspecto;r or such authority may entertain 
the appeal after the eXpiry of the said period of fifteen days if he 'Is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufRcient cause from filing 20 
the appeal in time: 
~ PttWIdeC:I 'fal1her ~ 'An der under' 'seetiOB. ,5 sbail be complted 
With, J)etfding the decision Of the Chief il'lspeetor Or such authority. 
t .. (1) TheappMpriate Govenun.ent may constitute an Advisory 
Committee to advise upon such matters arisiDg out of the administration !.! 
of this Act and the regulations as that Government may refer to it for 5 
advice. 
(t) The n1embers of the AdviSOry Committee shall be appointed by 
the appropriate Gov~rnment and shall' be of such number and chosen 
in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act: 5° 
ProVided that the Advisory Committee shall include an equal number 
of members representing-
(i') the appropriate Government, 
(ii) the dock workers, and 
(iii) the employers of dock workers and shipping companies. 
(:J) The Chairman of the Advisory Committee shall be one of the 
members ap~ to t~pl'e$ent the appropriate Government, nomi-
nkted 'in Ifbis behalf by that ~vemment. 
(4) The appropriate Government.hall publish in the Official Gazette 
the names of all members of ,the Advi~ory Committee. 
(5)Tbe term of office of the members of the Advisory Committee 
and the marmer of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge df their functions by, the members shall be 
such as may be prescribed ,by rules made under this Act. 
35 

5011808. 
.. 01.1880. 
1.. (I) The appropriate GlwarnInent may, if it conaiders it expedient 
to do so, appoint a competent person to inquire into the causes of. any 
accident occurring in connection with any dock work or into any ca8ell 
whet"e a dtsease specified by regulations as a difJease connected with dock 
5 wo,.k has been or is sUspected to have been contracted by dock workers' 
::nd lHay also appoint ctne or more persons possessing' legal or ,peelal 
lmowJedge to. act &:0;; assessors in such inquiry. 
(2) The person appointed to hold .an inquiry under this, section shall 
have an the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
10 1908 for the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and 
compelling the production of documents and material objects and may 
also, so far as may be necessary for the purposes of the inquiry, exercise 
any ot the powers of an Inspector under this Ac't; and 'every person 
requi.red by the person making the inquiry to furnish any information 
15 shall be deemed to be legally bound so to do within the meaning ot 
section 176 of the Indian Pena1 COde. 
'(3) The person holding. the inquiry under this :teCtion shall malee a 
report. to the appropriate Government stating the causes of the accident 
or, as the case may be, disease. and any attendant circumstances and 
20 adding any observations which he or any of the assessors may think 
fit to make. 
25 
(4) The procedure to be followed at inquiries under this section 
shall be such as the appropriate Government may prescribe by rules 
under section 20. 
11. '(1) No dock worker shall-
'Cal wUfully interfere with, or misuse, any appliance, conveni-
ence or other thing provided in connection with any dock work 
for the purpose of securing the health, safety and welfare of- dock 
W'orkers; 
30 (b) wilful1y and without reasonable cause do anything likely 
t.(\ endanger himself or others: and 
(e) . wilfully neglect to make use of ~ny appliance, convenience 
or other thing provided in connection with any dock work for the 
purpose of securing the health. safety and welfare of dock W(III)rers. 
35 (2) If any dock worker contravenes any- of ihe provisions of sub-
section '(1), he shall be Dunishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months. or with fine which' may extend to one 
hundred rupees, or with both, 
12. Theapproprlate Government may, by notiftcation in the Offtcial 
40 GazeUe, exe.mpt from all or any of the provisions of this Act and of 
the regulations, on such conditions, if any, as it thinks fit-, . . 
(4) anY"port or place. doek, wharf. quay or similar premises, If 
tbatGovernmentissatiaftedthat dock work is only occaatenally 
carried on or' the traffic is small 'and' confined to small .h4ls and 
45 ' fishing vessels at such port, 'dock, wharf, quay or stmDar premilles; 
or 
'(b) . any SJ)eclfted,hip or clas~ of ahillS. if that Gol1el'l1~ent is 
spttsfted. 'havfn,~ !'f!~arct": to the features of such ship or shiPS. the' 
Power 
of appro-
priate 
Govern-
mentto 
direct 
inquiry 
illto 
caseaol 
accident, 
or di-
aeuet. 
Obliga •. 
tim of 
dock 
worker .. 
Power to 
exempt. 
;/ 

Advil 
Com-
mittee 
Proteci- '. 
tion of 
action 
Laken 
in IfOOd 
faith. 
Pellal-
tiP.lo 
6 
uature, quantum and periodicity of dock work carried ·thereon and 
all other' relevant factors, that it is necessary so to do: 
Provided that the appropriate Government 'lhall not grant exemp-
tion under this section unless it is satisfied that such exemption will not 
advel'llely affect the health, safety and welfare of dock workers. 5 
13. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which 'is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Aet. . 
14. (1) Whoever,-
(a) wilfully obstructs an I~pector in exercise of any power 10 
conferred by or under this Act or fails to produce on demand by an 
Inspector any register or other documents kept in pursuance of the 
regUlations or otherwise in connection with any dock wo.rk or 
conceals or prevents Or attempts to prevent any person from appear-
ing before, or being examined by, an I~spector; or J5 
(b) unless duly authorised or in case of neceSsity, removes any 
fencing, gangway, gear, ladder, life-saving means or appliance. light, 
mark, stage or other thing required to be provided by, or under,. 
the regulations; or 
(c)· having in case of necessity removed any such fencing, gang- Je) 
way, gear, ladder, life-saving means or appliance, light, mark, stage 
or other thing, omits to restore it at the end of the period for which 
its removal was necessary, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six· months, or with fine which may extend to. five thousand rupees, 25 
or with bath. 
(2) If any prm'lon, being a person whose duty is to comply with any 
of the regulations, contravenes such regulations' and such contravention 
results-
(a) in any fatal accident to a dock worker, or 30 
(b) an accident which incapacitates a dockworker from earning 
his fulI wages for more than a fortnight, 
such -person ~hall he punishable :with lmpris~)Dment ·for a t,rm. which 
may extend· to ·six .months or with· ft~ which sba.l not.be les .. than two 
thousand rupees in a ease f~ling under J:lause (a) a~d, five hund~d'35 
rupees in a case falling under clause (bo) but which may extend, in 
either ca8e,'to five thousand rupees; or with both, and the court may 
ordertbewhole or part of the fine to be paid to the dependent of 'the 
deceased· dock worker or; as the case may be, to the injured dock 
worker or, AS : the case may be; to the injured dOck worker, 4» 
ExpumaLion.-The proYl~on. of ,.thi~ sub-MctionsQiU be in addition 
to allY provisions which may be made under sub-aeetion (4) of .etional. 

7 
(3) Subject to the provisions of section 11, if any dock worker cOn-
travenes any provision of this Act or the re ~ulations imposing any duty 
o.r liability on dock workers, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three months, or with flne which may 
5 extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
(4) If any. person who has been convicted, for an oft'ence punishable 
under any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations is again con-
victed for an offence committed within two years of the previous con-
viction and involving a con~ravention of the same provision, be shall 
10 be-punishable for each subsequent conviction with double the imprlson~ 
ment to which he would have ,been liable for the first contravention. of 
such provision. 
15_ If the person committing an offence made punishable by this 
Act or the regulations or any abetment. thereof is a firm or other asso-
15 ciation of individuals or a company or a local authority, all or any of the 
partners or members or directors thereof as well as the firm, as'Soc~ation 
of individuals, company or local authority shaH be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence or abetment and shan be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
20 Provided that where a firm, association or company has given notices 
in writing -to the Chief Inspector and the Inspector of the port where 
any dock work is being carried that it haos nominated,-
'(a) in the case of a firm, any of its partIrers; 
(b) in the case of an association, any of its members; 
25 (c) in the case of a company. any of its directors, 
who is resident, in each caOSe in any place to which this Act extends and 
who is in each case either in fact in charge of the management of, or 
holds the largest number of shares in, such firm, association or company, 
to assume the responsibility of the peni-orl in charge of any dock work 
30 tor the purposes of this Act, suC'h partner. member or director, as the 
case may be. shall. so long as he continues to so reside and be in char~ 
or hold the largest number of shares aR aforesaid, be deemed to be 'the 
person in charl'!'e of such dock work for the PurpogeS of this Act unless 
a notice in writin~ cancelling his nomination or stating that he has Ceased 
35 to be a partner, member o.l' director. as the case may be, is received by 
the Chief Inspector. 
16. (1) wpere a person i~ convicted of an offence punishable under 
this Act, the court- may, in addition to awarding him anv punishment, by . 
order in writing, require him within a periOd specified in the order 
40 (which ma:v be extended bv' the court from time to time on application 
made in this behalf) to take such me~sul'eS as may be so sPeCified for 
remedying the matters in respect of which offence was committed. 
(2-) Where an order is made under sub-section (1), the person 'Shall 
not be liable under this Act in respect of the continuance of the ofl'ence 
45 during the period, or extended period, if any, but if on the expirv of 
such period or extended peri~ the order of the court has not been fully 
, complied with, the person shall be deemed· to have committed a further 
ofrence and shall be punish"ble with imprisonment for a term which 
Deterrni-
nation of 
the per-
sons res-
pol18ible 
for the 
of!encein 
certain 
cases. 
Power of 
court to 
make 
ordent. 

Provision 
relating 
to juris-
diction. 
Provision 
regarding 
fine. 
under 
make 
rules, 
8 
may extend to six months, or' with fine which may extend to· one 
hundred rupees for every day after such expiry on which the .order has 
not been complied with, or with both. 
17. (1) No court inferior to that of a metropolitan maptrate or 8 
magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act or the 5 
. regulations. 
, (2) No prosecution for any offence under this Act or the regulation. 
shall be instituted except -by or with· the previous s~ction of an Inspector. 
(3) Notwithstanding any.thlng cootained in the Code of 'CrimiaaJ 
Procedure, 1973, no court shall take cognizance of an offence under this 10 2 of 1974-
Act or the regulation'S unless complaint thereof has been made-
(0) in the case of an offence punishable with fine,-
(i) within six months trom the date Of the offence; or 
(ii) where the commission of the offence was not known to 
the Inspector, within .six months from the first day .on which 15 
. the oft'ence comes to the knowledge of the Inspector; or' 
(iii) where it is not known by whom the offence was com .. 
mitted, the first day on which the identity of the offender is 
known to the Inspector; or 
(b) in the ca'Se of an offence punishable with imprisonment,-
(i) within one year from the date of the offence; 'or 
(ii) where the coinmission of the offence was not known to 
the Inspector, within one year from the first day on which .the 
offence comes to the knowledge of tlte Inspector; or 
20 
(iii) where it is not known by whom the. offeRee was CQm· 25 
mitted, the first day on which the identity of the offender 
is known to the Ins~tor. 
Expl4n4tion.-For the 'Purposes of this section. in the case of a conn: 
nuing offence a fresh. period of limitation 'shan 'begin to run at every 
moment of the time during which the ofl'ence continues. 3? 
18. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2Q of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, it shall be lawful for a met.ropolitan magistrate 
or a magistrate of the first class to pass a sentence of fine exceeding five 
thousand rupees authorised by this Act or the regulations on any person 
convicted of any offence thereunder. 
19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie ag-unst any 
per-son for anythill'g' which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 
35 
10. The appropriate Govemment. may, by notiflcation in the OfIlcial 
GueMe,make rules consist.mt wiih this Act for all or any of the f&U()\\r-4P 
ing p1lrpO'seS. namely:- . 
(~) the manner,in which an ~n~,or f.$, to. l::1.(ercise the pow. ... 
con~~r~d upon him under this Act; 
2 of 1974. 

5 
ro 
9 
·(b) the inspecti® of premises of ships where any dock work is 
carried on; 
(0) the manner of aervices Of orders made under this Act; 
{d.) the ter.m of office and other conditions of service of members 
of the AdWIory Committee, the manner of filling vacancies among, 
and the procedUft! to :be fallowed in, the discharge of their functions 
under sub-section (5) of section 9; 
(e) the procedure at inquiries under section 10; and 
(f) any other matter which is to be provided for by rules under 
this Act. 
21. (l) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act for providing 
for the safety, health and welfare of dock worke.rs. 
(2) Such regulations may provide for all or any of the following 
15 purposes, namely:-
20 
(a) providing for the general requirement relating 1;& the con-
struction, equipping and maintenance for the safety of . working 
places on shore, ship, dook~ structure and other places at which any 
dock work is carried on; 
(b) providing for the safety of any regular approach~ over a 
dock, wharf, quay or other places which dock workers have to use 
for going for work and for fencing of such places and projects; 
(e) providing for the efficient lighting of all areas of dook, -ship, 
any other vessel, dock structure or working places where any dock 
work is carried on and of all approaches to such places to which 
dock workers are required to go in the course of their employment; 
(d) prOViding and maintaining adequate ventilation and suit-
able temp.arature in every building or an enclosure on ship where 
dock workers are employed; 
30 (e) providing for fire and explosion prevention and protection; 
(f) providing for safe means of accE!'l3s to ships, holds, stagings, 
equipment, lifting applian~ and other working places; 
(g) providing fQr the safety of workers engaged in the opening 
and closing of hatches, protection of ways and other openings in the 
35 docks which may be dangerous to them; 
(h) prOViding for the safety of workars on clocks from the risk 
of falling overboard being struck by cargo during loading Or unload-
ing operations; 
(i) providing for the construction, 'maintenanc~ and use of lifting 
40 and other cargo handling appliances and services, such as, pallets 
.containing or supporting loads and provision of safety appliances 
on them, if necessary; 
(;) prOviding for the safety of workers employed in freight 
container te.nn!nals or other terminals for handling unitised cargo; 
45 (k) providing for the fencing of machinery, live electrical con-
ductors, steam pipes and hazardoUs openings; 
Power to 
make 
Resuia-
tions. 

· -. 
10 
(1) providing for the constru.c:tion, maintenance and us'!! of 
staging; 
(m.) providing for the rigging and use of ship's derricks; 
(n) providing fOf. the testina, examination, inspection and 
certification as appropriate of loose gears including chains and ropel 5 
and of slings and other lifting devices used in dock work; 
(0) provi~g for the precautions to be taken to facilitate escape 
of workers when employed in a· hold, bin, hopper or the like or 
between docks of a hold while handling coal or other bulk cargo; 
(P) providing for the measures to be taken in order to preventl () 
dangerous methods of working in. the stacking, unstacking, stowing 
and unstowing of cargo. or handling in ·connection therewith; 
(Q) providing for the handling of dangerous substances and 
working in dangerous or harmful environments and the precautions 
to be taken in connection with such handling; l5 
(r) providing for the work in connection with cleaning, chipping, 
painting operations and precautions to be taken in connection with 
such workj 
(s) ~roviding for the employment of persons for handling cargo 
handling appliances, power operated hatch covers or other power 20 
operated shiR's equipment, such as, door in the hull of a ship, ramp, 
retraceable car dock or similar eqUipment or to give signals to the 
drivers of such machinery; 
(t) providing for the transport of dock workers; 
(u.) providing for the precautions to be taken to protect dock 25 
workers against harmful effects of excessive noil.e, vibrations and air 
pollution at the work place; 
(v) providing for protective equipment or protective clothing; 
(w) providing for the sanitary, washing and welfare faCilities; 
(x) providing for-
(i) the medical supervision; 
(ii) the ambulance rooms, first aid and rescue facilities and 
arran~ments tOJ.' the removal of dock workers to the nearest 
place of treatment; 
(iii) the safety and health organisationj and 
(iv) the training of dock worms and for the obligation'S and 
rights of the dock workers for their safety and health at the work 
place; 
35 
(y) providing for the investigation of occupational accidents, 
dangerous occurrences and diseases, specifying such diseases and the 40 
forms of notices., the persoru; and authorities to whom they are to be 
furnished, the pa;rticulars to be contained in them and the time 
within which tlley are to be submitted; and 
(z) providing for the submission of statement of accidents, 
man-days lost, volume of cargo handled and· particulars of dock 45 
workers. 

5 
11 
(3) The regulations made under this section may,-
(a) provide for the circUIImtances in which and the conditions 
sub1ect to. which,. exemptioDi' from any; of' the regulations made 
,under this section may be given specifying the authorit~es who may 
grant such exemptions and regulating their proCedure; and 
(b) make special provision to meet the sPt!cial requitement of 
any p8,1'ticular port or ports. 
(4)1 In making a regulation under this section, the appropriate Gov-
ernment may direct that a breach thereOf shall be punishable -with im-
10 prisonment for a term which may extend to )3ix months, or with. fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees l or with ,both, and, if the 
breach is continued after conviction, with a further fine which may 
extend. to one. hundred. rupees for each day on· which the breach. is so 
continued. 
15 2Z. (1) The power to make.rules and regulations conferred by s~tions General 
20 and 21 is subject to the condition of the rules and reaulations being provision 
made after previous publications. relaUIIJ 
100f 1897. (2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause (3) of section to rules 
23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 as that after which a draft of rules !aaDtdi l!e'U-
J9 of 1934. 
19 of 1934. 
9 ot 1948. 
. ons. 
20 or regulations proposed to be made will be taken. under consideration, 
shall not be less than fortY·five days from the date on which the draft 
of the proposed rules Or regulations is pUblished for general information. 
(3) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act by the 
Central Government 'shall be laid, as soon as may be after· it is made, 
25 before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or' in two or more 
successive session, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions afo.resaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both 
30 Houses agree that ihe rule or regulation should not be made, the· rule 
or regulatio:n shall thereafter have effect only in such modified fonn 01 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifi-
cation or ,annulment shall he without pre.iudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule or regulation, as the case may be,' 
35 (4) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act by a State 
Government shall he ]aid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the 
State Legislature. 
23. In the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948, 
section 3; in sub-section (2) ,-
in Amend-
ment of 
Act 9 
40 (a) in clause (g), the words "and welfare" shall be omitted; 
(b) clause (h) shall be omitted. 
24. 'The Indian Dock Labourers A~t, 1934 is hereby repealed.' 
25. Tht! Indian Dock'Labourers Regulations, 1948 made under section 
5 of the Indian Dock Labourers Act, 1934 so repealed and. the Dock 
45 Workers (Safety. Health and Welfare) Scheme, 1961 made under section 
40f the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 shall be 
deemed to be regu.iations framed under this Act and shall·be in force 
unless they are altered or repealed under this Act. 
of 1948. 
Repeal. 
Savin .... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian .Dock Labourers Act, 19M (19 of 19311), tile Dock Workers, 
(Regulation of Employment) Act,l948 (9 of IMS) and the Dock Wo~kers 
(Safety, Health ~d Welfare) Scheme, 1961, framed under the later Act, 
inter alia. deal with the matters relating to the protection against acci-
dent of workers employed in loading and unloadiftg ships, employment of 
dock workers and safety, health and ~lfare of dock workers. Thus, 
the law relating to the said matters is, at present, contained in more than 
one Act. 
2. In view of the experience gaiJaed by the wollkin« of u.e Act. and 
the said Scheme, it is felt that with a view to serving the intellelta of 
the dock workers more effectively, the law relating to safety, health and 
welfare of the said workers, as far as practicable, be contained in a single 
Act. Accordingly, the proposed Bill provides for the safety, health and 
welfare of dock workers and for matters connected therewith. 
3. The Bill, among other things, seeks, ileter Alia, to-
(a) provide for the 9Ilfety, health and welfare of dock workers 
in respect of all ports and all ships; 
(b) enlarge the definitions of "dock MJIl"k" and "dock workers" 
80 as to widen the scope of protection; . 
(c) specify that the appropriate Government shall be, in relation 
to any major port, the Central Government, and, in relation to any 
other port, the State Government concerned; 
(d) provide for the appointment of Chief Inspectors and Inspec-
tOl'S of Dock Sdfety with appropriate powers for enforcing the pro-
visions of the proposed legislation; 
(e) proVide for the constitution of aGlviaory committees to 
advise upon matters arising out of the ac:IminUtration of the proposed. 
legislation; 
(1) empower the appropriate Government to direct inquiry into 
eases of accidents and diseases; 
(g) lay down obligations of the dock workers in folloWing cer-
tain safety practices; 
(h) empower the appropriate Government to exempt any port 
or ship from the provisions of the propoSed legislation subject to 
such conditions as it thinks fit; 
(i) provide for appropriate punishment for offences against the 
proposed legislation and also to provide for enhanced punWlmen.ta in 
the case of second and subsequentconvicticm and further to provide 
for certain minimum punishment in certain cues; 
12 

13 
(j) provide for thp repeal of the Indian Dock Labourers Act, 
1934 (19 of 1934) and to make· necessary consequential amendments 
in the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 
1948). 
4. The Btll seeks to achieve the above· objects. 
NEW DELHI; T. ANJAIAH. 
The 19th August, 1985. 
, 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Dock Workers (Safety,. Health and Welfare) Bill, 1985, 
provides for the appointment of Chief Inspectors and Inspectors of Dock 
Safety, by the appropriate Government, for· purposes of enforcement of 
the provisions of the proposed legislation. The Central Government shall 
be the appropriate Government in respect of dock work eanied on in the 
maj or ports. 
2. At present, the aspects regarding safety, health and welfare of 
dock workers engaged in dock work, in so far as the major ports at 
Bombay, Calcutta, Madras, Cochin, Kandla, Paradeep, Marmagoa, 
Vishakhapatnam, New Mangalore and. New Tuticorin are concerned, are 
enforced through the Dock Safety Inspectorates under the organisation 
of the Directorate General of Factory ~dvice Service and Labour Insti-
tutes, Bombay .. The provisions of the proposed legislation are also to be 
enforced in the Central sphere by the same Dock Safety Inspectorates 
for which the current expenditure in a financial year from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India is approximately Rs. 10 lakhs. ." 
3. It would be necessary at a later stage. to restructure and augment 
the Dock Safety Inspectorates in the Centre so as to make enforcement 
of the proposed law more effeetivp. and this would involve additional 
expenditure in the future yeal'9 to be incurred from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is not possible at this stage to compute the exact fin-
ancial requirements on this account in future. The extension of ~he 
Act to minor ports would also involve additional expenditure which 
would be borne by the State Governments. 
4. The Bill does not involve' any other expenditure of a recurring or 
non-recurring nature. 
14 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to exempt 
any port or ship from' all or any of the provisions of the 'proposed legis-
lation on such conditions, if any, as it thinks fit. Circumstances in which 
such power can be exercised have' been laid down in the said clause. It 
has also been provided in that clause that the appropriate Government 
shall not grant such ~emption unless it is satisfied that such exemption 
will not adversely affect the health,' safety and welfare of dock workers. 
This power is necessary to meet various circumstances and contingencies 
which cannot be visualised. 
2. Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
make rules in respect of,matters falling within the purview of that clause. 
The matters in respect of whicn rules may be made, inter alia, relate to 
the mannei' in whidt an Inspector is 'to exercise the power cdnferred upon 
him. the inspection 'of premises ·or ships Where any dock work is carried 
on, the terms of office and other conditions of service of members of the 
advisory committE!f>~ and the p~edure to be followed . at an inquiry 
under clause 10 of the proposed'legislation. The matters with respect to 
which l'ules may be made undet" this ,provision woulltrelate to ltlatters of 
procedure or detail. . 
3. Likewise. clause 21 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Govern-
ment to make regulations for providing for the matters relating to the 
health, safety and welfare of dock workers. Sub-clause (2) of that 
clause also enumerates the specific matters in this behalf for which such 
regulations may be made. The matters with . respect to which regulations 
may be made for the purposes of health, safety and welfare of the dock 
workers under this provision would relate to matters of procedure or 
detail. 
4. In view of the reasons given above, the delegation of legislative 
power under the afore~aid provisions is normal in character . 
• 
15 

Scheme 
for en-
suring 
replar 
employ-
mentof 
workers. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACT FROM THE DocK WOIOalRS (REotn.ATION OF EMPLOYMmrT) 
Act# 1948 
(9 OF 1948) 
• • • • • 
3. (1) • • • • 
(2) In particular, a scheme may provide-
• • • • • 
(g) for the training and welfare of dock workers, in so far as 
satisfactory provision therefor does not exist apart from the scheme; 
• • • • • 
(h) for health and safety measures in places where dock workers 
are employed, in 80 far as satisfactory provision therefor does not 
exist apart from the scheme; 
• • • • • 
• 

LOX SABRA 
A 
BILL 
t.o provjde for the safety, health and welfare of dock workPrs and for 
matters connected therewith .. 
(S'hri T. Anjiah, 
Minister of State t1j the MifLUtr:rJ of Labour) 