CO R..1I GS!. DUi1. 
t') 
Page 1, line 10,-
[J r "S;) st i tu tee!'1 re'lj .. 31) h s ti t'U te;~ It 

i3 of 1972. 
As INTBODUCID IN Lox SABRA ON 
-' 
"'I ; .. ,of> 
\. ~ / ~~ 
Bill No. 1M of 1981 
------THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment 
Act, 1981. lL III 
5 Z. In section 12 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act),-
(a) in the opening paragraph, the words ", with the previous per-
mission of the State Government," shall be omitted; 
(b) for clause (b), the following clauses and Explanati.on shall 
10 be sustituted, namely:-
'(b) scientific research; 
(bb) scientific management; 
ErplanatiDn..-For the purposes of clause (bb), the expression 
"scientific management" means-
(i) translocation of any wild animals to an alternative 
suitable habitat; or 
(ii) population management of wild life, without killing 
or poisoning or destroying any wild animals;'; 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 12. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 44. 
Amend-
ment of 
lection 63. 
. r 
(c) after clause (c), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"Provided that no such permit ihall be granted-
(a) in respect of any wild animal specified in Schedule 
I, except with the previous permission of the Central Gov- 5 
ernment, and 
(b) in respect of any other wild animal, except with the 
previous permission of the State Government.". 
3. In section 44 of the principal Act,-:-
(a) in sub-section (3), the words ", within fifteen days from the 10 
commencement of this Act," shall be omitted; . 
(b) in sub-section (4), for clause (b), the following clause shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(b) No licence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
granted unless the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised 19 
officer having regard to the antecedents and previous experience 
of the applicant; tile impUaltion which thCil grant of suc~ licence 
would have on the status of wild life and to such other matters 
as may be prescribed in this behalf and af'termaking, such in-. 
quiry in respect of those matters as he may think fit, is satis- 20 
tied that t~ li~~e M9ul~ be gTflIlwd.". 
" In "etion 6301 the prU\eiPill Act, in .ub-Me~i()ll (1), af~ elJuse 
(a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
U ((14) the matters to be prea~ibed under clause (b) of sub-,section 
(f) of section 44;", 25 

C/"< ) • ,f.. •.• 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (53 of 1972) provides for the 
protection (If wild animals and birds and for mattel'l connected therewith 
or ancillary thereto. 
2. Under the present scheme of the aforesaid Act, wild animals speci-
fied in Schedule I of the Act cannot be hunted by any person except as 
provlded in. sections 11 and 12 iqr specific purposes. There is no proVisiOll, 
at present, for permitting capture and translocation of wild animals for 
scientific management, which may, for instance, be-necesaary in the case of 
elephants for their population management or for introduction in alter-
native suitable habitat of endangered species like the Great Indian 
Rhino~eros and the Asiatic Lion. To achieve this purpose, it is necessarJ 
to suitably amend section 12 of the said Act with the stipulation that in 
the case of any wild animal specified in Schedule I, the prior approval of 
the Central Governme'nt, and in the case of other wild animals, the 
prior approval of the State Government, would be necessary. 
3. Section 44 Of the Act relates to grant of licences for carrying on 
business in trophy and animal articles, and the time within which appli-
cations for sldch licences may be made has been specified i'n sub-section 
(3) of this section as 15 days from the commencement of the principal Act. 
A:; a result, no one can now apply for licences for carrying on business 
in trophy and animal articles. As such, persons who get in possession of 
trophy and animal articles are constrained to carry on business with 
respect thereto in a clandestine manner. It is, therefore, proposed to omit 
the time limit of 15 days provided in sub-section (3) of section 44. At the 
same time, it is also proposed to spell out expressly the more important 
guideli'nes which should be followed in granting licences under the section 
and confer power on the Central Government to specify by rules other 
guidelines. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; RAO BIRENDRA SINGH. 
The 14th December, 1981. 
3 

, MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (b) of clause 3 of the Bill seeks to substitute for clause (b) 
of sub-section (") of section," of the principal Act a new clause (b) re-
lating inter alia to the matters which should be taken into account in 
granting a licence under that section. Unlike the existing provision which 
leaves .all such matters to be prescribed by rules to be made by State Gov-
ernments, the new clause (b) spells out the more jmportant of the matters 
which have to be taken into account in the clause itself and leaves the 
other matters to be prescribed 'by rules made by the Central Government. 
Thus the amendment really bas the effect of limiting the scope of the 
power dele.gated under" the Act as originally enacted. As the more im-
portant matters or guidelines have been spelt out in the amendment, and 
as the other matters which are to be prescribed by rules pertain to matters 
of detail, the delegation of legislative power involved is of a normal 
character. 

ANNEXURE 
Exl'RACTS FROM THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972 
(53 'OF 1972) 
• • • • • 
12. Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, it shall 
be lawful for the Chief Wild Life Warden, to grant, with the previous 
permission of the State Government, a permit, by an order in writing 
stating the reasons therefor, to any person, on payment of such fee as 
may be prescribed, which shall entitle the holder of such permit to hunt, 
s~bject to such conditions as may be specified therein, any wild animal 
specified in such permit, for the' purpose of,-
... ... ... ... ... 
(b) scientific research; or 
(c) collection of specimens for zoological gardens, museums and 
similar institutions . 
• • • ... ... 
44. (1-) ... ... • • • 
(3) Every person referred to in sub-section (1) wh~ intends to obtain 
a lic·ence, shall, within fifteen days from the commencement of this Act, 
make an application to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised 
officer for the grant Qf a licence; 
(4) (a) ... ... ... ... ... 
(b) No licence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be granted unless 
the Chief Wild Life Warde'll. or the authorised officer having regard to 
such matters as may be prescribed in this behalf and after making such 
Inquiry in respect of those matters as he may think 'fit, is satis6.ed that the 
licence should be granted. 
• • • • • 
83. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
all or any of the folloWing, namely:-
• • • • 
Grant of 
permit 
for 
epecial 
pur,oses. 
Dealines 
i.n trophy 
qnd 
animal 
articles 
without 
licence 
prohibi-
ted. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to' 
YJlake 
rules. 

, 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the' Wild Life (Proteetion) A~t, li.'1.2. 
(Rao BVr'endra Singh, Minister 01 Agri-
culture a.nd Rural ReconstNction 4ft(! 
Irrigation and Minister of Civil 
Supplte.,) 