Short title and 
extent.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 164 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Shri P.P. Chaudhary , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.   
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution of India in clause (2), for the words “sixty-five 
years”, the words “seventy years” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 
article 124.
5

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Clause (2) of article 124 of the Constitution of India allows every Judge of the Supreme 
Court to hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years. The age of retirement of 
Supreme Court Judges, which was fixed at sixty-two years in the beginning, was enhanced 
to sixty-five years by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Since then, no 
revision has taken place in this regard. 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice, in its 39th Report dated the 29th April, 2010, has recommended 
to raise the retirement age of the Judges of the High Courts from sixty-two to sixty-five. 
Hence, in view of this it is expedient and necessary to enhance the age of Supreme Court 
Judges from sixty-five years to seventy years. Further, most of the reasons adduced by the 
Fifth Central Pay Commission in support of its recommendation for increasing the age of 
retirement of the Central Government employees, such as global practices, increase in life 
expectancy, improved health standards, need for utilization of experience and wisdom of 
senior employees, etc., would also apply to the Judges. Besides this, after their retirement 
the Judges are being appointed by Government in various Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals, 
etc. which is antithesis and not in consonance as well as sprit of preamble to Constitution of 
India. The increase in age of retirement will altogether put a check on the re-employment of 
the Judges of the Supreme Court after retirement. 
Independence of judiciary is an essential attribute of rule of law, which is one of the 
basic features of the Constitution. Judiciary must be free from all pressures including the 
pressures from executive as well as psychological pressure on the Judges related to their 
future after retirement. The Judges are required to ensure the independence and impartiality 
of judiciary by keeping themselves free from any allurement of employment under the 
Government after their retirement. 
The Constitution specifically prohibits the Chairman of Union Public Service 
Commission and its Members, the Chairman of State Public Service Commission and 
its Members for further employment either under the Government of India or under the 
Government of any State. The Constitution on the other hand nowhere restricts or prohibits 
retired Chief Justice and Judges of the High Courts to hold further employment either under 
the Government of India or under any of the State Governments. 
Article 148 (4) provides that the Comptroller and Auditor General shall not be eligible 
for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any State 
after he has ceased to hold his office. 
The Chief Justice and Judges of the various High Courts, the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India, the Chairman of Union Public Service Commission, the Chairman of the 
State Public Service Commission and the Members of these Commissions are constitutional 
functionaries and they should be kept free from all kinds of allurement of employment under 
the Government after cessation of holding of their office. It is presumed that reappointment 
of Judges would have effect of undermining the independence and fairness of judiciary. 
The Constitution prohibits the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the Chairman, 
Public Service Commission and its members from getting employment after cessation of 
their office, however, no such bar is there with regard to the Chief Justice and the Judges of 
the Supreme Court. 

In view of the present state of vacancies of Judges in the Supreme Court, it is extremely 
difficult to clear the heavy pendency of cases in the Supreme Court. Increasing the age of 
retirement by five more years would restrict occurrence of new vacancies on account of 
superannuation for the next five years during which time the existing backlog in vacancies 
could be cleared. This would have a clear impact on reduction of pendency of cases in the 
Supreme Court. 
It is, therefore, proposed to increase the age of retirement of the Judges of Supreme 
Court from sixty-five years to seventy years.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                              P . P .  C H A U D H A R Y  
November 13, 2024
3

ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Constitution of India] 
*  *  *  *  * *
124. (1) *  *  *  *  *
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant 
under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and 
of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and 
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years: 
*  *  *  *  * *
 
4
Establishment 
and Constitution 
of Supreme 
Court.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
_______ 
(Shri P .P . Chaudhary, M.P .) 