Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 164 of  2024
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES 
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2024
By
Sඁඋං Vංඌඁඇඎ Dൺඒൺඅ Rൺආ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2024.
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In section 2 of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention 
of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in 
sub-section (1):–
   ( a) after clause (bc), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment 
of section 2.
33 of 1989

     (bca) “electronic communication or any digital platform” means the 
   use of any electronic communication device or any digital platform including 
   but not limited to the internet, social media, emails, messaging applications 
   or any other digital form of communication to convey information or 
   messages”; and
   ( b) after clause (bf), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
     (bfa)  “otherwise harm” means causing damage or injury to a member 
   of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe through actions or behaviours 
   that impact his physical health, emotional well-being or personal 
   reputation.”.
 3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (zc), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
     “(zd) uses electronic communication or any digital platform to threaten, 
   harass, intimidate, defame or otherwise harm a member of a Scheduled Caste 
   or a Scheduled Tribe, by acts of cyber bullying, online stalking, or 
   dissemination of derogatory or offensive content,”. 
 
2
Amendment 
of section 3. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 In recent years, there has been a significant rise in crimes against the Scheduled 
Castes (SCs) and the Scheduled Tribes (STs). In the year 2022, a total of 57,582 
cases were reported for crimes against SCs, marking a 14.3 per cent increase from 
50,900 cases in the year 2021. Similarly, crimes against STs saw a 14.3 per cent. 
rise, with 10,064 cases reported in the year 2022 compared to 8,802 in the year 
2021. Additionally, cybercrimes has surged, with 65,893 cases registered in the year 
2022 – an increase of 24.4 per cent from 52,974 cases in the year 2021. The crime 
rate per lakh population under this category rose from 3.9 in the year 2021 to 4.8 in 
the year 2022.
 While the Information Technology Act, 2000 addresses various aspects of 
cybercrime, it does not specifically cater to the unique vulnerabilities of SCs and STs. 
Given that these communities are often at a disadvantage, it is crucial to introduce 
provisions within the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989 to address digital and electronic forms of abuse. The current 
provisions under the Act do not fully cover the spectrum of modern digital abuse.
 The proposed Bill aims to amend the Act to include protections against digital 
harassment, which is increasingly targeting marginalized communities. By explicitly 
addressing digital forms of discrimination, we can offer more robust protections and 
ensure that perpetrators of such crimes are held accountable.
 This amendment supports the broader goals of social justice and equality by 
addressing all forms of discrimination, including those facilitated through digital 
platforms. It will also enhance public awareness about the rights of SCs and STs and 
clarify the types of unacceptable and punishable behaviours under the law.
 By incorporating provisions for digital communication and electronic platforms, 
it will significantly strengthen the parent Act and provide a more comprehensive 
shield against modern forms of harassment.
 Hence this Bill.
    
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;  VISHNU DAYAL RAM
July  30, 2024
3

ANNEXURE
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Sർඁൾൽඎඅൾൽ Cൺඌඍൾඌ ൺඇൽ ඍඁൾ Sർඁൾൽඎඅൾൽ Tඋංൻൾඌ 
(Pඋൾඏൾඇඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Aඍඋඈർංඍංൾඌ) Aർඍ, 1989]
(33 of 1989)
  * * * * * *
 2. ( 1)  * * * * * *
    ( bc) “economic boycott” means,– 
      ( i) a refusal to deal with, work for hire or do business with other 
    person; or 
      ( ii) to deny opportunities including access to services or contractual 
    opportunities for rendering service for consideration; or 
      ( iii) to refuse to do anything on the terms on which things would be 
    commonly done in the ordinary course of business; or 
      ( iv) to abstain from the professional or business relations that one 
    would maintain with other person; 
    ( bd) exclusive special court means the exclusive special court established 
  under sub-section (1) of section 14 exclusively to try the offences under this 
  Act;
  * * * * * *
    ( bf) manual scavenger shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (g) 
  of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual 
  Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013 (25 of 2013);
  * * * * * *
 3. ( 1) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled 
Tribe,— 
  * * * * * *
    ( zc) imposes or threatens a social or economic boycott of any person or a 
  family or a group belonging to a Scheduled Castes or a Scheduled Tribes.
  * * * * * *
4
Definitions.
Punishments 
for offences 
atrocities.

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL 
further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, M.P .) 