THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS AND DISTRICT COURTS
(USE OF OFFICIAL LANGUAGES) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the use of official languages in the proceedings of the Supreme Court,
High Courts and district courts and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court, High Courts and 'District Courts (Use
of Official Languages) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by a notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointed day" means the date as may be notified by the appropriate
Government for the purposes of this Act;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 164 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Definitions.

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means—
(i) in the case of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, the Central
Government; and
(ii) in the case of a district court, the State Government concerned;
(c) "district court" includes the courts subordinate thereto established in the
States by the High Court concerned;
(d) "document" means document as defined in section 3 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872;
(e) "High Court" means a Court as defined in clause (14) of article 366 or
established under article 231 of the Constitution and includes its benches;
(f) "official language" means the official language of the Union under article 343
of the Constitution and includes the language in use for official purposes in any State;
(g) "party" includes any person authorized by the party to the matter or an
advocate for the party;
(h) "proceedings" include pleadings, petition, application, appeal, reference,
revision, review, affidavit, counter affidavit, other documents filed or received during
course of conduct of the matter, appearance, leading of arguments, during hearing in
any matter, judgment, decree or order and such other matters as may be prescribed by
the Supreme Court, High Courts or district court, as the case may be; and
(i) "Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of India.
3. (1) From the appointed day, any party to the proceedings before the Supreme Court
or any High Court or district court, as the case may be, shall have the right to prefer the
official language in conduct of such proceedings in that court.
(2) The party to the proceedings shall make an application to the Supreme Court, High
Court or district court for the conduct of the proceedings in the official language in such
manner as may be laid down by the Supreme Court or the High Court or district court
concerned, as the case may be.
4. (1) Where any party to the proceedings has made preference for the conduct of
proceedings in official language, the Supreme Court or High Court or district court, as the
case may be, shall conduct proceedings before it in that official language.
(2) The Supreme Court, High Court or district court, as the case may be, may lay down
by rules the procedure for conduct of proceedings in the official language:
Provided that such procedure shall not entail any additional expense on any party to
the case for conducting such proceedings in the official language.
5. The appropriate Government shall take such measures as may be necessary to
ensure availability of requisite infrastructure in the Supreme Court, High Courts and
district courts for the conduct of proceedings in the official language.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, requisite infrastructure includes
appropriate translation and typing facility in the official language and such other facilities
as may be necessary for conduct of the proceedings in the official languages.
Right of the
party to
prefer official
language
during the
course of
proceedings.
Conduct of
proceedings in
the Supreme
Court, High
Courts and
District
Courts.
Measures by
appropriate
Government
for providing
requisite
infrastructure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 345 of the Constitution provides that the Legislature of a State may by law
adopt any one or more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the language or
languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of that State.
Article 350 provides that every person shall be entitled to submit a representation for
the redress of any grievance to any officer or authority of the Union or a State in any of the
languages used in the Union or in the State, as the case may be.
Article 351 provides that it shall be the duty of the Union to promote the spread of the
Hindi language, to develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the
elements of the composite culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating
without interfering with its genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani and
in the other languages of India specified in the Eighth Schedule, and by drawing, wherever
necessary or desirable, for its vocabulary, primarily on Sanskrit and secondarily on other
languages.
Nonetheless, article 348 provides that Parliament may, by law provide for the use of
language other than English for the proceedings in the Supreme Court and High Courts.
However, at present all the work in the Courts is being transacted in English language only.
It is a matter of concern for most of the persons in the country. Until and unless the petitioner
is able to understand the language of the hearing, right to just hearing cannot be ensured.
There is a legal saying that justice should not only be done, but it should also be seen to be
done. Everyone has a right to get justice in the language he is well versed.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
August 3, 2018.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall take such measures
as may be necessary for ensuring availability of requisite infrastructure in the Supreme
Court, High Courts and district courts within its jurisdiction for conduct of proceedings in
the official language in the Supreme Court, High Courts and district courts, as the case may
be. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the exact amount of recurring and
non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved.
4

MGIPMRND—1842LS(S3)—01-11-2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the use of official languages in the proceedings of the Supreme Court,
High Courts and district courts and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)