1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 164 of  2015
THE UNAUTHORISED COLONIES, SLUMS AND JHUGGI-JHOPRI
CLUSTERS (BASIC AMENITIES AND OTHER PROVISIONS)
BILL,  2015
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the regularization of unauthorised colonies existing for two or more than
two years and to provide basic amenities like drinking water, sanitation, healthcare,
electricity, toilets, sewerage and management of garbage in such unauthorised
colonies, slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of  the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unauthorised Colonies, Slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri
Clusters (Basic Amenities and Other Provisions) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
National
Policy for
Unauthorised
Colonies,
Slums and
Jhuggi-Jhopri
Clusters.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "basic amenities" include provision of drinking water, electricity, street
lighting, sewerage, toilets, drainage system, garbage disposal, sanitation, healthcare
facilities, educational facilities, recreational facilities, marketing facilities, transportation
facilities and access to public distribution system;
(b) "competent authority" means such officer or authority as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the competent
authority for the purposes of this Act;
(c) "jhuggi-jhopri cluster" means an area consisting of jhuggi-jhopri clusters,
generally built with bricks and mud, metal or wood having thatched or tin sheet or
polythene roof covering;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "slum" includes an area consisting of unplanned and shabbily built and
over crowded houses in unhygienic atmosphere without civic amenities and such
other areas as may be declared so by the competent authority; and
(f) "unauthorised colony" means a colony not approved by the competent
authority having jurisdiction and is in existence for two or more years.
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a policy for unauthorised colonies,
which shall provide, inter alia, for the following, namely :—
(a) regularization of all unauthorised colonies;
(b) improvement or removal of slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters;
(c) alternative accommodation to the dwellers of slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters;
(d) construction and allotment of dwelling units with all basic amenities to dwellers
of the slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters;
(e) provision of basic civic amenities such as potable water supply, electricity for
domestic use, metallic roads, street lighting, sewerage, toilets including community
toilets and proper drainage, sanitation and garbage disposal system in slums and
jhuggi-jhopri cluster areas;
(f) healthcare facilities through Health Centres, dispensaries, pathological labs
and mobile clinics for the inhabitants, including distribution of medicines, mosquito
nets and repellants and fumigate free of cost from time to time and in particular during
rainy season to protect the inhabitants from vector-borne diseases like malaria, dengue,
chikungunya, encephalitis or filariasis;
(g) educational facilities, playgrounds and recreational facilities for children;
(h) shopping facilities for daily household needs including vegetables and fruits;
(i) accessibility to public distribution system and providing fuel for domestic
consumption such as kerosene, LPG or pipeline gas connections;
(j) financial assistance or training to inhabitants of slum and jhuggi-jhopri clusters
to enable them to become self-employed; and
(k)  transportation facilities.
4. The Central Government shall, within one year from the date of the commencement
of this Act, by notification in Official Gazette, implement the policy formulated under
section 3, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) regularisation  of  all  unauthorised  colonies; and
(b) provision of all basic amenities in the regularised colonies.
Regularisation
of
unauthorised
colonies and
provisions of
basic
amenities.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. For the purpose of effective implementation of this Act, the Central Government
shall, through the competent authority,—
(i) carry out the works of improvement in slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters
from time to time in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) provide all basic amenities in slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(iii) extend financial assistance or vocational training to the inhabitants of
slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters for their self-employment; and
(iv) construct and allot dwelling units to the inhabitants of slums and jhuggi-
jhopri clusters where such areas have been declared as slum clearance areas.
6. (1) Where the competent authority is satisfied that most satisfactory method of
dealing with conditions in a slum area is the demolition of all the buildings in the area, the
authority shall by an order notified in the Official Gazette declare the area to be a clearance
area, that is to say, an area to be cleared of all buildings in accordance with provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) The competent authority shall give adequate notice to the inhabitants of slums and
jhuggi-jhopri clusters before demolition of houses, shelters or buildings.
(3) The competent authority shall not remove or demolish any jhuggi-jhopri clusters
till all residents of the area have been evacuated and allotted alternative dwelling units with
all basic amenities at convenient locations.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds every year for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for time being
in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matter dealt with in this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the  rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
basic
amenities to
inhabitants of
slums and
construct new
dwelling unit
through
competent
authority.
Competent
authority to
declare any
slum area to
be a clearance
area.
Central
Government
to make
provision of
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our  country is very vast and is the second most populous country after China.
Seventy per cent. of our population lives in villages and poverty is rampant in rural India.
Driven by poverty and to earn their livelihood or fulfil their dreams,  people migrate to urban
areas especially to the metropolitan cities. Millions of such migrant people and also some
local population settle down in slums, jhuggi-jhopri clusters and unauthorised colonies and
even on footpaths or pavements under the open sky in most inhuman conditions without
basic civic amenities like potable water, electricity, toilets, sanitations, sewerage, healthcare,
education etc. Such slums, jhuggi-jhopri clusters and unauthorised colonies exist in various
parts of urban areas and metropolitan cities including the national capital city of Delhi. In
Delhi regularisation of unauthorised colonies has always been a burning problem for
successive Central Government. The number of slums, jhuggi-jhopri clusters and unauthorised
colonies is increasing and millions of people continue to languish in stinking and inhuman
conditions and thus fall victims to various fatal diseases. These slums, jhuggi-jhopri clusters
and unauthorised colonies have also gained notoriety for other reasons but majority of
people living there are law abiding citizens. Despite all this, we do not have a policy to
address the problems of slums, jhuggi-jhopri clusters and unauthorised colonies.
Being a welfare State, the Central Government and the State Governments are duty
bound to initiate welfare measures for the residents of slums, jhuggi-jhopri clusters and
unauthorised colonies by providing them basic civic amenities. It has been observed that
such areas are also neglected by local authorities which are responsible for providing civic
amenities citing various technical and legal reasons. The Central Government should come
forward and bear all the expenses in implementing the provisions of this Bill.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL  CHINAYYA  SHETTY
May 7, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for regularisation of unauthorised colonies and provisions
of basic amenities in unauthorised colonies. Clause 5 provides for basic amenities,
improvement in slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters, financial assistance to inhabitants for
self-employment and construction of new dwelling units for inhabitants of slums and
jhuggi-jhopri clusters through the competent authority. Clause 7 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-five thousand crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the regularization of unauthorised colonies existing for two or more than
two years and to provide basic amenities like drinking water, sanitation, healthcare,
electricity, toilets, sewerage and management of garbage in such  unauthorised
colonies, slums and jhuggi-jhopri clusters and for matters  connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1219LS(S3)—14.07.2015.