As uytropycep in Lox Sana

2 4nove

Bill No. 164 of 1982

THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (SPECIAL PROVISIONS)
AMENDMENT BILL, 1992

A
BILL

further to amend the Essential Commodities (Special Provisions) Act,
1981 and to make special provisions by way of amendment to the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Essential Commodities (Special short

Provisions) Amendment Act, 1992. titte and
com-
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 27th day of mence-
August, 1992. ment.

2. In paragraph 2 of the preamble to the Essential Commodities Amend-
(Special Provisions) Act, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as the principal ment of
Act), for the words “ten years”, the words “fifteen years” shall be Pr"

10 substituted. he

3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words Amend-
“ten years”, the words “fifteen years” shall be substituted. _—-


2

Inger. 4, After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
tion of _ inserted, Ramey —) 0५ .e

new sec- 9०७ ५४1५ >

tion 9A.

Inser- ‘9A, In the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, after section 10A,
tion of the following section shall be inserted, namely; —

new sec-

tion

10AA in

Act 10

of 1955.

Power to “10AA, Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
arrest. Criminal Procedure, 1973, no officer below the rank of an officer

in charge of a police station or any police officer authorised by
him in this behalf in writing, shall arrest any person accused of
committing an offence punishable under this Act,”

Repeal 5. (1) The Essential Commodities (Special Provisions) Amendment
me Ordinance, 1992 is hereby repealed, |

savmg. |]

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended
by this Act. i



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act) provides for regulation of production, supply and pricing
of essential commodities. The principal Act has been amended from
time to time to make its provisions more effective.

2, With a view to dealing more effectively with persons indulging
in anti-social activities like hoarding and blackmarketing and the evil
of vicious inflationary prices, the Essential Commodities (Special Pro-
visions) Act, 1981 was enacted by Parliament. The said Act made special
provisions by way of amendments to the principal Act for a temporary
period of five years. These provisions related inter alia to:—

6) the trial in a summary way of all offences under the princi-
pal Act;

(ii) the constitution, for the purposes of such trial, of Special
Courts, consisting of a single judge appointed by a High Court, who
is to be a person qualified to be a Judge of a High Court or who is
or has been a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge for
not less than one year;

(iii) providing minimum mandatory imprisonment for a period of
not less than 3 months for all offences except an offence of abetment
in regard to procuring of foodstuffs or drugs by persons for their
‘own use or for the use of any member of their family, and not for
the purpose of carrying on any business or trade which is punish-
able with fine only; Z

(iv) providing for enhancement of the term of imprisonment
awardable in case of conviction in a summary trial from one year
to two years;

(v) making of all offences under the principal Act to be non-
bailable;

(vi) providing for stricter provisions for grant of bail and
making it obligatory on the part of the Special Courts to give an
opportunity to the prosecution to oppose bail application.

3. The provisions of the Essential Commodities (Special Provisions)
Act, 1981 were brought into force on 1st September, 1982 in all the
States and Union territories except the Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
Arunachal Pradesh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Mizoram.
The said provisions were extended by the Essential Commodities (Special
Provisions) Continuance Act, 1987 (25 of 1987) for a further period of
five years with effect from Ist September, 1987.

3


4

4. The reasons for which the above-mentioned special provisions
enacted and brought into force still continue to exist. The question
their continuance has, therefore, been considered in consultation |
the State Governments and Union territories administrations, who
of the view that the said provisions have proved very useftl
effective and should continue in force. Keeping these aspects in view,
the Essential Commodities (Special Provisions) Amendment Ordinance,
1992 (Ord. 12 of 1992) was promulgated by the President on 27th
August, 1992 to extend the life of the Essential Commodities (Specia
Provisions) Act, 1981 for a further Period of five years with effect from
Ist September, 1992. : i

5. A new. section 10AA had also been inserted in the principal Act
to provide that no officer below the rank of an officer in charge of a
police station or any police officer authorised by him in writing shall
arrest a person accused of committing an offence punishable under the |
Act.

6. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance,

‘New Deu;

KAMALUDDIN AF “ED.
The 22nd October, 1992. है



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to extend the period of operation of the
Essential Commodities (Special Provisions) Act, 1981 for a further period
of five years with effect from Ist September, 1992. By virtue thereof
the Special Courts established under section 12A of the Essential Com-
modities Act, 1955, will, continue and new Special Courts can also be
established in the next five years. The expenditure on such Court in
the Union territories which do not have their owh Consolidated Funds
will have to be met by the Central Government.

2. A provision of Rs. 2 lakhs and Rs, 1 lakh per annum for recurring
and non-recurring expenditure under non-plan was made at the time
of giving extension in 1987. It is indicated that in the Union territories
such as Delhi, Chandigarh and Pondicherry, where such Courts
have been set up, the existing Sessions/Additional Sessions Courts have
been designated as Special Courts to try offences under the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955. Therefore, there is presently no extra expenditure
towards the salaries of Judges and the supporting staff which are met
from the non-plan Budget for the Union territories for judicial establish-
ments, However, a token outlay of recurring and non-recurring expen-
ditute respectively of Rs. 2 lakhs and Rs. 1 lakh only for the first yeat
4m respect of the Union territories is anticipated.


ANNEXURE

Exrracts From tits Essentran Commoorries (SPECIAL Provistons)
Acr, 198. i ual

(18 or 1981)

* * * * *

|
AND WHEREAS for dealing more effectively with persons indulging in
such anti-social activities and the evil of vicious inflationary prices, it is
necessary to make certain special provisions by way of amendments to
the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, for a period of ten years;

* % * % *

ACD): * * * = *

(3) It shall cease to have effect on the expiry of ten years from the
date of commencement of this Act! except as respects: things done 68:
omitted to be done before such cesser of operation 6f. this Act, and-
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon suth cesser
of operation of this Act as if it had then been repealed by 8 Ceniral Act,

a1 if
* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Essential Commodities (Special Provisions) Act,

1981 and to make special provisions by way of amendment to the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955.

(Shri Kamal-Uddin Ahmed, Minister of State in the Ministry of
a Civil Supplies and Public Distribution.)

at lll ४