Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE BUREAU OF ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2019
By
SHRI NARANBHAI KACHHADIY A,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest measures for
rooting out corruption; making the administration efficient and for matters
 connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Accountability Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Bureau" means the Bureau of Accountability established under section 3;
and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No. 165 of 2019
Definitions.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Bureau to be known as the Bureau of Accountability for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) The Bureau shall consist of—
(i) three serving or retired Judges of the Supreme Court of India;
(ii) the Cabinet Secretary to the Central Government;
(iii) the Home Secretary to the Central Government;
(iv) Director of the Intelligence Bureau;
(v) Director of the Central Bureau of Investigation;
(vi) one retired General of the Army to be nominated by the Central Government;
(vii) an eminent social worker to be nominated by the Central Government;
(viii) an eminent political worker to be nominated by the Central Government;
(ix) two Members of Parliament one each from the House of the People and the
Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
and
(x) three serving or retired Chairpersons of Public Sector Undertakings to be
nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The members of the Bureau shall have such tenure from the date of their appointment
or nomination, as may be prescribed.
(4) The Bureau shall have its head office located at New Delhi.
(5) The Bureau shall have its offices in every State and Union territory.
(6) The Central Government shall appoint such number of Officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau.
(7) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
members and officers and staff of the Bureau shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Chairperson of the Bureau shall be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst the three serving or retired Judges of the Bureau to preside over the meetings of the
Bureau.
5. The Bureau shall take steps and suggest measures to the Central Government to—
(i) accelerate the pace of working in the Ministries of Government of India;
(ii) make the administration corruption free; and
(iii) implement the policies framed by the Central Government within the prescribed
time period.
6. The members of the Bureau shall carry out surprise inspections of various Ministries
and Departments of the Central Government and the Public Sector Undertakings from time to
time and suggest measures for carrying out administrative reforms in the functioning of the
Ministries, Departments and Public Sector Undertakings.
7.  (1
) The Bureau shall formulate rules for its internal working and the rules so made
shall be laid on the Table of each House of Parliament.
(2) If any amendment is made to the rules frame under sub-section (1), the amendment
so made shall also be laid on the Table of each House of Parliament.
Establishment
of a Bureau of
Accounta-
bility.
2
Chairperson of
the Bureau.
Functions of
the Bureau.
Procedure to
be followed by
the Bureau in
its function-
ing.
Powers of
Bureau.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
3
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It has been emphasized time and again that low performing and inefficient bureaucracy
is big hurdle in the development of the country. Some senior officers and their subordinates
working in Government offices do not dispose of their official works within the prescribed or
reasonable time period. Many important files remain pending for months in Government
Offices and offices of Public Sector Undertakings which in turn leads to corruption. It is,
therefore, necessary that a high powered permanent Bureau should be set up to accelerate
the pace of work of bureaucracy and ensure timely completion of work. This will also help in
rooting out corruption.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NARANBHAI  KACHHADIYA
June 20, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a Bureau of
Accountability. It further provides that the Central Government shall appoint such number
of officers and staff as it considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest measures for
rooting out corruption; making the administration efficient and for matters
 connected therewith.
————
(Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1236LS(S3)—09.07.2019.