1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR TINY INDUSTRIES BILL, 2016
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a National Commission for Tiny Industries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Tiny Industries
Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 165 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should
take under its control the regulation of products and processes of tiny industries.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "National Commission" means the National Commission for Tiny Industries
constituted under section 4;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "State Commission" means the State Commission for Tiny Industries
constituted under section 6; and
(d) "tiny industry" means any industry involved in the manufacturing or
processing of consumer or household products such as breads, biscuits, and other
confectionery items, fast food or other food products, detergents, soaps, kitchen
items, shoe and leather goods, cosmetics and skin care products, herbal products for
medicinal and other purposes, stationery and electrical items, hardware and sanitary-
ware items or any other item which may be prescribed and where the total capital
invested in running the business does not exceed rupees ten lakh.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Commission for Tiny Industries for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The National Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and four other members
possessing such qualifications as may be specified by the Central Government, to be appointed
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of, service
of, the Chairperson and other members of the National Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5. The National Commission shall—
(i) formulate a National Policy for the promotion and development of tiny
industries;
(ii) coordinate with the States and Union territory Administrations regarding
promotion and development of tiny industries;
(iii) formulate guidelines regarding financial assistance or loans by banks or
financial institutions to tiny industries;
(iv) recommend to the Central Government the steps to be taken for the welfare
of persons engaged in tiny industries; and
(v) undertake such other functions, as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
6. (1) Every State Government shall, constitute a Commission to be known as the State
Commission for Tiny Industries for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The State Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and four other members to
be appointed by the State Government, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. The State Commission shall—
(i) provide financial assistance to the tiny industries in matters such as acquiring
licence and building of infrastructure;
Declaration as
to expediency
of control by
Union.
Definitions.
Constitution
of National
Commission
for Tiny
Industries.
Functions of
National
Commission.
Constitution
of State
Commission
for Tiny
Industries.
Functions of
State
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(ii) provide assistance to the tiny industries in obtaining loans from scheduled
banks and other financial institutions;
(iii) implement the National Policy framed under clause ( i) sub-section (1) of
section 5 for development of tiny industries in their respective jurisdiction;
(iv) advise the concerned State Government regarding any matter relating to
development of tiny industries in the State;
(v) furnish regular reports or information, as the case may be, to the National
Commission from time to time; and
(vi) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State
Government.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The tiny industries i.e. industries where the total capital invested in running the business
does not exceed rupees ten lakh, are very important for our economy as they prevent
concentration of wealth in few hands and decentralize the manufacturing processes and
provide employment on large scale. These are the industries involved in the manufacturing
or processing of consumer or household products such as bread, biscuit and other
confectionery items, fast food or other food products, detergents, soaps, kitchen items, shoe
and leather goods, cosmetics and skin care products, herbal products for medicinal and
other purposes, stationery and electrical items, hardware and sanitary ware items.
Tiny Industries simultaneously provide choice to the consumers and act as a source
of revenue to the State by way of payment of taxes. However, there is no clear-cut policy for
the development of small and tiny industries in the country. Earlier, certain categories of
industries were reserved exclusively for the small scale sector, but now it has been dispensed
with. Now big industrial houses and even multinational companies are penetrating the small
scale sector as well as the retail sector, thereby causing a threat to the existence of small and
tiny industries, as they are not in a position to compete with the former. Further, the small
scale entrepreneurs have to run from pillar to post in order to obtain loans, licences, and
other infrastructural facilities. There is no proper authority to assist them and address their
grievances.
It is, therefore, proposed to constitute a National Commission for Tiny Industries and
similar commissions at State level to promote and develop tiny industries.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
May  12, 2016

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Commission for Tiny
Industries. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson and other members of the
Commission. Clause 6 provides for constitution of State Commission for Tiny Industries.
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely
to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a National Commission for Tiny Industries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1109LS(S3)—11.07.2016.