(i)
CLAUSES
Bill No. 165 of  2017
THE FINANCIAL RESOLUTION AND DEPOSIT INSURANCE
BILL, 2017
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER  II
RESOLUTION CORPORATION
3. Establishment of Corporation.
4. Management of Corporation.
5. Restriction on future employment of  Members.
6. Removal of  Members.
7. Powers of Chairperson.
8. Meetings of Corporation.
9. Members not to participate in meetings in certain cases.
10. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings.
11. Power to appoint officers and employees.
12. Functions of officers.
13. Powers and functions of Corporation.
14. Powers of investigation.
15. Powers pending investigation.
16. Search and seizure.
17. Power to enter premises and inspect, etc.
18. Conditions on exercise of powers.
19. Constitution of committees.
20. Consultation and  transparency.
21. Funds of Corporation.
22. Fees, etc., to be paid to Corporation.
23. Grants by Central Government.
24. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER III
S
YSTEMICALLY IMPORTANT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
25. Designation of  systemically important financial institution.
26. Consequence of designation.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

(ii)
CLAUSES
27. De-designation of systemically important financial institution.
28. Delegation of powers by Central Government.
CHAPTER  IV
LIABILITY OF CORPORATION TO INSURED DEPOSITORS OF INSURED SERVICE PROVIDERS
29. Liability of Corporation to insured depositors of insured service providers.
30. Manner of payment by Corporation.
31. Discharge of  liability of  Corporation.
32. Provision for unpaid amounts.
CHAPTER  V
R
EGISTRATION
33. Registration of specified service provider.
34. Withdrawal or cancellation  of registration of specified service provider.
35. Withdrawal or cancellation of registration not to affect liability to pay premia, etc.
CHAPTER  VI
RESOLUTION OF SPECIFIED SERVICE PROVIDER
36. Classification of specified service providers into categories of risk to viability.
37. Consultation in case of difference of opinion over classification.
CHAPTER  VII
RESTORA TION PLAN AND RESOLUTION PLAN
38. Submission of plans.
39. Contents of restoration plan.
40. Contents of resolution plan.
41. Change, revision, etc., of resolution plan and restoration plan.
CHAPTER  VIII
M
ATERIAL, IMMINENT AND CRITICAL RISK TO VIABILITY
42. Material risk to viability.
43. Imminent risk to viability.
44. Additional powers of appropriate regulator in respect of central counterparty.
45. Critical risk to viability.
46. Show cause notice.
CHAPTER  IX
E
FFECT ON TERMINATION RIGHTS UNDER SPECIFIED CONTRACTS
47. Effect on termination rights under specified contracts.
CHAPTER  X
METHODS AND TIME LIMIT OF RESOLUTION
48. Methods of resolving a specified service provider.
49. Contents of scheme.
50. Transfer of assets and liabilities to bridge service provider.
51. Claw-back of  performance incentive.

(iii)
CLAUSES
52. Bail-in.
53. Bail-in instrument in relation to securities.
54. Onward transfer of securities.
55. Safeguards for applying methods of resolution.
56. Time limit on resolution.
57. Continuity of certain functions.
CHAPTER  XI
A
DMINISTRA TION
58. Powers of Corporation as an administrator.
59. Functions of administrator.
60. Power of Corporation to remove managerial and other persons from office.
61. Power of Corporation to appoint additional directors.
62. Supersession of board of directors.
CHAPTER  XII
L
IQUIDATION
63. Order of  liquidation.
64. Cessation of liability to pay premium.
65. Bar on jurisdiction and transfer of proceedings.
66. Powers of Corporation as a liquidator.
67. Liquidation estate.
68. Power of liquidator to access information.
69. Consolidation of claims.
70. Verification of claims.
71. Special provisions to make calls on contributories.
72. Manner of payment of deposit insurance by Corporation in case of liquidation.
73. Admission or rejection of claims and payment of deposit insurance.
74. Appeal against decision of liquidator.
75. Determination of  valuation of claims.
76. Documents of specified service provider to be evidence.
77. Public examination of directors and auditors.
78. Power of Tribunal to assess damages against delinquent directors, etc.
79. Secured creditor in liquidation proceedings.
80. Distribution of assets.
81. Dissolution of specified service provider.
82. Preferential transactions and relevant time.
83. Orders in case of preferential transactions.
84. Avoidance of undervalued transactions.
85. Relevant period for avoidable transactions.
86. Application by creditor in cases of undervalued transactions.
87. Order in cases  of undervalued transaction.
88. Transactions defrauding creditors.

(iv)
CLAUSES
89. Extortionate credit transactions.
90. Orders of Tribunal in respect of extortionate credit transactions.
91. Assistance by related parties.
92. Assistance and co-operation.
CHAPTER  XIII
V
OLUNTARY LIQUIDATION AND WINDING UP
93. Voluntary liquidation.
94. Winding up under section 271 of the Companies Act, 2013.
CHAPTER  XIV
FOREIGN RESOLUTION ACTION
95. Power to enter into memorandum of understanding.
96. Recognition and enforcement or refusal of recognition and enforcement of foreign
resolution actions.
97. Rights of local creditors in certain cases.
CHAPTER  XV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
98. Punishment for concealment of property.
99. Punishment for transactions defrauding creditors.
100. Punishment for misconduct on liquidation.
101. Punishment for falsification of books of specified service provider.
102. Punishment for wilful and material omissions from statements relating to affairs of
specified service provider.
103. Punishment for contravention of prohibition made under this Act.
104. Punishment for interference in investigation.
105. Other offences.
106. Offences by companies.
107. Penalty for contravention of provisions of this Act or rules and regulations made
thereunder.
108. Penalty in relation to restoration and resolution plans.
109. Power to adjudicate penalty.
110. Recovery of penalty under this Chapter.
111. Appeal against order of penalty.
112. Trial of offences by Special Court.
113. Appeal and revision.
CHAPTER  XVI
COMPENSA TION
114. Application and appointment of valuer.
115. Access to information.
116. Valuation report.
117. Confidentiality.

(v)
CLAUSES
118. Award of compensation.
119. Appeal and finality of resolution action.
CHAPTER  XVII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ELIGIBLE CO-OPERATIVE BANKS
120. Continuation of deposit insurance for eligible co-operative banks.
121. Circumstances in which winding up of eligible co-operative banks can be sought
under this Act.
CHAPTER  XVIII
MISCELLANEOUS
122. Repayment of amount to Corporation.
123. Declaration of fidelity.
124. Disclosure of information.
125. Indemnity of  Members.
126. Protection of action taken under this Act.
127. Provisions of the Competition Act, 2002 not to apply in certain cases.
128. Information sharing between appropriate regulator and Corporation.
129. Budget.
130. Annual report.
131. Power of Central Government to supersede Corporation.
132. Power to exempt central counterparties from application of  certain provisions of this
Act.
133. Bar of  jurisdiction.
134. Members, officers and employees of  Corporation to be public servants.
135. Amounts collected as penalties.
136. Exemption from tax on income, profits and gains.
137. Provisions of this Act to override other laws.
138. Information utility.
139. Liquidation of the Corporation.
140. Power to make rules.
141. Power to make regulations.
142. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
143. Power to remove difficulties.
144. Power of Central Government to give directions.
145. Repeal and savings.
146. Amendment of certain enactments.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.— Appropriate Regulator.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.— Specified Service Provider.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.— Declaration of  Fidelity and Secrecy.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.— Amendment to Certain Enactments.

1
Short title and
commencement.
18 of 2013.
THE FINANCIAL RESOLUTION AND DEPOSIT INSURANCE BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for the resolution of certain categories of financial service providers in
distress; the deposit insurance to consumers of certain categories of financial services;
designation of systemically important financial institutions;and establishment of a
Resolution Corporation for protection of consumers of specified service
providers and of public funds for ensuring the stability and resilience
of the financial system and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) "Appellate Tribunal" means the  National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
established under section 410 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(2) "appropriate regulator" means a financial sector regulator specified under
Definitions.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 165 of  2017
5
10

2
the First Schedule, and includes  financial sector regulators where the specified service
provider is regulated by more than one financial sector regulator; and in that case
such regulators shall, from amongst them, designate a lead regulator by entering into
a memorandum of understanding, and in case of any disagreement, the Central
Government may designate a lead regulator;
(3) "banking" means the banking as defined in clause ( b) of section 5 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(4) "banking institution" means a banking company as defined in clause (c) of
section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and includes—
(i) a corresponding new bank as defined in clause (da) of section 5 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(ii) an eligible co-operative bank;
(iii) a multi-state co-operative bank as defined in clause ( cciiia) of
section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(iv) a Regional Rural Bank established under sub-section (1) of section 3
of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976; and
(v) the State Bank of India constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3
of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 and its subsidiary banks as defined in
clause (nd) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(5) "bridge service provider" means a company limited by shares, created by
the Corporation under section 50;
(6) "central counterparty" means an entity that interposes itself between
counterparties to contracts traded in one or more financial markets, becoming the
buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer and thereby ensuring the
performance of open contracts, and includes a system provider operating as a central
counterparty under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 or a clearing
corporation under section 8A of the Securities Contract Regulation Act, 1956;
(7) "co-operative bank" means—
(i) a State co-operative bank  as defined in clause ( u) of section 2 of the
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981;
(ii) a central co-operative bank  as defined under clause (d) of section 2 of
the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981; and
(iii) a primary co-operative bank as defined in  clause (ccv) of section 56
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(8) "consumer" means a person who has availed or avails or intends to avail of
a financial service or had or has or intends to have a right or interest in a financial
service;
(9) "Corporation" means the Resolution Corporation established under
section 3;
(10) "critical functions" means functions which,—
(i)  may have a significant impact on a specified service provider if suddenly
discontinued;
(ii)  are not easily substitutable;
(iii) are specific to a specified service provider;
(iv) such other functions as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation, in consultation with the appropriate regulator;
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
21 of 1976.
10 of 1949.
51 of 2007.
42 of 1956.
61 of 1981.
10 of 1949.
61 of 1981.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(11) "deposit" means the aggregate of the unpaid balances due to a depositor
(other than a foreign Government, the Central Government, a State Government, or a
banking institution or a co-operative bank) in respect of all his accounts, by whatever
name called, with a banking institution, and includes credit balances in any cash
credit account, but does not include—
(i) where a banking institution on the commencement of this Act or an
eligible co-operative bank is working under a scheme of compromise or
arrangement sanctioned by the competent authority providing for the
acceptance of fresh deposits, any amount due to the depositor in respect of his
deposit before the date of the coming into force of the scheme to the extent it is
not credited after that date under the provisions of the scheme; or
(ii) any amount due on account of any deposit with an insured service
provider which has been specially exempted in this behalf by the Corporation
with the previous approval of the appropriate regulator;
(iii) any amount due on account of any deposit received outside India,
and the expression "depositor"shall be construed accordingly;
(12) "deposit insurance" means the insurance provided by the Corporation to
depositors of an insured service provider, under section 29;
(13) "eligible co-operative bank" means a co-operative bank, other than a multi-
State co-operative bank, the law for the time being in force, under which such co-
operative bank is governed, provides that—
(i) an order for the winding up, or sanctioning a scheme of compromise or
arrangement or of amalgamation, of the bank, may be made only with the previous
sanction of the Reserve Bank of India;
(ii) an order for the winding up of the bank shall be made if so required by
the Reserve Bank of India in the circumstances referred to in section121;
(iii) if so required by the Reserve Bank  of India in the public interest or
for preventing the affairs of the bank being conducted in a manner detrimental
to the interests of the depositors or for securing the proper management of the
bank, an order shall be made for the supersession of the committee of
management or other managing body (by whatever name called) of the bank
and the appointment of an administrator therefor;
(iv) the power exercisable by the Reserve Bank of India under sub-clauses
(i), (ii) and (iii) shall only be exercisable by the Corporation in the event of the
bank being classified as imminent or critical risk to viability under this Act;
(v) an order for the winding up of the bank or an order sanctioning  a
scheme of compromise or arrangement or of amalgamation or an order for the
supersession of the committee of management or other managing body (by
whatever name called) of the bank and the appointment of an administrator
thereof made with the previous sanction in writing or on the requisition of the
Reserve Bank of India or the Corporation, as the case may be, shall not be liable
to be called in question in any manner; and
(vi) the liquidator or the insured service provider or the transferee bank,
as the case may be, shall be under an obligation to pay to the Corporation in the
circumstances, to the extent and in the manner referred to in section 29;
(14) "financial market infrastructure" includes—
(i) a depository as defined in the Depositories Act, 1996;
(ii) a payment systems and the trade repositories defined in the Payment
and Settlement Systems Act, 2007;
22 of 1996.
51 of 2007.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(iii) a recognised stock exchange as defined in the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956;
(iv) a securities settlement system;
(v) a clearing corporation referred to in section 8A of the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956; and
(vi) such other entity,
as may be notified by the Central Government, but shall not include a settlement
system owned or operated by the Reserve Bank of India;
(15) "financial service provider" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in clause (17) of section 3 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016;
(16) "information utility" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (21) of section 3 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016;
(17) "insurance company" means any person who has obtained the certificate
of registration under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Insurance Act, 1938 and
includes the Life Insurance Corporation of India and the General Insurance Corporation
of India;
(18) "insured deposit" means the deposit or any portion thereof, the repayment
of which is insured by the Corporation under section 29;
(19) "insured service provider" means any banking institution, that has obtained
deposit insurance under sub-section ( 3) of section 33;
(20) "liquidation commencement date" means the date on which the Tribunal
passes an order of liquidation under section 63;
(21) "Member" means a Member of the Corporation appointed under sub-
section (2) of section 4;
(22) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette, and
the expression "notified" or "notify" shall be construed accordingly;
(23) "person", whether resident in India or outside, includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu Undivided Family;
(iii) a company;
(iv) a trust;
(v) a partnership;
(vi) a limited liability partnership;
(vii ) an association of persons or body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not;
(viii) a body corporate or artificial juridical person not falling within clauses
(i) to (vii); and
(ix) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any of the
persons mentioned in clauses ( i) to (vii);
(24) "premium" means the sum payable by an insured service provider for
deposit insurance under sub-section ( 2) of section 22;
(25) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government
under this Act;
42 of 1956.
42 of 1956.
31of 2016.
31of 2016.
4 of 1938.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(26) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Corporation or appropriate
regulator, as the case may be, under this Act;
(27) "related to a specified service provider" means-
(i) a director or a partner of the specified service provider or a relative of
a director or partner of the specified service provider;
(ii) a key managerial personnel of the specified service provider or a
relative of a key managerial personnel of the specified service provider;
(iii) a limited liability partnership or a partnership firm in which a director,
partner, or manager of the specified service provider or his relative is a partner;
(iv) a private company in which a director, partner or manager of the
specified service provider is a director and holds along with his relatives, more
than two per cent. of its share capital;
(v) a public company in which a director, partner or manager of the specified
service provider is a director and holds along with his relatives, more than two
per cent. of its paid-up share capital;
(vi) any body corporate whose board of directors, managing director or
manager, in the ordinary course of business, acts on the advice, directions or
instructions of a director, partner or manager of the specified service provider;
(vii) any limited liability partnership or a partnership firm whose partners
or employees in the ordinary course of business, act on the advice, directions
or instructions of a director, partner or manager of the specified service provider;
(viii) any person on whose advice, directions or instructions, a director,
partner or manager of the specified service provider is accustomed to act;
(ix) a body corporate which is a holding, subsidiary or an associate
company of the specified service provider, or a subsidiary of a holding company
for which the specified service provider is a subsidiary;
(x) any person who controls more than twenty per cent. of voting rights
in the specified service provider on account of ownership or a voting agreement;
(xi) any person of which the specified service provider controls more
than twenty per cent. of voting rights on account of ownership or a voting
agreement;
(xii) any person who can control the composition of the board of directors
or corresponding governing body of the specified service provider;
(xiii) any person who is related to the specified service provider on account
of—
(a) participation in policy making processes of the specified service
provider;
(b) having more than two directors in common between the specified
service provider and such person;
(c) interchange of managerial personnel between the specified
service provider and such person; or
(d) provision of essential technical information to, or from, the
specified service provider;
(28) "resolution" means the process of resolving a specified service provider in
accordance with ChapterVI;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(29) "resolution cost" means the cost incurred by the Corporation for
administration and resolution of a specified service provider under this Act, including
the costs for the process of liquidation, if applicable,and such other costs, as may be
specified by regulations made by the Corporation;
(30) "resolution plan" means a plan for the resolution of a specified service
provider prepared in accordance with section 40;
(31) "restoration plan" means a plan for the restoration of a specified service
provider prepared in accordance with section 39;
(32) "run-off entity" means an insurance entity which is under resolution in
accordance with sub-section (2) of  section 48;
(33) "Special Court" means a Special Court established or designated as such
under sub-section (1) of section 435 of the Companies Act, 2013 having jurisdiction in
the matter;
(34) "specified service provider" means a person as specified under the Second
Schedule;
 (35) "systemically important financial institution" means a person designated
as such under section 25 and includes a central counterparty;
(36) "Tribunal" means the National Company Law Tribunal established under
section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013, having jurisdiction in the place where the
registered office of the specified service provider is situated or, in the case of a
specified service provider incorporated outside India, where its principal place of
business in India is situated;
(37) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Insurance Act, 1938, the Banking Regulation Act,
1949, the Securities Contact (Regulation) Act, 1956,  the Securities Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992, the Depositories Act, 1996, the Foreign Exchange Management Act,
1999, the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, the Companies Act, 2013 and
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER  II
R
ESOLUTION CORPORATION
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish for the purposes of this
Act, a Corporation by the name of the Resolution Corporation.
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold or dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the
said name sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Corporation shall be at Mumbai.
(4) The Corporation may establish its offices at other places in India.
4. (1)The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the
Corporation shall vest in the Members of the Corporation, which may exercise all powers
and do all acts and things which may be exercised by the Corporation.
(2) The Corporation shall consist of the following Members, to be appointed by the
Central Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) one officer of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance, ex officio;
Establishment
of Corpora-
tion.
18 of 2013.
18 of 2013.
2 of 1934.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.
42 of 1956.
15 of 1992.
22 of 1996.
42 of 1999.
51 of 2007.
18 of 2013.
31 of 2016.
Management
of Corpora-
tion.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(c) one Member to be nominated by the Reserve Bank of India, ex officio;
(d) one Member to be nominated by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India, ex officio;
(e) one Member to be nominated by the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority of India, ex officio;
(f) one Member to be nominated by the Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority of India, ex officio;
(g) such number of whole-time Members,  not exceeding three, as may be decided
by the Central Government; and
(h) two independent Members.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be persons of ability, integrity and
standing, who have expertise in finance, economics, risk management, or regulation,
supervision, resolution of financial firms, law or public policy in the area of financial
services.
(4) The Chairperson and other Members, other than an ex officio Member, shall be
appointed after obtaining the recommendation of a selection committee consisting of—
(a) Cabinet Secretary—chairperson;
(b) a Secretary to the Government of India to be nominated by the Central
Government — member;
(c) three experts of repute from the field of finance, law, management, insolvency
and related subjects, to be nominated by the Central Government—members.
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson and other Members (other than ex officio
Members) shall be five years and shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall not hold office after he has attained
the age of sixty-five years:
Provided further that an independent Member appointed under clause ( h) of sub-
section (2) shall not hold office after he has attained the age of seventy years.
(6) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or as a Member,
other than an ex officio Member, if at the time of appointment, such person,—
(a) has been appointed twice as a Member ;
(b) shall not be able to serve a term of at least three years before reaching the
age of retirement; or
(c) holds or has held, in three years preceding such appointment, any position
which is likely to conflict with his duties as a Member.
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other Members (other than ex officio Members) shall be such as
may be prescribed.
5. The Chairperson and other Members shall not, for a period of two years from the
date on which they cease to hold office as such, except with the previous approval of the
Central Government, accept—
(a) any employment under the Central Government or any State Government; or
(b) any appointment under a specified service provider.
6. (1
) The Central Government may remove the Chairperson or a Member from office,
if he—
(a) has been adjudged as insolvent;
Restriction
on future
employment
of Members.
Removal of
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member;
(c) has been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the Central
Government involves moral turpitude;
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuation in office detrimental
to the public interest; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member.
(2) No Member shall be removed under this section unless he has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
7. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and control in
respect of all administrative matters of the Corporation and may also exercise such other
powers, except the powers exercisable under section12, as may be delegated to him by the
Corporation.
8. (1) The Corporation shall meet at such times and places, and observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at
such meetings) as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
(2) If, for any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the
Corporation, any other Member chosen by the Members present at the meeting, shall
preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before a meeting of the Corporation shall be
decided by a majority of votes of Members present and voting and in the event of an
equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding, shall have a
casting vote.
9.  Any Member, who is a director of a company and who as such director has any
direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting
of the Corporation, shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be
recorded in the proceedings of the Corporation, and the Member shall not take any part in
any deliberation or decision of the Corporation with respect to that matter.
10. No act or proceeding of the Corporation, shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the Corporation;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member ; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Corporation not affecting the merits
of the case.
11. (1) The Corporation may appoint such officers and employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of such officers and employees, shall be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation.
(3) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and (2), it shall be lawful for the Corporation
to utilise and for the appropriate regulator to make available, the services of such employees
of the appropriate regulator on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between
the Corporation and the appropriate regulator.
12. The Corporation may make regulations consistent with the provisions of this Act
and the rules made thereunder for authorising its officers to carry out any functions for the
purposes of this Act.
Powers of
Chairperson.
Meetings of
Corporation.
Members not
to participate
in meetings in
certain cases.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Power to
appoint
officers and
employees.
Functions of
officers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Corporation shall have the following
powers and functions, namely:—
(a) provide deposit insurance to banking institutions;
(b) specify the criteria for classification of a specified service provider into one
of the categories of risk to viability;
(c)  act as an administrator for the specified service provider which has been
classified in the category of critical risk to viability;
(d) exercise powers in relation to certain termination rights in respect of specified
service providers;
 (e) resolve a specified service provider which has been classified in the category
of critical risk to viability;
(f) act as a liquidator for a specified service provider against which an order of
liquidation has been made;
(g) any other powers and functions as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, while
exercising the powers under this Act, the Corporation shall have the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at
such place and such time as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons related to the specified
service provider and examining them on oath;
(c) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of any person
related to the specified service provider at any place;
(d) issuing of commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) sharing of information or ordering disclosures as may be specified  by
regulations made by the Corporation; and
(f) any other matter as may be prescribed.
14. (1) Where the Corporation has reasonable grounds to believe that—
(a) the activities of a specified service provider are being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the interest of the consumers; or
(b) any person or entity related to the specified service provider has violated
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made or any directions
issued thereunder,
it may, by order in writing, direct any person (hereafter in this section referred to as the
Investigating Authority) mentioned in the order, to investigate the affairs of such specified
service provider or persons or entity related to the specified service provider and to report
its finding thereon to the Corporation.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions in sections  210, 213, 214, 215, 217, 219, 220
and 223 of the Companies Act, 2013, it shall be the duty of every manager, managing
director, officer and other employee of the company, in case of a company functioning as a
specified service provider and every person related to a specified service provider, to
preserve and to produce to the Investigating Authority or any person authorised by him in
this behalf, such books, registers, other documents and records of, or relating to the specified
service provider, which are in their custody or control as specified by a notice, by the
Investigating Authority.
Powers and
functions of
Corporation.
5 of 1908
Powers of
investigation.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(3) Subject to the Banker's Book of Evidence Act, 1891, the Investigating Authority
may require any person related to the specified service provider in any manner to furnish
such information to, or produce such books, or other documents, or records before him or
any person authorised by him in this behalf as he may consider necessary if the furnishing
of such information or the production of such books,  registers, other documents and
records is relevant or necessary for the purposes of its investigation.
(4) The Investigating Authority may keep in its custody any books, registers, other
documents and records produced under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3) for six months
and thereafter shall return the same to the specified service provider or any person or entity
related to the specified service provider by whom or on whose behalf the books, registers,
other documents and records are produced:
Provided that the Investigating Authority may call for any book, register, other
document or record if they are required again:
Provided further that if the person on whose behalf the books, registers, other
documents and records are produced requires certified copies of the books, registers, other
documents and records produced before the Investigating Authority, it shall give certified
copies of such books, registers, other documents and records to such person or entity on
whose behalf the books, registers, other documents and records were produced.
(5) Any person, directed to make an investigation under sub-section (1), may examine
on oath any person or entity related to the specified service provider in any manner, in
relation to the affairs of the specified service provider and may administer an oath accordingly
and for that purpose may require any of those persons to appear before him personally.
(6) Notes of any examination under sub-section (5) shall be taken down in writing and
shall be read over to, or by, and signed by, the person examined, and may thereafter be used
in evidence against him and the specified service provider.
(7) Upon the conclusion of an investigation under this section, the Investigating
Authority shall prepare a report of such investigation, a copy of which shall be forwarded
to the appropriate regulator within such time as may be specified by regulations made by
the Corporation.
15. (1)Without prejudice to the provisions in sections13 and 14, the Corporation may
authorise any of its Members to carry out any of the following measures, namely:—
(a) restrain a specified service provider from carrying out such business activities
as it thinks fit;
(b) restrain any office bearer of a specified service provider from acting as such;
(c) impound and retain the proceeds in respect of any activity of a specified
service provider which is under investigation;
(d) provisionally attach, by an order, for a period not exceeding thirty days, any
assets of a specified service provider or any person related to a specified service
provider, where it has reason to believe that such specified service provider or any
person related to specified service provider has violated any of the provisions of this
Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder:
Provided that only such assets, which relate to the proceeds involved in such
violation shall be attached:
Provided further that a Member shall, before or after, passing the order under
this clause, give to the specified service provider or persons concerned a reasonable
opportunity of being heard;
(e) direct a specified service provider or any person related to such specified
service provider in any manner not to dispose of or alienate an asset forming part of
any activity which is under investigation.
18 of 1891.
Powers
pending
investigation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(2) The Member authorised under sub-section ( 1) shall, within fifteen days of the
order under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1), make an application supported by an affidavit
stating the grounds on which it has issued the said order, to the District Judge having
jurisdiction, for confirmation of the provisional order of attachment.
(3) Upon receipt of the application under sub-section ( 2), the District Judge having
jurisdiction shall, within thirty days of the application and after considering the affidavit
and providing a summary hearing to the concerned specified service provider, by order in
writing, confirm or revoke the order.
16. (1) Where the Corporation, in consequence of information in its possession, has
reason to believe that—
(a) any person related to a specified service provider required to produce, or
cause to be produced, any books, accounts or other documents in his custody or
control has omitted or failed to produce, or cause to be produced, such books, accounts
or other documents; or
(b) any person to whom a requisition to produce any books, accounts or other
documents has been or might be issued will not, or would not, produce or cause to be
produced, any books, accounts or other documents which shall be useful for, or
relevant to, an investigation under this Act; or
(c) a contravention of any provision of this Act has been committed or is likely
to be committed by a specified service provider; or
(d) any claim which is due to be settled by the specified service provider, has
been or is likely to be rejected or settled at an amount higher than a reasonable
amount; or
(e) any claim which is due to be settled by a specified service provider, has been
or is likely to be rejected or settled at an amount lower than a reasonable amount; or
(f) any books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, survey reports or other
documents, belonging to a specified service provider are likely to be tampered with,
falsified or forged,
it may authorise an officer (hereinafter referred as the authorised officer) to—
(i) enter and search any building or place where he has reason to suspect that
such books, accounts or other documents are kept;
(ii) break open the lock of any box, locker, safe, almirah or other receptacle for
the purposes of clause ( a) where the keys thereof are not available;
(iii) seize all or any such books, accounts or other documents, found as a result
of such search;
(iv) place marks of identification on such books, accounts or other documents
or make or cause to be made extracts or copies therefrom.
(2) The authorised officer may requisition the services of any police officer to assist
him for all or any of the purposes specified in sub-section ( 1) and it shall be the duty of
every such police officer to comply with such requisition.
(3) The authorised officer may, where it is not practicable to seize any such book,
account or other document, specified in sub-section (1), serve an order on the person who
is in immediate possession or control thereof that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise
deal with it, except with the previous permission of such officer and such officer may take
such steps as may be necessary for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this sub-
section.
(4) The authorised officer may, during the course of the search or seizure, examine on
oath any person who is found to be in possession or control of any books, accounts or
Search and
seizure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
other documents, and any statement made by such person during such examination may
thereafter be used in evidence in any proceeding under this Act.
(5) The books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports, or other documents
seized under sub-section ( 1) shall not be retained by the authorised officer for a period
exceeding one hundred and eighty days from the date of the seizure unless the reasons for
retaining the same are recorded by him in writing and the approval of the Corporation for
such retention is obtained:
Provided that the Corporation shall not authorise the retention of the books, accounts,
papers, receipts, vouchers, reports or other documents for a period exceeding thirty days
after all the proceedings under this Act, for which the books, accounts, papers, receipts,
vouchers, reports, or other documents are relevant, are completed.
(6) The person from whose custody the books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers,
reports, or other documents are seized under sub-section ( 1) may make copies thereof, or
take extracts therefrom, in the presence of the authorised officer or any other person
empowered by the authorised officer in this behalf at such place and time as the authorised
officer may appoint in this behalf.
(7) If a person legally entitled to the books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers,
reports or other documents seized under sub-section ( 1) objects for any reason to the
approval given by the Corporation under sub-section ( 5), such person may make an
application to the Tribunal stating therein the reason for such objection and requesting for
the return of the books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports or other documents.
(8) On receipt of the application under sub-section (7), the Tribunal may, after giving
the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit.
(9) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating to searches
and seizures shall apply, so far as may be, to every search and seizure made under
sub-section ( 1).
17. Where any officer or agent of the Corporation or of the appropriate regulator, duly
authorised in writing by the Corporation or the appropriate regulator, as the case may be,
thinks necessary so to do for ensuring the compliance with the provisions of this Act, he
may—
(a) enter any premises where a specified service provider carries on business;
(b) inspect any equipment, including any computer system or other documents
at such premises; and
(c) call upon any employee of such specified service provider or any other
person working in such premises to furnish such information or documents as may be
required by such officer.
18.  Any power exercisable under section 14, 15, 16 or section 17, may, notwithstanding
anything therein, be exercised in respect of a specified service provider only after such
specified service provider has been classified in the category of —
(a)  imminent risk to viability under section 43; or
(b) critical risk to viability under section 45.
19. The Corporation may, for the efficient discharge of its functions, constitute such
committees, as it may deem fit, consisting of a chairperson and such other members as may
be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
20. (1) The Corporation and the appropriate regulators shall hold due consultations
with all relevant stakeholders before making any regulations under this Act.
(2) The Corporation shall ensure transparency in the discharge of its powers and
functions, subject to the provisions of this Act.
Power to
enter
premises and
inspect, etc.
2 of 1974.
Conditions on
exercise of
powers.
Constitution of
committees.
Consultation
and  transpar-
ency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
21. (1) The Corporation shall constitute the following funds for the purposes of this
Act, namely:—
(a) a fund for deposit insurance provided by the Corporation to the insured
service providers, called the Corporation Insurance Fund;
(b) a fund for meeting the expenses of carrying out resolution of specified
service providers, called the Corporation Resolution Fund; and
(c) a fund for all other functions of the Corporation called the Corporation
General Fund.
(2) The Funds under this section shall be credited in the following manner—
(a) premium for deposit insurance collected from insured service providers, in
the Corporation Insurance Fund;
(b) fees for resolution collected from the specified service providers in the
Corporation Resolution Fund; and
(c) all other fees in the Corporation General Fund.
(3) The Corporation shall be prudent in investing the moneys in the Corporation
Insurance Fund in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
(4) The Corporation may invest the moneys in the other funds in a prudent manner.
(5)  Any income from any investment made by the Corporation under sub-sections (3)
and (4) shall be remitted to the respective fund from which such investment was made.
(6) The Corporation shall utilise the amounts in each fund only for the purpose for
which the fund was constituted.
22. (1) Every specified service provider shall pay to the Corporation, such amounts at
such intervals and in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation, towards—
(a) fees for resolution; and
(b) fees for administrative expenses of the Corporation including the fees
charged under section 33.
(2) Every insured service provider shall additionally pay such amounts, at such
intervals and in such manner, as premium for deposit insurance, as may be specified by
regulations made by the Corporation.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of this section, the Corporation shall specify
by regulations—
(a) the manner of assessment of fees and premium payable by a specified
service provider or insured service provider as applicable, including different rates
for different categories of specified service providers and insured service providers,
based on considerations which may include the risk profile of the specified service
provider, amongst others;
(b) the information which a specified service provider and an insured service
provider shall provide to the Corporation for calculating fees or premium as applicable.
23. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Corporation grants or loans of such sums of money, on such
terms, as the Central Government may think fit, for being utilised for the purposes of this
Act:
Provided that the Central Government may require such grants to be deposited in
such fund of the Corporation as the Central Government may direct.
Funds of
Corporation.
Fees, etc., to
be paid to
Corporation.
Grants by
Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
24. (1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of  India.
(2) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be prescribed and any expenditure incurred by him
in connection with such audit shall be reimbursed to him by the Corporation.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Corporation shall have the same
rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India generally has in connection with the audit of the Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of  books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices of
the Corporation.
(4) The accounts of the Corporation as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the
Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House
of  Parliament.
CHAPTER III
S
YSTEMICALLY IMPORTANT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
25. (1)  The Central Government may, in consultation with the appropriate regulator,
by an order published in the Official Gazette, designate a financial service provider, which
meets such criteria as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with
the appropriate regulator, as a systemically important financial institution:
Provided that no financial service provider shall be designated as  a systemically
important financial institution unless it has been given an opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that any person designated as Domestic Systemically Important
Bank by the Reserve Bank of India shall be deemed to be a systemically important financial
institution for the purposes of this Act, for a period of six months with effect from  such date
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify.
(2) The Central Government may, while designating a systemically important financial
institution under sub-section (1), direct that such holding, subsidiary or associate company,
or any other body corporate related to, or associated with, the financial service provider, as
specified in the order shall, jointly with such financial service provider or separately, be
deemed to be a systemically important financial institution, if such holding, subsidiary or
associate company or any other body corporate meets with the criteria specified under
sub-section ( 1).
(3) The Central Government shall, while prescribing criteria for designation of
systemically important financial institution under sub-section ( 1), take into consideration
the following attributes of a financial service provider, namely:—
(a) size;
(b) complexity;
(c) nature and volume of transactions with other financial service providers;
(d) interconnectedness with other financial service providers;
(e) nature of services provided by the financial service providers and whether
they are difficult to substitute; and
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed.
Accounts and
audit.
Designation
of  systemi-
cally
important
financial
institution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(4) A person designated as a systemically important financial institution under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may, within thirty days of the order of such designation,
prefer an appeal to the Tribunal on the ground of non-compliance with the procedural
requirements of this section before such designation.
26.  (1) If a person is designated as a systemically important financial institution,
then, notwithstanding whether or not such person is a specified service provider, the
provisions of this Act applicable to a specified service provider, shall apply to such
systemically important financial institution as if it were a specified service provider.
(2) Every systemically important financial institution shall,  within a period of ninety
days from the publication of the order of designation under section 25, submit a  restoration
plan to the appropriate regulator and a resolution plan  to the Corporation,  in accordance
with the provisions of  section 38.
(3) Every systemically important financial institution shall provide such information
to the Corporation at such intervals and in such manner as may be specified by regulations
made by the Corporation, to monitor the safety, soundness and solvency of such systemically
important financial institution.
(4) The Corporation and the appropriate regulator may, based on the information
received from any systemically important financial institution or otherwise and for reasons
to be recorded in writing,  jointly inspect such systemically important financial institution in
such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation in consultation
with the appropriate regulator.
(5)  Subject to the provisions of this Act, the regulation and supervision of systemically
important financial institutions shall continue to be governed by the appropriate regulator
with which the systemically important financial institution is registered.
27. Where a systemically important financial institution ceases to meet the criteria
specified under sub-section (1) of section 25, the Central Government may, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, de-designate such systemically important financial institution.
28. The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, delegate
any of its powers exercisable under this Chapter (except the power to make rules or issue
notifications), to be exercisable by such person or committee as may be specified in the
order.
CHAPTER  IV
L
IABILITY OF CORPORATION TO INSURED DEPOSITORS OF INSURED SERVICE PROVIDERS
29. (1) The Corporation shall, in consultation with the appropriate regulator, specify
the total amount payable by the Corporation with respect to any one depositor, as to his
deposit insured under this Act, in the same capacity and in the same right.
(2) The Corporation Insurance Fund shall be utilised by the Corporation—
(a) for payment of the specified amount or amount due,  whichever is less,  to a
depositor of an insured service provider in respect of his deposit,  in case of its
liquidation;
(b) for payment under—
(i)  a scheme of compromise or arrangement or amalgamation of an eligible
co-operative bank, in accordance with the law governing such eligible
co-operative bank; or
(ii) a scheme of resolution sanctioned under section 48, other than
resolution through bail-in under section 52, in respect of any other insured
service provider:
Consequence of
designation.
De-designation
of
systemically
important
financial
institution.
Delegation of
powers by
Central
Government.
Liability of
Corporation
to insured
depositors of
insured
service
providers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
Provided that where the scheme referred to in clause ( b) provides for each
depositor being paid or credited with, on the date the scheme comes into force, an
amount which is less than the original amount and also the specified amount, in which
case, the Corporation shall be liable to pay to every such depositor in accordance
with the provisions of section 29, an amount equivalent to the difference between the
amount so paid or credited and the original amount, or the difference between the
amount so paid or credited and the specified amount, whichever is less:
Provided further that where the scheme also provides that any payment made
to a depositor before the coming into force of the scheme shall be reckoned towards
the payment due to him under that scheme, the scheme shall be deemed to have
provided for that payment being made on the date of its coming into force.
Explanation.—In this sub-section,—
(i) "original amount" in relation to a depositor means the total amount
due by the insured service provider immediately before the date of coming into
force of the scheme of compromise or arrangement or amalgamation or the
scheme of resolution, as the case may be, to the depositor in respect of his
deposit in the insured service provider in the same capacity and in the same
right:
Provided that where under the first proviso to sub-section (2), the scheme
is deemed to have provided for any payment being made on the date of its
coming into force, the amount of such payment shall be included in calculating
the original amount;
(ii) "specified amount" means the amount specified by the Corporation
under sub-section ( 1).
(3) Where, during resolution of an insured service provider, the Corporation determines
that the readily realisable assets of the insured service provider shall not be sufficient to
pay for the insured deposits of the insured service provider, the Corporation may, after
inviting offers from other insured service providers, prepare a scheme which involves—
(i) any insured service provider taking over the liabilities of the insured service
provider in resolution to the extent of the insured liabilities to the depositors;
(ii) transferring the deposits of the insured depositors to the other insured
service provider to the extent of the insured amount;
(iii) transferring such readily realisable assets of the insured service provider in
resolution as appropriate;
(iv) making such payments, as mutually agreed by the Corporation and the
other insured service provider, out of the Corporation Insurance Fund for taking over
the insured deposits; and
(v) liquidating an insured service provider, or forming a bridge institution
under this Act with such assets which are not readily realisable including all remaining
liabilities of the insured service provider in resolution.
(4) Where a scheme of resolution is prepared under section 48, the Corporation may
make such payments out of the  Corporation Insurance Fund to the other insured service
provider, subject to the following conditions, namely:—
(a) the amount transferred under such scheme shall not be more than the
estimated liabilities of the  Corporation Insurance Fund, had the insured service
provider in resolution been liquidated; and
(b) the amount is transferred to an entity which is not related to the insured
service provider in resolution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(5) Where the Corporation resolves an insured service provider, or resolves a bridge
institution under section 50, notwithstanding anything in section 80, the Corporation's
claim over the amount paid out of the Corporation Insurance Fund under sub-section ( 2)
shall have priority over other claims.
(6) For the purposes of this section, the amount of a deposit shall be determined after
deducting any ascertained sum of money which the insured service provider may be legally
entitled to claim by way of set off against the depositor in the same capacity and in the same
right.
(7) The Corporation shall, within ninety days from the date of utilisation of any
amount from the Corporation Insurance Fund, submit a report to the Central Government in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(8) The Corporation shall, for the purposes of this section, by regulations specify—
(a) the process of determining readily realisable assets of an insured service
provider in resolution;
(b) the process of inviting offers from other insured service providers and the
time and manner of making offers by other insured service providers; and
(c) the process of estimation of liabilities to the  Corporation Insurance Fund.
(9) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "readily realisable assets" means the assets of the insured service provider
in resolution which may be sold or transferred at a reasonable market value within a
short span of time usually not exceeding six months; and
(b) a party is related to an insured service provider if it owns more than the
specified percentage of the equity of the insured service provider or has a common
shareholder which owns more than a specified percentage of equity and such other
persons as may be specified, by regulations made by the Corporation.
30. (1) Where under any scheme of resolution under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section 29, involving any insured service provider with any other banking institution
(hereafter referred to as "the transferee insured service provider") the Corporation has
become liable to pay to depositors of the insured service provider under section 29, the
transferee insured service provider shall, immediately and in any case not later than one
month from the date on which such scheme takes effect, furnish to the Corporation, a list
showing separately, deposits in respect of each depositor and the amounts to be set off and
also the amount paid or credited or deemed to have been paid under the scheme, in such
form and manner as may be specified by regulations, made by the Corporation duly certified
by the chief executive officer of the transferee insured service provider.
 (2) The Corporation shall, before the expiry of two months from the receipt of the list
under sub-section (1), pay the amount payable under section 29 directly to the depositor or
to the transferee insured service provider or the insured service provider for being credited
in his account.
(3) The manner of payment by the Corporation in case of liquidation shall be as laid
down in section 72.
31. Any amount paid by the Corporation under section 29 in respect of a deposit
shall, to the extent of the amount paid, discharge the Corporation from its liability in respect
of that deposit.
32. (1) Where any depositor, to whom any payment is to be made in accordance with
the provisions of section 29 or section 73, cannot be found or is not readily traceable,
adequate provisions shall be made by the Corporation for such payment and such amount
shall be accounted for separately in its books.
Manner of
payment by
Corporation.
Discharge of
liability of
Corporation.
Provision for
unpaid
amounts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(2) The amount under sub-section ( 1) shall be payable to a bona fide depositor in
such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTRATION
33. (1) On the date of the commencement of this Act, every specified service provider
under the Second Schedule shall be deemed to be registered under this Act:
Provided that where a holding company of such specified service provider or a non-
regulated operational entity within a financial group or conglomerate of a specified service
provider is classified into a category of risk to viability under sub-section (2) of section 36,
such  holding company or the non-regulated operational entity within a financial group or
conglomerate of the specified service provider, shall be deemed to be registered from the
date of such classification.
(2) Where the appropriate regulator issues a license, authorisation or permission by
virtue of which a person is categorised as a specified service provider, such person shall be
deemed to be registered under this Act.
 (3) Every banking institution shall, on the grant of a banking licence by the appropriate
regulator, be deemed to be registered as an insured service provider for obtaining deposit
insurance under this Act:
Provided that a banking institution registered under the Deposit Insurance and Credit
Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 shall, as on the commencement of this Act, be deemed to
be registered as an insured service provider under this Act.
(4) The Corporation shall maintain a register with such details and information, of
each specified service provider as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation,
which shall be available for inspection by any person subject to such conditions and
payment of such fees as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2), the appropriate regulator
shall, within fifteen days of the commencement of this Act or the issuance of a license,
authorisation or permission, as the case may be, provide to the Corporation such information
as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation relevant for the maintenance of
the register under this section.
34. (1) Notwithstanding the withdrawal or cancellation by the appropriate regulator
of a specified service provider to carry on business,  such entity shall be deemed to be a
specified service provider for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that the registration of an insured service provider under this Act shall
stand cancelled in the following circumstances, namely:—
(a) the insured service provider has been prohibited permanently from receiving
fresh deposits;
(b) the insured service provider has ceased to be a banking company or a co-
operative bank, as the case may be, within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section
36A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, or has converted itself into a non-banking
institution;
(c) the insured service provider has been informed by notice in writing by the
Reserve Bank of India that its licence has been cancelled under section 22 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or that a licence under that section cannot be granted
to it;
(d) the insured service provider has transferred all its deposit liabilities in India
to any other institution;
Registration
of specified
service
provider.
Withdrawal or
cancellation
of registration
of specified
service
provider.
47  of 1961.
10 of 1949.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(e) a liquidator has been appointed in respect of such insured service provider;
(f) the insured service provider has been amalgamated with any other insured
service provider;
(g) where the insured service provider is an eligible co-operative bank, if it
ceases to be so under the law governing such insured service provider; or
(h) the insured service provider has been ordered to be liquidated.
(2) The Corporation may, in consultation with the appropriate regulator, cancel the
registration of an insured service provider under this Act and classify it to be at such risk to
viability as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation if it fails to pay the
premium under section 22 for three consecutive periods:
Provided that no registration shall be cancelled without giving one month's notice in
writing to the insured service provider calling upon it to pay the amount in default.
(3) The Corporation may, in consultation with the appropriate regulator, restore the
registration of an insured service provider whose registration has been cancelled under
sub-section ( 2), if the insured service provider requests the Corporation to restore the
registration and pays all the amounts due by way of premia from the date of default till the
date of payment together with interest due thereon, on the date of payment:
Provided that the Corporation shall not restore the registration of an insured service
provider unless it is satisfied, on an inspection or otherwise that such insured service
provider is eligible to be registered as an insured service provider.
35. (1) Where the registration of a specified service provider or an insured service
provider has been withdrawn or cancelled, it shall not—
(i) entitle such specified service provider or insured service provider, as the
case may be,  to any refund for any fees or premia paid to the Corporation under this
Act; or
(ii) affect the liability of such specified service provider or insured service
provider, as the case may be,  for payment of premium or fees for the period before
such withdrawal and of any interest due under sub-section ( 2).
(2) If a specified service provider or an insured specified service provider makes any
default in payment of any amount of fees or premium, it shall, for the period of such default,
be liable to pay to the Corporation interest on such amount at such rate not exceeding eight
per cent. over and above the bank rate, as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, "bank rate" shall have the
same meaning as assigned to it in section 49 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
CHAPTER VI
R
ESOLUTION OF SPECIFIED SERVICE PROVIDER
36. (1) The appropriate regulator or, as the case may be, the Corporation may, by an
order in writing, classify a specified service provider which meets the criteria laid down
under sub-section (5), into any one of the categories of risk to viability:
Provided that the Corporation shall have no power to classify a specified service
provider into the category of low or moderate risk to viability.
(2) The appropriate regulator or, as the case may be, the Corporation, shall, while
classifying a specified service provider under this sub-section, if it considers expedient or
necessary for the purposes of the resolution of the specified service provider under this
Act, determine as to whether a holding company of such specified service provider or a
Withdrawal or
cancellation
of registration
not to affect
liability to
pay premia,
etc.
Classification
of specified
service
providers into
categories of
risk to
viability.
2 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
non-regulated operational entity within a financial group or conglomerate of a  specified
service provider is to be so classified, and if it so determines,—
(a) it shall classify such holding company or a non-regulated operational entity
within a financial group or conglomerate; and
(b) on such classification, the holding company or a non-regulated operational
entity within a financial group or conglomerate of a  specified service provider, shall
be deemed to be a specified service provider.
(3) A copy of the order of classification under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall
be forwarded to the Corporation or the appropriate regulator, as the case may be, within
fifteen days of such order.
(4) For the purposes of classification under sub-section ( 1) of section 36, the
appropriate regulator, may carry out investigation, inquiry or inspection, at such intervals
as may be specified by regulations made by it.
(5) The Corporation shall, in consultation with the appropriate regulator, specify by
regulations, objective criteria for classification of a specified service provider into any one
of the following categories of risk to viability, namely:—
(a) low, where the probability of failure of a specified service provider is
substantially below the acceptable probability of failure;
(b) moderate, where the probability of failure of a specified service provider is
marginally below or equal to acceptable probability of failure;
(c) material, where the probability of failure of a specified service provider is
marginally above acceptable probability of failure;
(d) imminent, where the probability of failure of a specified service provider is
substantially above the acceptable probability of failure;
(e) critical, where the probability of failure of a specified service provider is
substantially above the acceptable probability of failure, and the specified service
provider is on the verge of failing to meet its obligations to its consumers:
Provided that the Corporation may specify different criteria for different
categories of specified service provider.
(6) While making any regulations under sub-section ( 5), the Corporation shall take
into account the following attributes of a specified service provider, namely:—
(a) adequacy of capital, assets and liability;
(b) asset quality;
(c) capability of management;
(d) earnings sufficiency;
(e) leverage ratio;
(f) liquidity of the specified service provider;
(g) sensitivity of the specified service provider to adverse market conditions;
(h) compliance with applicable laws;
(i) risk of failure of a holding company of a specified service provider or a
connected body corporate in India or abroad; and
(j) any other attributes as the Corporation deems necessary:
Provided that for the purposes of classifying a specified service provider in the
category  of critical risk to viability, the regulations shall take into account the period for
which the specified service provider has been in the category of  imminent risk to viability,
if applicable:
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
Provided further that the Corporation may, in consultation with the appropriate
regulator, specify additional criteria in respect of risk to viability of a specified service
provider which is operating in India as a branch office of a body corporate incorporated
outside India.
(7) The classification of a specified service provider by the Corporation or the
appropriate regulator, as the case may be, shall be final and the specified service provider
shall comply with the requirements of such classification.
(8) The classification of a specified service provider into any of the categories of risk
to viability  except the category of critical risk to viability under section 45, shall be kept
confidential by  the appropriate regulator, the Corporation and by all relevant parties.
37. (1) Where a specified service provider has been classified in the category of
material risk to viability by the appropriate regulator, and the Corporation has a difference of
opinion over such classification, the Corporation shall record its reasons in writing and
convey the same to the appropriate regulator.
(2) Where the Corporation has conveyed a contrary opinion over the assessment
under sub-section (1), there shall be a consultation of not more than fifteen days between
the Corporation and the appropriate regulator with a view to arriving at a consensus over
the assessment:
Provided that if after such consultation, the Corporation continues to hold a different
view regarding the assessment, it may decide to conduct an independent inspection to
confirm its own view regarding the risk to viability, and the appropriate regulator may be
present during such inspection, if it deems necessary.
(3) The Corporation shall, after conducting the inspection under sub-section ( 2),
forward a copy of the inspection report along with its findings to the appropriate regulator
for its comments.
(4) The Corporation may, after considering the comments of the appropriate regulator,
make a determination of the imminent or critical risk to viability of the specified service
provider except the classification of a central counterparty referred to in sub-section (4) of
section 43 and such determination shall be final.
 (5) The Corporation may request such information relating to the business of the
specified service provider as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation, for
any specified service provider classified in the category of material, imminent or critical risk
to viability.
CHAPTER VII
R
ESTORATION PLAN AND RESOLUTION PLAN
38. (1) Any specified service provider, classified in the category of material or imminent
risk to viability shall  submit a restoration plan to the appropriate regulator and a resolution
plan to the Corporation within ninety days of such classification under section 36:
Provided that the Corporation may specify a shorter period if in its opinion, it is
necessary so to do.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), every systemically important financial
institution shall submit a restoration plan to the appropriate regulator and a resolution plan
to the Corporation within ninety days of its designation under section 25.
(3) A copy of every restoration plan submitted to the appropriate regulator shall be
submitted to the Corporation, and a copy of every resolution plan submitted to the
Corporation shall be submitted to the appropriate regulator, within fifteen days of its receipt
by the appropriate regulator or the Corporation, as the case may be.
Consultation
in case of
difference of
opinion over
classification.
Submission of
plans.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
39. (1) Every restoration plan shall contain the following, namely:—
(a) distinct identification of the assets and liabilities of the specified service
provider;
(b) any contingent liabilities of the specified service provider;
(c) steps which the specified service provider shall take to qualify for classification
in the category of at least moderate risk to viability and how such steps may result  in
such classification;
(d) the period within which the entire restoration plan and each step of the plan
will be executed; and
(e) any other relevant information specified by regulations made by the
appropriate regulator.
(2) Where a systemically important financial institution is classified in the category of
low or moderate risk to viability, it shall submit the information required under this sub-
section assuming that it is classified in the category of material or imminent risk to viability.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the appropriate regulator shall, by regulations,
specify the form and manner in which the restoration plan is required to be made.
(4) The appropriate regulator may require a specified service provider to provide any
information as may be necessary to determine the efficacy of a restoration plan.
40. (1) Every resolution plan shall contain the following, namely:—
(a) distinct identification of the assets and liabilities of the specified service
provider;
(b) any contingent liabilities of the specified service provider;
(c) distinct identification of critical functions of the specified service provider;
(d) direct or indirect access to financial market infrastructure services; and
(e) strategy plans to exit the resolution process which may provide for the
consideration of legal or regulatory requirements as may be required by the
Corporation to sell or transfer the assets and liabilities of the specified service provider,
or change its ownership; and
(f)   other relevant information.
(2) The Corporation shall, by regulations, specify—
(a) the form and manner in which the resolution plan is required to be made; and
(b) any relevant information required by the Corporation.
(3) The Corporation may require a specified service provider to provide any information
as may be necessary for the purpose of resolution, including any information required for
the transfer or sale of the assets of the specified service provider.
41. (1) Every restoration plan shall be revised annually and the appropriate regulator
and the Corporation shall be informed of such revised restoration plan, within seven days
of the revision.
(2) Every material change in the restoration plan shall be immediately informed to the
appropriate regulator and the Corporation.
(3) The appropriate regulator shall review the information provided in the restoration
plan and if after such review, it determines that the plan would not ensure restoration within
a reasonable period, it shall inform the specified service provider of such deficiency, and the
specified service provider shall resubmit the restoration plan within such period as may be
directed by the appropriate regulator:
Contents of
restoration
plan.
Contents of
resolution
plan.
Change,
revision, etc.,
of resolution
plan and
restoration
plan.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
Provided that the appropriate regulator may, if it considers necessary in the interest
of restoration of the specified service provider, modify such deficient restoration plan and
such modified plan shall be binding on the specified service provider.
(4) Every resolution plan shall be revised annually and the Corporation and the
appropriate regulator shall be informed of such revised resolution plan within seven days
of such revision.
(5) Every material change in the resolution plan shall be immediately informed to the
Corporation and the appropriate regulator.
(6) The Corporation shall review the information provided in the resolution plan and
if after such review, the Corporation determines that the plan does not comply with the
provisions of this section and is not comprehensive, it shall inform the specified service
provider of such deficiency, and the specified service provider shall resubmit the resolution
plan within such period as may be directed by the Corporation:
Provided that the Corporation may, if it considers necessary in the interest of orderly
resolution of the specified service provider, modify such deficient resolution plan on its
own and such modified plan shall be binding on the specified service provider.
(7) For the purposes of this section,—
(a)  the appropriate regulator  shall, by regulations,  specify the meaning of
"material change" in the restoration plan; and
(b)   the Corporation shall, in consultation with the appropriate regulator, specify
by regulations, the meaning of "material change" in the resolution plan.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ATERIAL, IMMINENT AND CRITICAL RISK TO VIABILITY
42. (1) Where the appropriate regulator classifies a specified service provider in the
category of material risk to viability, it may carry out additional inspections to monitor the
risk to viability of the specified service provider.
(2) The appropriate regulator may, by order, prevent the specified service provider
which is classified in the category of material risk to viability, from carrying out any or all of
the following actions, namely:—
(a) accepting funds which increase the liabilities to consumers;
(b) declaration or payment of dividends to any shareholder of the specified
service provider;
(c) payment of any bonuses to any director, employee or manager of the specified
service provider;
(d) acquiring any interest in any other business;
(e) establishing new locations for carrying out business or acquiring new
clients;
(f) carrying out transactions with any person related to the specified service
provider; or
(g) repayment of any debt which is not due.
(3) The appropriate regulator may, by order, require the specified service provider,
classified in the category of material risk to viability to carry out any or all of the following
actions, namely:—
Material risk
to viability.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

24
(a) increase the capital of the specified service provider through such means as
may be stated in the order, which may include conversion of securities from one type
to another in terms of such securities;
(b) issue new securities;
(c) sell identified assets; or
(d) such other action as may be required by the appropriate regulator.
(4) The appropriate regulator may, on an application of the specified service provider,
vary the order made under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3), if it is satisfied that such
variation shall,—
(a) reduce the financial obligation of the specified service provider; or
(b) restore the specified service provider to the category of low or moderate risk
to viability.
43. (1) A specified service provider may be classified in the category of imminent risk
to viability—
(a) by the appropriate regulator—
(i) under sub-section (1) of section 36;
(ii) if the specified service provider has not submitted a restoration plan
within the period specified under section 38; or
(iii) if the specified service provider has failed to implement the restoration
plan, in full or in part, within the period indicated in its restoration plan;
(b) by the Corporation—
(i) under sub-section (4) of section 37; or
(ii) if the specified service provider has failed to submit a resolution plan
under section 38 to the Corporation.
(c) by the appropriate regulator or by the Corporation, as the case may be, when
an order is made by any court or tribunal that there has been a fraud in the conduct of
the business of the specified service provider.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the term "fraud" shall
have the same meaning  as assigned to it in section 447of the Companies Act, 2013
which, in the opinion of the Corporation, may have a bearing on the risk to viability of
the specified service provider.
(2) A specified service provider classified in the category of imminent risk to viability
shall, if it is not a systemically important financial institution, submit a resolution plan to the
Corporation within the period specified in sub-section (1) of section 38;
 (3) When a specified service provider is classified in the category of imminent risk to
viability, the Corporation,—
(a) may appoint an officer or any person authorised by it to inspect the specified
service provider, including by being present at the principal location of business and
any other location of the specified service provider, and observing any meeting of the
management of the specified service provider or any other functioning of the specified
service provider;
(b) may by an order, prevent the specified service provider from  undertaking
any or all of the following actions, namely:—
(i) accepting funds which increase its liabilities and the number of
consumers;
Imminent risk
to viability.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
(ii) declaration or payment of dividends to any stakeholder of the specified
service provider;
(iii) payment of any bonus to any director, employee or manager of the
specified service provider;
(iv) acquiring interest in any other businesses;
(v) establishing new locations for carrying on businesses or acquiring
new clients;
(vi) carrying out transactions with any person related to the specified
service provider;
(vii) repayment of any debt which is not due;
(viii) payment of any fees to any agent or service provider of the specified
service provider;
(ix) payment of any remuneration to any employee, director or manager of
the specified service provider in excess of any limit set in the order;
(x)  providing any financial service as may be specified in the order;
(xi) making of any advances;
(xii) any repatriation of capital and deployment of funds where the
specified service provider is a branch office  without the approval of the
Corporation; or
(xiii) any other action, which in the opinion of the Corporation, may help
in the resolution of the specified service provider;
(c) may, by order, require the specified service provider to carry out any or all of
the following actions, namely:—
(i) increase the capital of the specified service provider through such
means as may be stated in the order, which may include conversion of securities
from one type to another in terms of such securities;
(ii) issue new securities;
(iii) sell identified assets; or
(iv) take such other action as may be required by the appropriate
regulator.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, any classification of a central counterparty
in the category of imminent risk to viability shall only be made by the appropriate regulator,
which shall record its reasons for such classification and inform the Corporation within
fifteen days of the  classification.
(5)  The appropriate regulator shall, in respect of a specified service provider classified
in the category of imminent risk to viability under this section or critical risk to viability
under section 45, exercise its powers under the law regulating such specified service provider,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in such law, to the extent it is not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act.
44. (1) The appropriate regulator may, in respect of a central counterparty classified in
the category of material or imminent risk to viability, in addition to the actions under section
42 and section 43, take the following additional measures of recovery, namely:—
(a) allocate uncovered losses caused by participant default, including variation
margin haircutting, utilising the initial margin of participants and making additional
cash calls on its participants;
(b) address uncovered liquidity shortfalls such as obtaining additional funds
from third-party institutions or from participants;
Additional
powers of
appropriate
regulator in
respect of
central
counterparty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
(c) replenish financial resources including by making cash calls on participants
or recapitalising such central counterparty in such manner as may be specified by
regulations made by the appropriate regulator;
(d) re-establish a matched book by a central counterparty, including forced
allocation of contracts or partial or complete termination of contracts;
(e) allocate losses which are not related to participant default, including allocating
additional capital;
(f) set off, close-out, netting, collateralisation and segregation of member assets;
(g) issuance of equity to the creditors;
(h) prohibition of early termination rights; or
(i) such other measures as may be deemed necessary by the appropriate regulator.
(2) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "cash call" in relation to a central counterparty means a situation where
such central counterparty asks its existing participants to contribute such additional
funds as may be specified by regulations made by the appropriate regulator;
(b) "haircut" means a percentage reduction in the amount that is payable to the
creditors.
45. (1) Where a specified service provider is classified in the category of critical risk
to viability,—
(i) by the appropriate regulator under sub-section ( 1) of section 36; or
(ii) by the Corporation under sub-section ( 4) of section 37,
the provisions of Chapters X, XI and XII shall apply.
(2) The appropriate regulator or the Corporation, as the case may be, before classifying
a specified service provider in the category of critical risk to viability, shall consider the
potential effect of such classification on—
(a) any person related to the specified service provider; and
(b) stability of the financial system of any other relevant jurisdiction.
(3) Any classification of a specified service provider in the category of critical risk to
viability shall be by an order in writing, which shall be published in such form and manner
as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in the Companies Act, 2013 or any other law for the time being in force.
(4) The order of classification under sub-section (3) shall be effective from the date of
its publication.
 (5) Upon classification of a specified service provider in the category of  critical risk
to viability under sub-section (3),—
(a) the Corporation shall be deemed to be the administrator of that specified
service provider under Chapter XI;
(b) no legal action or proceeding against such specified service provider,
including any arbitration proceeding, shall commence or  continue until such period
as may be specified in the order referred to in sub-section (3), or until conclusion of
the resolution under section 56, or until the date of the order appointing the Corporation
as the liquidator under section 63, as the case may be;
(c) no payment, repayment or acceptance of deposits shall be made or liabilities
incurred, except on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the order under
Critical risk
to viability.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

27
sub-section (3), until the date of the order appointing the Corporation as the liquidator
under section 63;
(d) if such specified service provider is an insurance company, it shall not
exercise any contractual rights to surrender or terminate an insurance cover or take
any action as may be determined by the Corporation to be relevant for the purposes
of carrying out resolution while preserving its value; and
(e) the Corporation shall make payment of deposit insurance in accordance
with the provisions of section 29.
(6) Where a central counterparty is classified in the category of critical risk to viability
under sub-section (3), no restriction referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (5)
shall apply unless so directed in the order made under sub-section ( 3).
(7) Upon classification of a specified service provider in the category of critical risk to
viability under sub-section (3), notwithstanding anything in any law for the time being in
force,—
(a) the appropriate regulator may, by notification, withdraw or modify any
authorisation or licence granted to the specified service provider to carry out any
financial service; and
(b) no depositor of the relevant insured service provider shall have any deposit
insurance with respect to any new deposit accepted by the insured service provider
from the date of the order under sub-section ( 3), unless otherwise provided in that
order.
46. A specified service provider shall not be classified in the category of material risk
to viability under section 42, imminent risk to viability under section 43, or critical risk to
viability under section 45, unless—
(a) a show cause notice is issued to such specified service provider in such
form and manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation; and
(b) the specified service provider has been given an opportunity to present its
case within such period as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
CHAPTER IX
E
FFECT ON TERMINATION RIGHTS UNDER SPECIFIED CONTRACTS
47. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions relating to netting and set off under the
Payments and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and the
Securities (Contracts) Regulation Act, 1956, entry into resolution of a specified service
provider shall not cause early termination of a specified contract so long as the substantive
obligations of the contract (including payment and delivery obligations, and provision of
collateral) continue to be performed, subject to such other safeguards as may be specified
by regulations made by the Corporation in consultation with the appropriate regulator.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1) or any provision relating to netting
and set off under the Payments and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934, or the Securities (Contracts) Regulation Act, 1956, if a termination right under a
specified contract becomes exercisable, the Corporation shall have the power, subject to
such safeguards, as may be specified by regulations made by it, to temporarily prohibit by
an order in writing, the exercise of such termination rights of any party to such specified
contract with the relevant specified service provider or its associate company or subsidiary
(where the obligations of the associate company or subsidiary are guaranteed or otherwise
supported by such specified service provider) if the relevant termination right is exercisable
solely on entry into resolution or in connection with the exercise of any resolution power,
except liquidation, in respect of such specified service provider or its associate company or
subsidiary, as the case may be, under this Act.
Show cause
notice.
Effect on
termination
rights under
specified
contracts.
51 of 2007.
2 of 1934.
42 of 1956.
51 of 2007.
2 of 1934.
42 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
(3) The prohibition under sub-section ( 2) shall not—
(a) exceed two business days; and
(b) affect the exercise of early termination rights of a central counterparty against
a specified service provider under resolution in the event of default on the part of the
specified service provider other than on grounds of an entry into resolution or the
exercise of any power by the Corporation under this section.
(4) The powers under sub-section (2) shall be exercised by the Corporation,—
(a) in consultation with the appropriate regulator; and
(b) for ensuring  systemic stability.
(5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "entry into resolution" shall mean entry into resolution of a specified service
provider which is classified in the category of critical risk to viability under this Act;
(b) "specified contract" shall include such contracts or agreements as may be
specified by regulations made by the Corporation in consultation with the appropriate
regulator;
(c) "termination right" shall have the meaning as may be specified by regulations
made by the Corporation, in consultation with the appropriate regulator.
CHAPTER X
M
ETHODS AND TIME LIMIT OF RESOLUTION
48. (1) The Corporation may resolve a specified service provider classified in the
category of critical risk to viability under section 45 through a scheme or a bail-in instrument,
in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations made by it, by—
(a) transferring the whole or part of the assets and liabilities of the specified
service provider to another person, on terms agreed between the Corporation and
such person;
(b) creating a bridge service provider in accordance with section 50;
(c) bail-in in accordance with the provisions of section 52;
(d) merger or amalgamation of the specified service provider;
(e) acquisition of the specified service provider, in whole or in part;
(f) liquidation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XII; or
(g) a combination of any of the methods listed in clauses (a) to (f).
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), in the case of an insurance company,
the Corporation may, in consultation with the appropriate regulator,—
(a) classify such insurance company as a run-off entity to allow the present
insurance policies to run to their expiration dates and for that purpose, the Corporation
may—
(i) restrain the insurance company from writing any new business;
(ii) prohibit the insurance company from exercising termination rights, in
accordance with the provisions of section 47;
(iii) take measures to replenish financial resources, including recapitalising
the insurance company in such manner as may be specified by regulations
made by the Corporation:
Provided that shortfall, if any, over time shall be allocated across
policyholders, creditors and shareholders in accordance with section 80;
Methods of
resolving a
specified
service
provider.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

29
(b) sell or transfer the portfolios of the insurance company to another insurance
company including a run-off entity, in such manner as may be specified by regulations
made by the Corporation.
(3) Where the scheme of resolution referred  to in sub-section ( 1) involves any
transfer of the assets and liabilities of the specified service provider or the acquisition,
amalgamation or merger of a specified service provider or any combination thereof, no such
scheme shall be made by the Corporation unless the proposed transferee entity has obtained
the consent of the appropriate regulator in this regard.
(4) A scheme made under this section shall have regard to,—
(a) the treatment  of all liabilities of the specified service provider in accordance
with the priority they would have in liquidation; and
(b) the treatment of such persons affected adversely by the order of classification
in the category of critical risk to viability under section 45, in accordance with the
priority they would have on a liquidation, to bear losses on an equal footing with
each other,
except in such circumstances as the Corporation may, for the reasons to be recorded in
writing, specify.
(5) The scheme prepared under sub-section (1) shall be published by the Corporation
in the Official Gazette and a copy thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government to be
laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(6) All expenses towards the resolution costs shall be made in the following manner,
namely:—
(i) the fees paid by the specified service provider to the Corporation under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 22, shall be utilised first;
(ii) the resources of the specified service provider under resolution or other
external source of funding, if any,  shall be utilised next, keeping in view the objectives
of the Act; and
(iii) the Corporation shall pay for the remaining costs from the amounts excluding
the fees utilised under clause (i) in the Corporation Resolution Fund:
Provided that in drawing any additional amount from the Corporation Resolution
Fund, the grants, if any, received from the Government shall be utilised after exhausting
the money received from all other sources in that  Fund:
Provided further that the Corporation may recover any amounts drawn from the
Corporation Resolution Fund by imposing an ex post fee on the specified service
provider under resolution wherever possible,  keeping in view the objectives of this
Act, or in such manner as may be specified in the scheme, subject to any regulations
made by the Corporation in this regard.
49. (1) Any scheme prepared under section 48 may contain any or all of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, name and registered office, the capital, assets, powers,
rights, interests, authorities and privileges, the liabilities, duties and obligations, of
the transferee specified service provider;
(b) the transfer to the transferee specified service provider of the business,
properties, assets and liabilities of the specified service provider on such terms and
conditions as may be specified in the scheme;
(c) any change in the  board of directors, or the appointment of a new board of
directors, of the specified service provider or of the transferee specified service provider,
Contents of
scheme.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

30
and the authority by whom, the manner in which, and the other terms and conditions
subject to which, such change or appointment shall be made and in the case of
appointment of a new board of directors or of any director, the period for which such
appointment shall be made;
(d) the alteration of the memorandum and articles of association of the specified
service provider or of the transferee specified service provider for the purpose of
altering the capital thereof or for such other purposes as may be necessary to give
effect to the resolution;
(e) subject to the provisions of the scheme, the continuation by or against the
specified service provider or, as the case may be, the transferee specified service
provider, of any legal action or proceeding pending against the specified service
provider, including any arbitration proceeding immediately before the date of the
order of stay under clause ( b) of sub-section (5) of section 45;
(f) the reduction of interest or rights which the members, consumers (including
depositors) and other creditors have in or against the specified service provider
before its resolution, to such extent as the Corporation and the appropriate regulator
consider necessary in the public interest or in the interests of the members, consumers
(including depositors) and other creditors or for the maintenance of the business of
the specified service provider;
(g) the payment in cash or otherwise to consumers (including depositors) and
other creditors in full satisfaction of their claim—
(i) in respect of their interest or rights in or against the specified service
provider before its resolution; or
(ii) where their interest or rights in or against the specified service provider
has or have been reduced under sub-clause ( f) in respect of such interest or
rights as so reduced;
(h) the allotment to the members of the specified service provider for shares
held by them in the specified service provider before its resolution whether their
interest in such shares has been reduced under sub-clause ( f) or not, of shares in the
specified service provider in the transferee specified service provider and where any
members claim payment in cash and not allotment of shares, or where it is not possible
to allot shares to any members, the payment in cash to those members in full
satisfaction of their claim—
(i) in respect of their interest in shares in the specified service provider
before its resolution; or
(ii) where such interest has been reduced under sub-clause (f), in respect
of their interest in shares so reduced; or
(i) the continuance of the service of all the employees of the specified service
provider excepting such of them as not being workmen within the meaning of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as specifically mentioned in the scheme, in the transferee
specified service provider, at the same remuneration and on the same terms and
conditions of service, which they were getting, or as the case may be, by which they
were being governed, immediately before the date of the order of classification in the
category of critical risk to viability under stay under section 45:
Provided that the scheme may contain a provision that—
(i) the specified service provider shall pay or grant not later than three
years from the date on which the scheme is made  under section 48, to the said
employees the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions of
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
service as are, at the time of such payment or grant, applicable to the other
employees of corresponding rank or status of a comparable specified service
provider to be determined for this purpose by the appropriate regulator;
(ii) the transferee specified service provider shall pay or grant not later
than three years from the date on which the scheme is made under section 48, to
the said employees the same remuneration and upon the same terms and
conditions of service as are, at the time of such payment or grant, applicable to
the other employees of corresponding rank or status of the transferee specified
service provider subject to the qualifications and experience of the said
employees being the same as or equivalent to those of such other employees of
the transferee specified service provider:
Provided further that if in any case under clause ( ii) of the first proviso,
any doubt or difference arises as to whether the qualification and experience of
any of the said employees are the same as or equivalent to the qualifications
and experience of the other employees of corresponding rank or status of the
transferee specified service provider, the doubt or difference shall be referred,
before the expiry of a period of three years from the date of the payment or grant
mentioned in that clause, to the appropriate regulator whose decision thereon
shall be final;
(j) notwithstanding anything in clause ( i), where any of the employees of the
specified service provider not being workmen within the meaning of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947, are specifically mentioned in the scheme under clause (i) or where
any employees of the specified service provider have by notice in writing given to the
specified service provider or, as the case may be, the transferee specified service
provider at any time before the expiry of one month next following the date on which
the scheme is made under section 48, intimated their intention of not becoming
employees of the transferee specified service provider, the payment to such employees
of compensation, if any, to which they are entitled under the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, and such pension, gratuity, provident fund and other retirement benefits
ordinarily admissible to them under the rules or authorisations of the specified service
provider immediately before the date of the order of classification in the category of
critical risk to viability made under section 45;
(k) any other terms and conditions for the resolution of the specified service
provider as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation;
(l) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as are necessary to
secure that the resolution shall be fully and effectively carried out; and
(m) the effect of the resolution action on any  person related to the specified
service provider.
(2) On and from the date of the coming into effect of the scheme or any provision
thereof under section 48, the scheme or such provision shall be binding on the specified
service provider or, as the case may be, on the transferee specified service provider and any
other specified service provider concerned in the resolution and also on all the members,
consumers (including depositors) and other creditors and employees of each of the specified
service providers, and on any other person having any right or liability in relation to any of
those specified service providers, including the trustees or other persons, managing, or
connected in any other manner with, any provident fund or other fund maintained by any
person or the specified service provider.
(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the scheme, the
Corporation, in consultation with the appropriate regulator may, by an order, do anything
not inconsistent with the provisions of the scheme, which appears to it necessary or
expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

32
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the resolution of  a specified
service provider by a single scheme of several specified service providers in respect of each
of which an order of classification in the category of critical risk to viability under section 45
has been made.
(5) The provisions of this section and the scheme prepared under section 48 shall
have effect, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act or in any other law or any
agreement, award or other instrument, for the time being in force.
(6) Any scheme prepared under section 48 may contain all or any of the matters
specified under this section to the extent it is relevant for the methods of resolution under
that section, used for resolving a specified service provider.
(7) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “transferee specified service provider” means an acquirer of a specified
service provider under resolution;
(b) any reference to the terms and conditions of service of an employee, shall
not be construed as extending to the rank or status of such employee.
50. (1) The Corporation may create a bridge service provider by incorporating a
company under the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, for the purpose of resolving a
specified service provider, with the aim of eventual resolution under sub-section (12).
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Companies Act, 2013, the shares
of the bridge service provider shall be held entirely by the Corporation.
(3) The articles of association of the bridge service provider shall be,—
(a) approved by the Corporation; and
(b) executed by at least three Members of the Corporation.
(4) The bridge service provider shall have a board of directors comprising of at least
three directors and not more than ten directors, as appointed by the Corporation.
(5) Upon an application being made by the Corporation, the appropriate regulator
shall, subject to such terms and conditions as it deems fit, provide such authorisation to the
bridge service provider, as may be required, as expeditiously as possible.
(6) After the appropriate regulator has granted the appropriate authorisation to the
bridge service provider,—
(a) the Corporation may by a scheme under section 48, transfer the whole or
part of the assets, liabilities, businesses, properties and undertakings of the specified
service provider to such bridge service provider;
(b) the Corporation may by the scheme under section 48, provide for different
arrangements for management and control at different stages;
(c) the bridge service provider shall have the same powers and be subject to the
same laws as a specified service provider carrying out similar financial services.
(7) The Corporation may direct the bridge service provider in respect of any matter
relating to its functions and the bridge service provider shall comply with such directions.
(8) The Corporation or  the appropriate regulator may exempt the bridge service
provider from complying with the provisions of any Act or the rules or regulations
administered by the Corporation, or the appropriate regulator, as the case may be, for a
period not exceeding one year.
(9) The bridge service provider shall be entitled to any other exemption which the
Central Government may, by order, determine.
Transfer of
assets and
liabilities to
bridge service
provider.
18 of 2013.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

33
(10) The Corporation may provide the bridge service provider with such funds from
the Corporation Resolution Fund, as may be required by the bridge service provider to
carry on its business.
(11) The Corporation shall resolve the bridge service provider as expeditiously as
possible, and in any event, within one year from the date of its incorporation.
(12) The Corporation shall resolve the bridge service provider by—
(a) transferring, by way of a scheme under section 48, the whole or any part of
the assets, liabilities, businesses, properties or undertakings of the bridge service
provider to another person capable of providing the services of a specified service
provider, on such terms as may be agreed between the Corporation and such person;
(b) sale, by way of a scheme under section 48, of the shares of the bridge
service provider constituting more than three-fourths of the equity capital of the
bridge service provider; or
(c) liquidation of the bridge service provider under this Act and the provisions
of Chapter XII shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to such bridge service provider.
51. (1) A specified service provider shall submit to the appropriate regulator, such
details of remuneration paid to its chairperson, director, chief executive officer (by whatever
name called) and such other officer, in such form and manner, within such period, as may be
specified by regulations made by the appropriate regulator, in consultation with the
Corporation:
Provided that no specified service provider shall be required to submit details of
remuneration when it is classified in the category of low or moderate risk to viability.
(2) The appropriate regulator shall specify by regulations made by it, the manner in
which certain portion of such remuneration may be designated as performance based
incentive for such chairperson, director, chief executive officer, (by whatever name called)
and such other officer referred to in sub-section ( 1).
(3) The specified service provider may, by an order in writing, after providing an
opportunity of being heard, in compliance with regulations made under sub-section ( 2),
designate such part of the remuneration of such officers, as performance based incentive,
as it considers fit.
(4) If a specified service provider is classified in the category of  critical risk to
viability by the appropriate regulator or by the Corporation under section 45, the Corporation
may, by an order, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard, require an officer
referred to in sub-section ( 5) to return the performance based incentive to the specified
service provider.
(5) An officer of a specified service provider shall be subject to an order under
sub-section (4), if—
(a) the officer acted, or omitted to act in a manner that caused, or materially
contributed to, the specified service provider to be classified in the category of
critical risk to viability; and
(b) the act was done, or the omission was made, intentionally, recklessly or
negligently.
(6) The Corporation shall ensure that any act or omission referred to in
sub-section (5) is commensurate with the proportion of performance based incentive which
is to be returned under sub-section ( 4).
(7) No payment made before three years from the date on which the specified service
provider was classified in the category of critical risk to viability, shall be required to be
returned to the specified service provider under this section.
Claw-back of
performance
incentive.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
(8) The order under sub-section ( 4) shall be applicable to a chairperson, director,
chief executive officer (by whatever name called) and such other officer even if such
chairperson, director, chief executive officer or other officer has ceased to hold the office as
such before the order was made, but held such office within the period mentioned in
sub-section ( 7).
(9) If a chairperson, director, chief executive officer, (by whatever name called) or
such other officer fails to comply with an order made under sub-section (4), the Corporation
may, by order in writing, proceed to realise the amount in the manner set out in the Second
Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961.
52. (1) Notwithstanding anything in section 49, the Corporation may, in consultation
with the appropriate regulator, if it is satisfied that it necessary to bail-in a specified service
provider to absorb the losses incurred, or reasonably expected to be incurred, by the
specified service provider and to provide a measure of capital so as to enable it to carry on
business for a reasonable period and maintain market confidence, take an action under this
section by a bail-in instrument or a scheme to be made under section 48.
(2) The bail-in instrument or scheme  referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be in such
form and manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation, and contain—
(a) a bail-in provision; or
(b) a provision for the purposes of or in connection with any bail-in provision
made by that instrument or by another instrument.
(3) Subject to sub-section (5), a bail-in provision means any or a combination of the
following, namely:—
(a) a provision cancelling a liability owed by a specified service provider;
(b) a provision modifying or changing the form of a liability owed by a specified
service provider; and
(c) a provision that a contract or agreement under which a specified service
provider has a liability shall have effect as if a specified right had been exercised
under it.
Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expressions,—
(a) “cancelling a liability owed by the specified service provider” includes
cancelling a contract under which the specified service provider has a liability;
(b) “modifying a liability owed by specified service provider” includes modifying
the terms or the effect of the terms of a contract under which the specified service
provider has a liability;
(c) “changing the form of a liability” includes—
(i) converting an instrument under which the specified service provider
owes a liability from one form or class to another;
(ii) replacing such an instrument with another instrument of a different
form or class;
(iii) creating a new security of any form or class in connection with the
modification of such an instrument.
(4) The Corporation shall, by regulations, specify the liabilities or classes of liabilities
of a specified service provider, which may be subject to bail-in.
(5) The appropriate regulator may, in consultation with the Corporation, require
specified service providers or classes of specified service providers to maintain liabilities
that may be subject to bail-in and the terms and conditions for such liabilities to contain a
provision to the effect that such liabilities are subject to bail-in.
Bail-in.
43 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

35
(6) In addition to the actions laid down in sub-section ( 3), the Corporation may, in
consultation with the appropriate regulator, take the following actions in respect of a  central
counterparty, namely:—
(a) direct the haircutting of the collaterals and margins;
(b) direct the issuance of equity to the creditors.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “haircut” shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it in section 44.
(7) The bail-in instrument or scheme under this section shall not affect—
(a) any liability owed by a specified service provider to the depositors to the
extent such deposits are covered by deposit insurance;
(b) any liability that the specified service provider has by virtue of holding
client assets.
Explanation.—In this clause, the expression, “client assets” shall include such
assets as may be specified by regulations made by the appropriate regulator;
(c) any liability of original maturities upto seven days;
(d) any obligation to a central counter party;
(e) any liability, so far as it is secured;
(f) any liability owed to employees or workmen including pension liabilities of
the specified service provider except for liabilities designated as performance based
incentive under section 51;
(g) any transaction covered under section 47; and
(h) such other liabilities as may be specified by regulations made by the
appropriate regulator in consultation with the Corporation and the Central Government.
(8) The Corporation shall forward the bail-in instrument made under this section to
the Central Government together with a report in such form and manner as may be prescribed,
which shall contain—
(a) the reasons why a bail-in instrument under this section was made;
(b) the effect of the bail-in instrument; and
(c) the deviations, if any, from the requirements of sub-section ( 3) and the
reasons therefor.
(9) A copy of the report received under sub-section (8) shall, as soon as may be after
it is received by the Central Government, be laid before each House of  Parliament.
(10) The provisions of sub-sections ( 3) and ( 6) of section 49 shall apply,
mutatis mutandis, to the bail-in instrument or scheme under this section.
53. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 52, a bail-in instrument may—
(a) cancel or modify any securities to which section 52 applies;
(b) convert any such securities from one class to another, including the creation
of a new security in modification of an existing security;
(c) make provision with respect to the rights attaching to securities issued by
the specified service provider, including—
(i) that the specified rights attaching to securities are to be treated as
having been exercised;
(ii) that the Corporation is authorised to exercise such specified rights
attaching to securities;
Bail-in
instrument in
relation to
securities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

36
(iii) that the specified rights attaching to securities may not be exercised
for a period specified in the bail-in instrument;
(d) provide for the listing of securities issued by the specified service provider
to be discontinued;
(e) provide for securities issued by the specified service provider to be
transferred to the Corporation or any other entity;
(f) make such other provision for or in connection with the transfer of securities
issued by the specified service provider, as it may consider appropriate, whether or
not the transfer was the subject of that bail-in instrument.
54. (1) Where the Corporation has made a provision for transfer of securities in the
bail-in instrument under clause ( e) of section 53, the Corporation may make one or more
onward transfer bail-in instruments.
(2) The onward transfer bail-in instrument under sub-section (1) may,—
(a) provide for the transfer of—
(i) securities issued by the specified service provider before the bail-in
instrument was made and transferred by such bail-in instrument; or
(ii) securities issued by the specified service provider after the bail-in
instrument was made; or
(b) make any other provision for, or in connection with the transfer of securities
issued by the specified service provider whether or not the transfer was the subject
of that bail-in instrument.
 (3) The form and manner of the bail-in instrument under section 52 shall apply to the
onward transfer bail-in instrument.
55. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the Corporation shall have regard to the
following safeguards to the extent possible keeping in view the objectives of this Act,
namely:—
(a) ensuring the continuity of critical functions of  the specified service provider;
(b) ensuring that no creditor of the specified service provider is left in a worse
position as a result of application of any method of resolution under section 48, than
such creditor would have been in the event of its liquidation under Chapter XII;
(c) protecting the client funds, and client assets of the specified service provider,
to no less an extent than they would be protected in liquidation under Chapter XII;
and
(d) such other safeguards as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), for the purposes of bail-in under
section 52, the Corporation shall also have regard to the following additional safeguards,
namely:—
(a) cancellation of  the liabilities of any specified service provider to its creditors
shall be done in accordance with the order of priority laid down in section 80;
(b) such liabilities may be cancelled where the instrument creating it contains a
provision to the effect that the parties to the contract agree to the liability being
eligible for a bail-in;
(c) equal treatment shall be given to all rights and liabilities of the same class;
(d) such other safeguards as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation in consultation with the appropriate regulator.
Onward
transfer of
securities.
Safeguards for
applying
methods of
resolution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

37
(3) The Corporation shall, while exercising powers under this Act, take measures to
ensure the protection of such collateral arrangements, set off or netting arrangements so as
to prevent—
(a) the transfer of some, but not all, of the rights and liabilities that are protected
under the collateral arrangements, set off or netting arrangements; and
(b) the modification or termination of rights and liabilities that are protected
under collateral arrangements, set off or netting arrangements.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section ( 3), rights and liabilities are to be treated as
protected under such arrangement if  the parties to the arrangement are entitled to set-off or
net those rights and liabilities:
Provided that  the Corporation may, if it considers  necessary to ensure the availability
of the covered deposits—
(i) transfer covered deposits which are part of an arrangement under
sub-section (3), without transferring other assets, rights or liabilities that are part of
the same arrangement; or
(ii) transfer, modify or terminate those assets, rights or liabilities without
transferring the covered deposits.
(5) For the purposes of this section, the expressions,—
(a) “client assets” and “client funds” shall mean such assets or funds as may
be specified by regulations made by the Corporation, in consultation with the
appropriate regulator;
(b) the expressions “collateral arrangements”, “set off and netting arrangements”,
“covered deposits”, shall mean such arrangements or deposits as may be specified
by regulations made by the Corporation, in consultation with the appropriate regulator.
56. (1) The resolution of the specified service provider under this Act, shall be
completed expeditiously and not later than one year from the date on which such specified
service provider is classified to be at critical risk to viability:
Provided that the period of one year may be extended by the Corporation, by an order,
for a further period not exceeding one year for reasons to be recorded in writing:
Provided further that the one year time limit shall not be applicable in case of  liquidation
under Chapter XII.
(2) In case resolution of the specified service provider is not completed within the
period provided in sub-section ( 1), the Corporation shall liquidate such specified service
provider under Chapter XII.
(3) The Corporation may, subject to sub-section (1), specify different time periods for
resolution of specified service provider, depending on the process of resolution, the size
and complexity of the specified service provider.
57. (1) The supply of services relating to the continuance of the critical functions of
the specified service provider or any other person as determined by the Corporation shall
not be terminated, suspended or interrupted during the resolution of such specified service
provider.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Corporation may, in consultation with the
appropriate regulator make such regulations as it may consider necessary .
CHAPTER  XI
A
DMINISTRATION
58. (1) From the date of classification of a specified service provider in the category
of critical risk to viability under section 45,—
(a) the management of the affairs of the specified service provider shall vest in
the Corporation as the administrator;
Time limit on
resolution.
Continuity of
certain
functions.
Powers of
Corporation
as an
administrator.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

38
(b) the powers of the board of directors of the specified service provider shall
stand suspended and be exercised by the administrator;
(c) the officers and other employees of the specified service provider shall
extend all assistance and co-operation to the administrator as may be required by the
administrator in managing the affairs of the specified service provider;
(d) the financial institutions maintaining accounts of the specified service
provider shall act on the instructions of the administrator in relation to such accounts
and furnish all information relating to the specified service provider available with
them to the administrator as may be required by him; and
(e) the Corporation shall have such other powers in relation to administration of
the specified service provider, as may be specified by notification by the Central
Government.
(2) The administrator referred to in sub-section (1), shall—
(a) act and execute in the name and on behalf of the specified service provider,
all deeds, receipts, and other documents, if any;
(b) take such actions, in the manner and subject to such restrictions,  as may be
specified by notification by the Central Government;
(c) have the authority to—
(i) access the electronic records of specified service provider from any
information utility or credit information system regulated under any law for the
time being in force having financial information of the specified service
provider;
(ii) access the books of account, records, and other relevant documents
of specified service provider available with government authorities, statutory
auditors, accountants, and such other persons  as may be specified by
regulations made by the Corporation;
(iii) appoint, in consultation with the appropriate regulator, for such period
as it may determine, an officer of the Corporation to oversee  the affairs of the
specified service provider; and
(d) undertake any action under section 48, except liquidation of the specified
service provider.
(3) While the Corporation is the administrator of the specified service provider,—
(a) no shareholders of the specified service provider or any other person shall
nominate or appoint any person to be a director of such specified service provider;
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of such specified
service provider shall be given effect to, unless approved by the Corporation; and
(c) no person shall, notwithstanding anything in any other law or in any contract,
or the memorandum or articles of association of the specified service provider, be
entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or termination of his office.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Corporation may, in consultation
with the appropriate regulator, in respect of  a central counterparty, take such additional
measures in the manner as may be specified by regulations by the Corporation, to—
(a) allocate uncovered losses caused by participant default, including variation
margin haircutting, utilising the initial margin of participants and making additional
cash calls on its participants;
(b) address uncovered liquidity shortfalls such as obtaining additional funds
from third-party institutions or from participants;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

39
(c) replenish financial resources, including making cash calls on participants or
recapitalising such central counterparties in such manner as may be specified by
regulations made by the Corporation in consultation with the appropriate regulator;
(d) re-establish a matched book by a central counterparty, including forced
allocation of contracts or partial or complete termination of contracts;
(e) allocate losses which are not related to participant default, including allocating
additional capital;
(f) carry out set-off, close-out netting, collateralisation and segregation of member
assets;
(g) issue equity to the creditors;
(h) impose a temporary prohibition on early termination rights; or
(i) take such other measures as may be deemed necessary by the Corporation.
(5) For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) "cash-call" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in sub-section (2)
of section 44;
(b) "haircut" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in   sub-section (2)
of  section 44.
(6) The Corporation may, subject to the provisions of sections 48 and section 49,
place the specified service provider, except a central counterparty, in liquidation in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter XII.
59. (1) The administrator shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) take control and custody of any asset over which the specified service
provider has ownership rights as recorded in the balance sheet of the specified
service provider, or with information utility or credit information system regulated
under any law for the time being in force or the depository of securities or any other
registry that records the ownership of assets, including—
(i) assets over which the specified service provider has ownership rights
which may be located in a foreign country;
(ii) assets that may or may not be in possession of the specified service
provider;
(iii) tangible assets, whether movable or immovable;
(iv) intangible assets, including intellectual property;
(v) securities, including shares, held in any subsidiary of the specified
service provider, financial instruments and insurance policies of the specified
service provider; and
(vi) assets subject to the determination of ownership by a court or
authority; and
(b) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), "assets" shall not include—
(a) assets owned by a third party in possession of  the specified service provider
held under trust or under contractual arrangements, including bailment;
(b) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the specified service provider;
and
(c) such other assets as may be notified by the Central Government in
consultation with the Corporation and the appropriate regulator.
Functions of
administrator.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

40
60. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 58, the Corporation may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, remove from office, with effect from such date as
may be specified in the order, any chairperson, director, chief executive officer (by whatever
name called) or other officer or employee of the specified service provider which has been
classified in the category of imminent risk to viability under section 43 or critical risk to
viability under section 45, as the case may be.
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made unless the chairperson, director or
chief executive officer or other officer or employee concerned has been given a reasonable
opportunity of making a representation to the Corporation against the proposed order:
Provided that if in the opinion of the Corporation any delay would be detrimental to
the interests of the specified service provider, the Corporation may, while giving the
opportunity of making the representation, by order direct that, pending the consideration
of the representation, if any, the chairperson or director or chief executive officer or other
officer or employee,  as the case may be, shall not, with effect from the date of such order,—
(a) act as such chairperson or director or chief executive officer or other officer
or employee;
(b) in any way, whether directly or indirectly, be concerned with, or take part in
the management of the specified service provider.
(3) Any person who has been removed under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days
from the date of the receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal.
(4) Where any chairperson, director or chief executive officer or other officer or
employee of a specified service provider has been removed under sub-section ( 1), he
shall—
(a) cease to be the chairperson or director, chief executive officer or other
officer or employee of the specified service provider; and
(b) not be concerned with, or take part in the management of, any specified
service provider, in any way, whether directly or indirectly, for such period not exceeding
five years as may be mentioned in the order.
(5) Where any chairperson, director or chief executive officer or other officer or
employee of a specified service provider has been removed under sub-section ( 1), the
Corporation may, by order in writing, appoint a person in place of  the chairperson or
director, or chief executive officer or other officer or employee, as the case may be, with
effect from such date as may be mentioned in the order.
(6) Any person appointed as chairperson, director or chief executive officer or other
officer or employee under this section, shall,—
(a) hold office, during the pleasure of the Corporation, for a period not exceeding
the period of resolution specified in section 56;
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of being a chairperson,
director or chief executive officer or other officer or employee or for anything done or
omitted to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in
relation thereto; and
(c) not be required to hold qualification shares in the specified service provider.
(7) Notwithstanding anything in any other law or in any contract, memorandum or
articles of association of the specified service provider, on the removal of a person from
office under this section, such person shall not be entitled to claim any compensation for
the loss or termination of office.
(8)  Any appointment or removal of a director, chief executive officer or other officer or
employee under this section shall have effect, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
Power of
Corporation
to remove
managerial
and other
persons from
office.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

41
the Companies Act, 2013 or any other law for the time being in force, or in any contract or
any other instrument.
61. (1) Where the Corporation is of the opinion that in the public interest or in the
interests of the specified service provider, it is necessary to do so, it may, by order in
writing, appoint, with effect from such date as may be specified in the order, one or more
persons to hold office as additional directors of the specified service provider classified in
the category of imminent risk to viability under section 43 or critical risk to viability under
section 45, as the case may be.
(2) Any person appointed as an additional director under this section, shall—
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Corporation;
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of  being a director or for
anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of the
office or in relation thereto; and
(c) not be required to hold qualification shares in the specified service provider.
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any proportion of the total number of directors of the
specified service provider, any additional director appointed under this section shall not be
taken into account.
62. (1) Without prejudice to the powers of the Corporation under section 58, where a
specified service provider has been classified in the category of imminent risk to viability
under section 43 or critical risk to viability under section 45 and the Corporation is satisfied
that in the public interest or for preventing the affairs of such specified service provider
from being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the consumers or depositors
of the specified service provider or for securing the proper management of the specified
service provider, it is necessary to do so, the Corporation may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, by an order, supersede the board of directors of such specified service provider for
a period not exceeding two years, as may be specified in the order.
(2) The Corporation may, on supersession of the board of directors of the specified
service provider under sub-section ( 1), appoint an officer of the Corporation as an
administrator for such period as it may determine.
(3) The Corporation may issue such directions to the administrator as it may deem
appropriate, and the administrator shall be bound to follow such directions.
(4) Upon making the order of supersession of the board of directors of a specified
service provider,—
(a) the chairperson, managing director and other directors as on the date of
such supersession shall vacate their offices;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties of the board of directors shall, until the
board of directors of such specified service provider is reconstituted, be exercised
and discharged by the administrator appointed under sub-section ( 2):
Provided that the power exercised by the administrator under this Act shall have
effect, notwithstanding that such power is exercisable by a resolution passed in the general
meeting of such specified service provider.
(5) The Corporation may constitute a committee consisting of such persons, not
exceeding three, who have experience in law, finance, banking, administration or accountancy
to assist the administrator in discharge of his duties.
(6) The committee constituted under sub-section ( 5), shall meet at such times and
places and observe such rules of procedure as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation.
Power of
Corporation
to appoint
additional
directors.
18 of 2013.
Supersession
of board of
directors.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

42
(7) The salary and allowances payable to the administrator and the members of the
committee constituted under sub-section ( 5), shall be such as may be specified by
regulations made by the Corporation and be payable by the specified service provider.
(8) Before the expiry of the period of supersession of the board of directors under
sub-section (1), the administrator shall call the general meeting of the specified service
provider to elect new directors.
(9) Notwithstanding anything in any other law or in any other contract, or bye-laws of
the specified service provider, no person shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the
loss or termination of his office on supersession under this section.
(10) The administrator appointed under sub-section ( 2) shall vacate his office
immediately after the board of directors of the specified service provider has been constituted.
CHAPTER  XII
L
IQUIDATION
63. (1) Where the Corporation determines that liquidation is the most appropriate
method for the resolution of a specified service provider under section 48, notwithstanding
anything in any other law for the time being in force relating to liquidation and winding up,
the Corporation shall make an application to the Tribunal for an order of liquidation in
respect of such specified service provider.
(2) The Tribunal shall, within a period of fourteen days from the date on which an
application under sub-section (1) or section 93 is received, pass an order of  liquidation and
appoint the Corporation as a liquidator for a specified service provider, in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that the Corporation may designate any of its officers as the liquidator for
the purposes of this Chapter.
(3) The Tribunal may, while passing the order of liquidation under sub-section ( 2),
make an order prohibiting the commencement or continuance of all legal actions and
proceedings against such specified service provider, till such period as the liquidation is in
continuance under this Chapter.
(4) On the appointment of the liquidator under sub-section ( 2), all powers of the
board of directors, key managerial personnel and the partners of the specified service
provider, shall cease to have effect and shall vest in the liquidator.
(5) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal under this section may, within
thirty days from the receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days, but within a further period not exceeding fifteen days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within
that period.
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Appellate Tribunal may, within forty-five
days from the date of receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court on a
question of law arising out of such order under this Act:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, entertain an appeal  after the expiry of the said
period of forty-five days, but within a further period not exceeding fifteen days, if it is
satisfied that such person was prevented by sufficient cause from filing an appeal within
that period.
(7) The order of liquidation under sub-section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a notice of
discharge to the officers, employees and workmen of the specified service provider, except
when the business of the specified service provider is continued during the liquidation
process by the liquidator.
Order of
liquidation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

43
64. The liability of an insured service provider to pay premium under section 21 shall
cease upon the appointment of the Corporation as the liquidator under section 63.
65. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, no
proceeding for liquidation of a specified service provider shall be entertained by any court
or tribunal other than the Tribunal, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Any liquidation proceeding or any other claims, suits, applications or proceedings
connected thereto, pending against any specified service provider, before any court or
tribunal, on the commencement of this Act, shall stand transferred to the Tribunal.
(3) Subject to section 93, when an order of liquidation has been passed under
section 63,—
(a) no suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted by or against the specified
service provider before any court, tribunal or authority, except before the Tribunal;
and
(b) such suit or other legal proceedings pending before any court, tribunal or
authority prior to the order of liquidation under section 63 shall stand transferred to
the Tribunal:
Provided that a suit or other legal proceeding may be instituted by the liquidator,
on behalf of the specified service provider, with the prior approval of the Tribunal.
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any proceeding pending in appeal before the
Supreme Court or a High Court.
66. (1) The liquidat or shall have the power—
(a)  to verify claims of all the creditors;
(b) to take into its custody or control all the assets, property, effects and
actionable claims of the specified service provider;
(c)  to carry on the business of the specified service provider for its beneficial
liquidation as is considered necessary;
(d) subject to section 79, to sell the immovable and movable property and
actionable claims of the specified service provider in liquidation by public auction or
private contract, with power to transfer such property to any person or body corporate,
or to sell the same in parcels in such manner as may be specified by regulations made
by the Corporation;
(e)  to draw, accept, make and endorse any negotiable instrument including a
bill of exchange, hundi or promissory note in the name and on behalf of the specified
service provider, with the same effect with respect to the liability as if such instruments
were drawn, accepted, made or endorsed by or on behalf of the specified service
provider in the ordinary course of its business;
(f) to take out, in its official name, a letter of administration to any deceased
contributory and to do in his official name any other act necessary for obtaining
payment of any money due and payable from a contributory or his estate which
cannot be ordinarily done in the name of the specified service provider, and in all such
cases, the money due and payable shall, for the purpose of enabling the liquidator to
take out the letter of administration or recover the money, be deemed to be due to the
liquidator himself;
 ( g) to obtain professional assistance from any person or appoint any
professional, in discharge of its duties, obligations and responsibilities and for
protection of the assets of the specified service provider;
(h)  to appoint an agent to do any business which the liquidator is entitled to do;
Cessation of
liability to
pay premium.
Bar on
jurisdiction
and transfer
of
proceedings.
Powers of
Corporation
as a liquidator.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

44
(i) to continue the employment of some or all employees of the specified service
provider on such terms as may be agreed upon;
(j)  to invite and settle claims of creditors (including depositors) and claimants
and distribute proceeds in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(k)  to institute or defend any suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings, civil
or criminal, in the name of or on the behalf of the specified service provider;
(l)  to investigate the financial affairs of the specified service provider to
determine undervalued or preferential transactions;
(m)  to take all such actions, steps, or to sign, execute and verify any paper,
deed, receipt, document, application, petition, affidavit, bond or instrument and for
such purpose to use the common seal, if any, as may be necessary for liquidation,
distribution of assets and in discharge of its duties and obligations and functions as
liquidator;
(n)  to apply to the Tribunal for such orders or directions as may be necessary
for the liquidation of the specified service provider and to report the progress of the
liquidation process to the Tribunal in a manner as may be specified by regulations
made by the Corporation;
(o)  in respect of a specified service provider which is an insurance company, to
reduce the amount of the insurance contracts of such specified service provider or
other insurer, upon such terms and conditions as the Corporation deems fit;
(p) subject to the provisions of Chapter XV, engage with the resolution
authorities of other jurisdictions for the purpose of giving effect to this Act; and
(q) to perform such other functions as may be  prescribed.
(2) The liquidator shall have the power to consult any person entitled to proceeds
from liquidation under section 80:
Provided that such consultation shall not be binding on the liquidator:
Provided further that the records of such consultation shall be made available to all
other entitled persons not so consulted, in writing.
(3) The Central Government may make rules governing the actions of the Corporation
as a liquidator under this section.
67. (1) The liquidator shall, for the purposes of liquidation, form an estate of the
assets mentioned in sub-section (3), which shall be called the liquidation estate in relation
to the specified service provider.
(2) The liquidator shall hold the liquidation estate as a fiduciary.
(3) Subject to sub-section ( 4), the liquidation estate shall comprise of all assets,
including—
(a) any tangible or intangible assets over which the specified service provider
has ownership rights, all rights and interests therein as evidenced in the balance
sheet of the specified service provider or an information utility or credit information
system regulated under any law for the time being in force or records in the registry or
any depository recording securities of the specified service provider or by any other
means as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation, and shares held
in any subsidiary of the specified service provider;
(b) assets that may or may not be in possession of the specified service provider,
including encumbered assets;
(c) assets subject to the determination of ownership by any court or authority;
(d) any asset or its value recovered through proceedings for avoidance of
transactions in accordance with this Chapter;
Liquidation
estate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

45
(e) any asset of the specified service provider in respect of which a secured
creditor has relinquished security interest;
(f) any other property belonging to or vested in the specified service provider
from the date of the order of liquidation; and
(g) all proceeds of liquidation as and when they are realised.
(4) The following shall not be included in the liquidation estate and shall not be used
for recovery in the liquidation, namely:—
(a) assets owned by a third party which are in possession of the specified
service provider, including—
(i) assets held in trust for any third party;
(ii) bailment contracts;
(iii) all sums due to any workman or employee from the provident fund,
the pension fund and the gratuity fund;
(iv) other contractual arrangements which do not stipulate transfer of
title but only use of the assets; and
(v) such other assets as may be notified by the Central Government in
consultation with the appropriate regulator;
(b) assets held by a specified service provider as collateral which are subject to
netting, set-off or adjustment in multi-lateral trading or clearing transactions;
(c) personal assets of any shareholder or partner of a specified service provider
as the case may be, provided such assets are not held on account of avoidance
transactions that may be avoided under this Chapter;
(d) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the specified service provider;
or
(e) any other assets as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation
in consultation  with the appropriate regulator.
(5) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 3) and sub-section ( 4), the following
shall not be included in the liquidation estate and shall not be used for recovery in the
liquidation, namely:—
(a) any collateral or assets collected in terms of any law applicable to central
counterparties;
(b) assets of a member of a central counterparty or the client of a member of a
central counterparty held by the central counterparty or by an insured service provider,
or a depository, or a custodian on behalf of the central counterparty and such assets
may be subject to netting and set-off in multi-lateral trading or clearing transactions
in accordance with the provisions of the rules, bye-laws, and regulations of the
central counterparty.
(6) The payments and recoveries for the matters enumerated in sub-section (5) shall
be in accordance with the, rules,  bye-laws or regulations of the central counterparty and
such liabilities shall be discharged before making any distributions under section 80.
68. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the
liquidator shall have the power to access any information system for the purpose of admission
and proof of claims and identification of the liquidation estate assets relating to the specified
service provider from the following sources, namely:—
(a) an information utility;
(b) credit information systems regulated under any law for the time being in
force;
Power of
liquidator to
access
information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

46
(c) any agency of the Central Government, State Government or local
Government, including any registration authorities;
(d) information systems for financial and non-financial liabilities regulated under
any law for the time being in force;
(e) information systems for securities and assets posted as security interest
regulated under any law for the time being in force; or
(f) any other source as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
(2) The creditors of the specified service provider may require the liquidator to provide
them with any financial information relating to such specified service provider in such form
and manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
(3) The liquidator shall provide the information referred to in sub-section (2) to such
creditors who have requested for such information within a period of seven days from the
date of such request or provide reasons for not providing such information.
69. (1) The liquidator shall receive or collect the claims of all consumers and creditors
in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation, within a period
of ninety days from the date of the commencement of the liquidation process.
(2)  A financial creditor (other than a depositor) may submit a claim to the liquidator by
providing a record of such claim with an information utility:
Provided that where the information relating to such claim is not recorded in the
information utility, the financial creditor may submit the claim in the same manner as provided
for the submission of claims for the operational creditor under sub-section ( 3).
(3) A depositor or operational creditor may submit a claim to the liquidator in such
form and in such manner and along with such supporting documents required to prove the
claim as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation:
Provided that every depositor of a specified service provider which is a banking
institution shall be deemed to have submitted its claim for the amount shown in the books
of the specified service provider as standing to its credit and, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in the Companies Act, 2013 or this Act or any other law for the time being in
force, the liquidator shall presume such claims to have been proved, unless it has reason for
doubting its correctness.
(4)  A creditor who is partly a financial creditor and partly an operational creditor shall
submit claims to the liquidator to the extent of the financial debt in the manner as provided
in sub-section (2) and to the extent the operational debt under sub-section ( 3).
(5) A creditor may withdraw or vary his claim under this section within fourteen days
of its submission.
(6) For the purposes of this section, the expressions "financial creditor", "operational
creditor", "financial debt" and "operational debt" shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in section 5 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
70. (1) The liquidator shall verify the claims submitted under section 69 within such
period and in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
(2) The liquidator may require any creditor or the specified service provider or any
other person to produce any other document or evidence which in the opinion of the
liquidator is necessary for the purpose of verifying the whole or any part of the claim.
71. Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the Tribunal
may, if it appears to it to be necessary or expedient so to do at any time after the appointment
of the liquidator, make a call on and order payment by any contributory, if such contributory
has been placed on the list of contributories by the liquidator and has not appeared to
dispute his liability.
Consolidation
of claims.
18 of 2013.
V erification
of claims.
Special
provisions to
make calls on
contributories.
31 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

47
72. (1) Where an insured service provider has been ordered to be liquidated and the
Corporation has been appointed as a liquidator under section 63, or where a liquidator, by
whatever name called, has been appointed for an insured service provider, which is an
eligible co-operative bank, the Corporation or the liquidator, as the case may be, shall
prepare, with the least possible delay and in any case not later than ninety days from the
date of its appointment as liquidator, a list in such form and manner as may be specified by
regulations made by the Corporation, showing separately the deposits in respect of each
depositor and the amounts of set-off in the same capacity and in the same right as referred
to in section 29.
(2) Before the expiry of sixty days from the receipt of such list from the insured service
provider, the liquidator shall pay to the depositor, the amount payable under section 29 in
respect of the deposit of each depositor—
(i) directly; or
(ii) through such agency as the liquidator may determine.
(3) Any expenses incurred by the liquidator in making payments under
sub-section ( 2) shall be treated as expenses incurred in the liquidation of the insured
service provider.
73. (1) The liquidator may, after verification of claims under section 70, admit or reject
the claim, in whole or in part, as the case may be:
Provided that where the liquidator rejects a claim, he shall record in writing the reasons
for such rejection.
(2) The liquidator shall communicate the decision of admission or rejection of claims
to the depositor, the creditor and the insured service provider within sixty days of such
admission or rejection of claims in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by
the Corporation.
(3) Where the liquidator has admitted the claims of the depositors under
sub-section (1), it shall proceed to pay out any amounts covered under deposit insurance
in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
74. A creditor or depositor aggrieved by the decision of the liquidator rejecting the
claims under section 73 may, within fourteen days of the receipt of the decision, prefer an
appeal to the Tribunal:
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of fourteen days, but within a further period not exceeding fifteen days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal
within that period.
75. The liquidator shall determine the value of claims admitted under section 73 in
such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
76. (1) The entries in the books of account or other documents of a specified service
provider which is being liquidated shall be admitted in evidence in all legal proceedings,
and all such entries may be proved by the production of the books of accounts or other
documents of the specified service provider containing such entries or by the production
of a copy of the entries, certified by the liquidator under his signature and stating that it is
a true copy of the original entries and that such original entries are contained in the books
of account or other documents of the specified service provider in his possession.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 all such entries in the
books of account or other documents of a specified service provider shall, as against the
directors, officers and other employees of the specified service provider in respect of which
an order of liquidation has been made, be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters
purporting to be therein recorded.
Manner of
payment of
deposit
insurance by
Corporation
in case of
liquidation.
Admission or
rejection of
claims and
payment of
deposit
insurance.
Appeal
against
decision of
liquidator.
Determination
of valuation
of claims.
Documents of
specified
service
provider to be
evidence.
1 of 1872.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

48
77. (1) Where an order has been made for the liquidation of a specified service
provider under section 63, the liquidator shall examine whether in its opinion any loss has
been caused to the specified service provider since its formation by any act or omission
(whether or not a fraud has been committed by such act or omission) of any person in the
promotion or formation of the specified service provider or of any director or auditor of the
specified service provider.
(2) If after examination under sub-section (1), the  liquidator is of the opinion that any
promoter or any person who has taken part in the conduct of business of the specified
service provider or has been a director or an auditor of the specified service provider should
be publicly examined, it may file an application before the Tribunal  to hold a public sitting
on a date to be appointed for that purpose and thereupon, the Tribunal may direct that such
person, director or auditor shall attend thereat and shall be publicly examined as to the
promotion or formation or the conduct of the business of the specified service provider, or
as to his conduct and dealings, provided that no such person shall be publicly examined
unless he has been given an opportunity to show cause why he should not be examined.
(3) The liquidator shall take part in the examination and for that purpose may, if
specifically authorised by the Tribunal in that behalf, avail of such legal assistance as may
be directed by the Tribunal.
(4) Any creditor or contributory may also take part in the examination either personally
or through any person entitled to appear before the Tribunal.
(5) The Tribunal may put such question to the person examined as it thinks fit.
(6) The person ordered to be examined shall be examined on oath and shall answer all
such questions as the Tribunal may put or allow to be put to him.
(7) A person ordered to be examined under this section may, at his own cost, employ
any person entitled to appear before the Tribunal who shall be at liberty to put to him such
question as the Tribunal may deem just for the purpose of enabling him to explain or qualify
any answer given by him:
Provided that if, in the opinion of the Tribunal,  he is exculpated from any charges
made or suggested against him, the Tribunal may allow him such costs in its discretion as
it may deem fit.
(8) Notes of the examination shall be taken down in writing, and shall be read over to
or by, and signed by, the person examined and may thereafter be used in evidence against
him in any proceeding, civil or criminal, and shall be open to the inspection of any creditor
or contributory as may be necessary.
(9) Where on such examination, the Tribunal is of the opinion, as to whether or not a
fraud has been committed,—
(a) that the person, who has been a director of a specified service provider, is
not fit to be a director of a specified service provider, or
(b) that the person, who has been an auditor of a specified service provider or
a partner of a firm acting as such auditor, is not fit to act as an auditor of a  specified
service provider or to be a partner of a firm acting as such auditor,
the Tribunal may make an order that the person shall not, without the leave of the Tribunal,
be a director of, or in any way, whether directly or indirectly, be concerned or take part in the
management of any  specified service provider or, as the case may be, act as an auditor of,
or be partner of a firm acting as auditors of any  specified service provider, for such period
not exceeding five years, as may be specified in the order.
78. (1) Where in a proceeding of liquidation under this Act, it appears to the Tribunal
that any person, who has taken part in the promotion or formation of, or who is or has been
a director, manager, or officer of the specified service provider,—
(a) has misapplied, or retained, or become liable or accountable for, any money
or property of the specified service provider; or
Public
examination
of directors
and auditors.
Power of
Tribunal to
assess damages
against
delinquent
directors, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

49
(b) has been guilty of any misfeasance or breach of trust in relation to the
specified service provider,
the Tribunal may, on an application made by the liquidator or any creditor or contributor,
within the period specified in sub-section ( 2), inquire into the conduct of the person, and
order him to repay or restore the money or property or any part thereof, with interest at such
rate, or to contribute such sum to the assets of the specified service provider by way of
compensation in respect of such misapplication or retention of any money or property or
any misfeasance or breach of trust, in relation to the specified service provider, as the
Tribunal considers appropriate:
Provided that where the specified service provider under liquidation is a banking
institution, the Tribunal,—
(a) shall make an order against such person to repay and restore the money or
property, unless he proves that he is not liable to make the repayment or restoration
either wholly or in part;
(b) has reason to believe that a property belongs to that person, whether or not
the property is in his name,  the Tribunal may, at any time, whether before or after
making an order under clause ( a), direct the attachment of such property, or such
portion thereof, as it considers fit and the property so attached shall remain subject to
attachment, unless the owner proves to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that he is the
real owner, and the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 relating to attachment
of property shall, as far as may be, apply to such attachment.
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be made within five years from the date
of the order of liquidation under section 63, or of the date when the alleged misapplication
or retention of any money or property or, misfeasance or breach of trust in relation to the
specified service provider, as the case may be, has been noticed, whichever is longer.
(3) This section shall apply, notwithstanding that the matter is one for which the
person may be criminally liable.
79. (1) A secured creditor in the liquidation proceedings may—
(a) relinquish its security interest to the liquidation estate and receive proceeds
from the sale of assets by the liquidator in the manner specified in section 80; or
(b) notwithstanding anything in sub-section (3) of section 63, realise its security
interest in the manner specified under this section.
(2) Where the secured creditor realises security interest under clause ( b) of
sub-section (1), he shall inform the liquidator of such security interest and identify the
asset subject to such security interest to be realised.
(3) Before any security interest is realised by the secured creditor under this section,
the liquidator shall verify such security interest and permit the secured creditor to realise
only such security interest, the existence of which may be proved—
(a) by the records of such security interest maintained by an information
utility; or
(b) by such other means as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation.
(4) A secured creditor may enforce, realise, settle, compromise or deal with the secured
assets in accordance with such law as may be applicable to the security interest being
realised, and to the secured creditor, and apply the proceeds to recover the debts due to it.
(5) If in the course of realising a secured asset, any secured creditor faces resistance
from the specified service provider or any person connected therewith in taking possession
of, selling or otherwise disposing of the security, the secured creditor may make an application
to the Tribunalfor an order to realise such security interest in accordance with the law for
the time being in force.
5 of 1908.
Secured
creditor in
liquidation
proceedings.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

50
(6) The Tribunal, on the receipt of an application under sub-section ( 5), may pass
such order as may be necessary to permit a secured creditor to realise security interest.
(7) Where the enforcement of the security interest under sub-section ( 4) yields an
amount by way of proceeds which is in excess of the debts due to the secured creditor, the
secured creditor shall—
(a) account to the liquidator for such surplus; and
(b) tender to the liquidator any surplus funds received from the enforcement of
such secured assets.
(8) The amount of resolution costs (including the costs for liquidation) under clause
(b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 80 due from secured creditors who realise their security
interests under this section, shall be deducted from the proceeds of any realisation by such
secured creditors, and they shall transfer such amounts to the liquidator to be included in
the liquidation estate.
(9) Where the proceeds of the realisation of the secured assets are not adequate to
repay debts owed to the secured creditor, the unpaid debts of such secured creditor shall be
paid by the liquidator in the manner specified in section 80.
80. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the
proceeds from the sale of the liquidation assets shall be distributed in the following order of
priority and within such period and in such manner as may be specified by regulations made
by the Corporation, namely:—
(a) the sums paid by the Corporation to a depositor of an insured service
provider which is covered by deposit insurance;
(b) the resolution costs, including costs for the process of liquidation;
(c) the following debts which shall rank equally between and among the
following, namely:—
(i) workmen's dues for the period of twenty-four months preceding the
liquidation commencement date; and
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event such secured creditor
has relinquished security in the manner set out in section 79;
(d) wages owed to employees other than workmen for the period of twelve
months preceding the date of the commencement of liquidation commencement date;
(e) the following debts which shall rank equally between and among the
following, namely:—
(i) amounts due to uninsured depositors;
(ii) such amounts due to insurance policy holders as may be specified by
regulations made by the Corporation;
(f) financial debts owed to unsecured creditors;
(g) the following dues shall rank equally between and among the following,
namely:—
(i) any amount due to the Central Government and the State Government,
including the amount to be received on account of the Consolidated Fund of
India and the Consolidated Fund of a State, if any, in respect of the whole or any
part of the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date;
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount unpaid following the
enforcement of security interest;
(h) any remaining debts and dues;
Distribution
of assets.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

51
(i) preference shareholders, if any; and
(j) equity shareholders or partners, as the case may be.
(2) Any contractual arrangements between recipients under sub-section ( 1) with
equal ranking, if disrupting the order of priority under that sub-section shall be disregarded
by the liquidator.
(3) The fees payable to the liquidator shall be deducted proportionately from the
proceeds payable to each class of recipients under sub-section (1), and the proceeds to the
relevant recipient shall be distributed after such deduction.
(4) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) it is clarified that at each stage of the distribution of proceeds in respect of
a class of recipients that rank equally, each of the debts shall be paid in full, or in equal
proportion within the same class of recipients, if the proceeds are insufficient to meet
the debts in full; and
(b) the expression, "workmen's dues" shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it in section 325 of the Companies Act, 2013.
81. (1) Where the assets of the specified service provider have been completely
liquidated, the liquidator shall make an application to the Tribunal for the dissolution of
such specified service provider.
(2) The Tribunal shall, on an application made under sub-section ( 1), order that the
specified service provider shall be dissolved from the date of that order and the specified
service provider shall be dissolved accordingly.
(3) A copy of the order under sub-section (2) shall, within seven days from the date
of such order, be forwarded to the authority with which the specified service provider is
registered.
82. (1) Where the liquidator, is of the opinion that the specified service provider has
at a relevant time given a preference in such transactions and in such manner as laid down
in sub-section ( 2) to any persons as referred to in sub-section ( 4), he shall apply to the
Tribunal for avoidance of preferential transactions and for, one or more of the orders referred
to in section 83.
(2) A specified service provider shall be deemed to have given a preference, if—
(a) there is a transfer of property or an interest thereof of the specified service
provider for the benefit of a creditor or a surety or a guarantor for or on account of an
antecedent financial debt or operational debt or other liabilities owed by the specified
service provider; and
(b) the transfer under clause ( a) has the effect of putting such creditor or a
surety or a guarantor in a beneficial position than it would have been in the event of
a distribution of assets being made in accordance with section 80.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section ( 2), a preference shall not include the following
transfers—
(a) transfer made in the ordinary course of the business or financial affairs of
the  specified service provider or the transferee;
(b) any transfer creating a security interest in property acquired by the  specified
service provider  to the extent that—
(i) such security interest secures new value and was given at the time of
or after the signing of a security agreement that contains a description of such
property as security interest and was used by the specified service provider to
acquire such property; and
Dissolution of
specified
service
provider.
18 of 2013.
Preferential
transactions
and relevant
time.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

52
(ii) such transfer was registered with an information utility on or before
thirty days after the specified service provider receives possession of such
property:
Provided that any transfer made in pursuance of the order of a court shall
not, preclude such transfer to be deemed as giving of preference by the specified
service provider.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section ( 3), "new value" means money or its worth in
goods, services, or new credit, or release by the transferee of property previously transferred
to such transferee in a transaction that is neither void nor voidable by the liquidator,
including proceeds of such property, but does not include a financial debt or operational
debt substituted for existing financial debt or operational debt.
(5) A preference shall be deemed to be given at a relevant time, if—
(a) it is given to a related party (other than by reason only of being an employee),
during the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date; or
(b) a preference is given to a person other than a related party during the period
of one year preceding the liquidation commencement date.
83. (1) The Tribunal may, on an application made by the liquidator under
sub-section (1) of section 82, by an order,—
(a) require any property transferred in connection with the giving of the
preference to be vested in the specified service provider;
(b) require any property to be so vested if it represents the application either of
the proceeds of sale of property so transferred or of money so transferred;
(c) release or discharge (in whole or in part) any security interest created by the
specified service provider;
(d) require any person to pay such sums in respect of benefits received by him
from the specified service provider to the liquidator, as the Tribunal may direct;
(e) direct any guarantor, whose financial debts or operational debts owed to
any person were released or discharged (in whole or in part) by the giving of the
preference, to be under such new or revived financial debts or operational debts to
that person as the Tribunal deems appropriate;
(f) direct for providing security or charge on any property for the discharge of
any financial debt or operational debt under the order, and such security or charge to
have the same priority as a security or charge released or discharged wholly or in part
by the giving of the preference; and
(g) direct for providing the extent to which any person whose property is so
vested in the specified service provider, or on whom financial debts or operational
debts are imposed by the order, are to be proved in the liquidation for financial debts
or operational debts which arose from, or were released or discharged wholly or in
part by the giving of the preference:
Provided that an order under this section shall not—
(a) affect any interest in property which was acquired from a person other than
the specified service provider or any interest derived from such interest and was
acquired in good faith and for value;
(b) require a person, who received a benefit from the preferential transaction in
good faith and for value to pay a sum to the liquidator.
(2) For the purposes of this section,—
Orders in case
of preferential
transactions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

53
(a) it is clarified that where a person, who has acquired an interest in property
from another person other than the specified service provider, or who has received a
benefit from the preference or such another person to whom the specified service
provider gave the preference,—
(i) had sufficient information of the initiation or commencement of
liquidation process of the specified service provider;
(ii) is a related party,
it shall be presumed that the interest was acquired or the benefit was received otherwise
than in good faith unless the contrary is shown;
(b) a person shall be deemed to have sufficient information or opportunity to
avail such information if an order of liquidation has been made under section 63.
84. (1) If the liquidator, on an examination of the transactions of the specified service
provider referred to in sub-section (2) determines that certain transactions were made during
the relevant period under section 85, which were undervalued, he shall make an application
to the Tribunal to declare such transactions as void and reverse the effect of such transaction
in accordance with this Chapter.
(2) A transaction shall be considered undervalued where the specified service
provider—
(a) makes a gift to a person; or
(b) enters into a transaction with a person which involves the transfer of one or
more assets by the specified service provider for a consideration the value of which
is significantly less than the value of the consideration provided by the  specified
service provider, and such transaction has not taken place in the ordinary course of
business of the specified service provider.
85. (1) In an application for avoiding a transaction which has been undervalued, the
liquidator shall demonstrate that—
(a) such transaction was made with any person within the period of one year
preceding the liquidation commencement date; or
(b) such transaction was made with a related party within the period of two
years preceding  the liquidation commencement date.
(2) The Tribunal may require an independent expert to assess evidence relating to the
value of the transactions mentioned in this section.
86. (1) Where an undervalued transaction has taken place and the liquidator has not
reported it to the Tribunal, a creditor, Member or a partner of a specified service provider, as
the case may be, may make an application to the Tribunal to declare such transactions void
and reverse their effect in accordance with this Chapter.
(2) Where the Tribunal, after examination of the application made under
sub-section (1), is satisfied that—
(a) undervalued transactions had occurred; and
(b) the liquidator after having sufficient information or opportunity to avail
information of such transactions did not report such transactions to the Tribunal,
it shall pass an order restoring the position as it existed before such transactions and
reversing the effects thereof in the manner as laid down in section 84 and section 87.
87. The order of the Tribunal declaring the undervalued transactions as void under
sub-section (1) of section 84 may provide for the following, namely:—
(a) require any property transferred as part of the transaction, to be vested in
the specified service provider;
Avoidance of
undervalued
transactions.
Relevant
period for
avoidable
transactions.
Application
by creditor
in cases of
undervalued
transactions.
Order in
cases  of
undervalued
transaction.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

54
(b) release or discharge (in whole or in part) any security interest granted by the
specified service provider;
(c) require any person to pay such sums, in respect of benefits received by
such person, to the liquidator, as the Tribunal  may direct; or
(d) require the payment of such consideration for the transaction as may be
determined by an independent expert.
88. Where the specified service provider has entered into an undervalued transaction
as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 84 and the Tribunal is satisfied that such transaction
was deliberately entered into by such specified service provider—
(a) for keeping assets of the specified service provider beyond the reach of any
person who is entitled to make a claim against the specified service provider; or
(b) in order to adversely affect the interests of such  person in relation to the
claim,
the Tribunal shall make an order—
(i) restoring the position as it existed before such transaction as if the transaction
had not been entered into; and
(ii) protecting the interests of persons who are victims of such transactions:
Provided that an order under this sections shall not—
(a) affect any interest in property which was acquired from a person other than
the  specified service provider and was acquired in good faith, for value and without
notice of the relevant circumstances, or affect any interest deriving from such
interest; and
(b) require a person who received a benefit from the transaction in good faith,
for value and without notice of the relevant circumstances to pay any sum unless he
was a party to the transaction.
89. (1) Where the  specified service provider has been a party to an extortionate credit
transaction involving a financial or operational debt during the period within two years
preceding the liquidation commencement date, the liquidator, may make an application for
avoidance of such transaction to the Tribunal if the terms of such transaction required
exorbitant payments to be made by the  specified service provider.
(2) The Corporation may specify by regulations the circumstances in which a
transaction shall be covered under sub-section ( 1).
(3) For the purposes of this section, it is clarified that any debt extended by any
person providing financial services which is in compliance with any law for the time being
in force in relation to such debt shall not be considered as an extortionate credit transaction.
90. Where the Tribunal after examining the application made under sub-section (1) of
section 89 is satisfied that the terms of a credit transaction required exorbitant payments to
be made by the specified service provider, it shall, by an order—
(a) restore the position as it existed prior to such transaction;
(b) set aside the whole or part of the debt created on account of the extortionate
credit transaction;
(c) modify the terms of the transaction;
(d) require any person who is, or was, a party to the transaction to repay any
amount received by such person; or
(e) require any security interest that was credited as part of the extortionate
credit transaction to be relinquished in favour of the liquidation estate.
Transactions
defrauding
creditors.
Extortionate
credit
transactions.
Orders of
Tribunal in
respect of
extortionate
credit
transactions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

55
91. (1) On being appointed as a liquidator or an administrator of a specified service
provider, the Corporation may, by an order in writing, require parties related to the specified
service provider to continue to provide such services or honour such contracts as the
Corporation may direct, for a period not exceeding two years from the date of such
appointment, for effective resolution of the specified service provider.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression "related party"  includes a "holding
company", "subsidiary company" or "associate company" as defined in the Companies
Act, 2013 and any other person with similar relationship with the specified service provider.
92. (1) The appropriate regulator shall provide necessary assistance and co-operation
to the Corporation in the discharge of its duties under this Chapter.
(2) For the purpose of enabling the Corporation to take into its custody or under its
control, all property, effects and actionable claims to which a specified service provider
under liquidation, is or appears to be entitled, the Corporation may request in writing the
District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any property, books of account or other
documents of such specified service provider may be situated or be found, to take possession
thereof, and the District Magistrate shall, on such request,—
(a) take possession of such property, books of account or other documents;
and
(b) forward them to the Corporation.
(3) Where any property or effects of the specified service provider under liquidation,
are in the possession of the District Magistrate, such Magistrate shall, on an application
made by the Corporation, sell such property and effects and forward the net proceeds of the
sale to the Corporation:
Provided that such sale shall, as far as practicable, be by public auction.
(4) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub-section (3), the
District Magistrate may take or cause to be taken such steps and use or cause to be used
such force as may, in his opinion, be necessary and shall provide necessary assistance and
co-operation to the Corporation in the discharge of its duties under this Chapter.
CHAPTER  XIII
VOLUNTARY LIQUIDATION AND WINDING-UP
93. (1) A specified service provider classified in the category of low or moderate risk
to viability may close its business and liquidate itself voluntarily under section 59 of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, subject to such conditions as may be specified by
regulations made by the appropriate regulator:
Provided that if the risk to viability classification of such specified service provider is
changed to material or higher category at any stage of such voluntary liquidation
proceedings, the proceedings shall lapse and the specified service provider shall be resolved
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) A specified service provider  classified in the category of material or higher risk to
viability shall not be eligible for voluntary liquidation.
94. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the Companies Act, 2013, the Tribunal shall not
entertain any application for winding-up of a specified service provider or bridge service
provider under section 271 of that Act, unless the Tribunal obtains a report from the
Corporation stating that such a specified service provider should be liquidated:
Provided that, where the specified service provider is classified  in the category of
low, moderate or material risk to viability, the Corporation shall require the appropriate
regulator to furnish the report for submission before the Tribunal.
Assistance by
related
parties.
Assistance
and co-
operation.
18 of 2013.
V oluntary
liquidation.
Winding-up
under section
271 of the
Companies
Act, 2013.
31 of 2016.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

56
(2) Upon submission of the report by the Corporation, if the  Tribunal is satisfied that
the specified service provider has to be liquidated, it shall appoint the Corporation as the
liquidator, and the specified service provider shall be liquidated as per the provisions of this
Act.
CHAPTER XIV
F
OREIGN RESOLUTION ACTION
95. (1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of
any country outside India for enforcing the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the Corporation may, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, enter into memorandum of understanding with such international
organisations or other authorities outside India, which have functions similar to those of
the Corporation, for sharing information on reciprocal basis to the extent permissible under
any law for the time being in force in India.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force in
India, the information received by the Corporation from the authorities referred to in
sub-section (2), shall be treated as confidential.
(4) The Corporation shall require the authority outside India to maintain confidentiality
of the information furnished by it under the memorandum of understanding and not to
disclose the information to any person or authority:
Provided that in case the laws of the country of the authority outside India do not
provide immunity from disclosure of the information furnished by the Corporation and such
authority is directed by a court of law, Tribunal or other authority to disclose such information,
the said authority shall inform the Corporation forthwith of such direction.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Corporation shall assist on a reciprocal
basis the authority outside India with whom it has entered into a memorandum of
understanding under sub-section (2), in the resolution of a branch office, situated in India
and which is a specified service provider, of a person situated in the country of such
authority.
(6) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any law for the time being in force  in
India, if in the course of resolution or liquidation proceedings, as the case may be, under
this Act, the Corporation is of the opinion that assets of the specified service provider, are
situated in a country outside India with which reciprocal arrangements have been made
under this section, the Corporation may make an application to the Tribunal that the evidence
or action relating to such assets is required in connection with such process or proceeding.
(7) The Tribunal on receipt of an application under sub-section ( 6) and, on being
satisfied that evidence or action relating to assets under that sub-section is required in
connection with resolution or liquidation proceedings, may issue a letter of request to a
court or an authority of such country competent to deal with such request.
96. (1) Subject to  any agreement or memorandum of understanding referred to in
section 95, if the Corporation receives a written request from a foreign resolution authority
for the recognition of a foreign resolution action in relation to,—
(a) a body corporate incorporated outside India, whose branch office is a
specified service provider; or
(b) a holding company of such body corporate  which is a specified service
provider,
it may, with the  prior approval of the Central Government, make a recognition and enforcement
order, recognising such  resolution action or a part thereof in accordance with this section.
(2) A recognition and enforcement order under sub-section ( 1) shall be made after
consultation with the appropriate regulator, and shall be subject to such conditions as may
be specified in the order.
Power to
enter into
memorandum
of
understanding.
Recognition
and
enforcement
or refusal of
recognition
and
enforcement
of foreign
resolution
actions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

57
(3) Where the Corporation recognises a resolution action and makes an order under
sub-section ( 1), it shall, within seven days of such order, publish the recognition and
enforcement order in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation, and send copies thereof to the specified service provider, the appropriate
regulator, the appropriate resolution authority of the body corporate incorporated outside
India, and to the Central Government.
(4) The foreign resolution action referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be recognised,
unless the following conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i) the foreign resolution action shall not be in derogation of the safeguards
contained in section 55 of this Act in relation to the Indian stakeholders affected by
such resolution action;
(ii) subject to any netting or set off in accordance with the provisions of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Securities Countracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 or
the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, as applicable,  the creditors of the
specified service provider which is a branch office in India of a body corporate
incorporated outside India shall have the first charge on the unencumbered assets of
the specified service provider in relation to which such recognition and enforcement
order is being made.
(5) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1), (2) (3) and (4) of section 95, the Corporation
may refuse to recognise a resolution action if in the opinion of the Corporation—
(i) the action may have an adverse impact on the financial stability of India;
(ii) the action is not consistent with the objectives of this Act;
(iii) the action is not consistent with the laws of India;
(iv) the action is opposed to the public policy of India;
(v) independent resolution action under the provisions of this Act is necessary
to achieve the objectives of this Act.
(6) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "holding company", in relation to a body corporate means a company of
which such body corporate referred to in sub-section (1) is a subsidiary through any
number of layers;
(b) "layer" in relation to a holding company, means its subsidiary or subsidiaries.
97. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, but subject to any agreement or
memorandum of understanding referred to in section 95, in the event of a foreign resolution
action, including liquidation, in respect of a body corporate incorporated outside India,
whose branch office in India is a specified service provider,—
(a) such branch office may be classified in the category of  critical risk to
viability by the appropriate regulator, and resolved in accordance with the provisions
of this Act; and
(b) subject to any netting or set off in accordance with the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934, the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 or the Payment and
Settlement Systems Act, 2007, as applicable, the creditors of such specified service
provider which is a branch office in India of a body corporate incorporated outside
India shall have first charge on the unencumbered assets of the specified service
provider for the purpose of resolution or liquidation under this Act:
Provided that where a body corporate incorporated outside India has not
entered into  resolution or liquidation, but its branch office in India, being a
specified service provider, has been classified in the category of  critical risk to
viability under section 45 and is being resolved under this Act, the creditors of such
branch office shall, subject to any agreement or memorandum of understanding referred
to in section 95, have first charge under clause (b).
Rights of local
creditors in
certain cases.
2 of 1934.
42 of 1956.
51 of 2007.
2 of 1934.
42 of 1956.
51 of 2007.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

58
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "foreign resolution action" shall
have such meaning as may be determined by the Corporation in consultation with the
appropriate regulator.
CHAPTER XV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
98. Where any officer of the specified service provider has,—
(i) within the twelve months immediately preceding the date of the order of
liquidation,—
(a) wilfully concealed any property or part of such property of the specified
service provider or concealed any debt due to, or from, the specified service
provider, of the value of ten thousand rupees or more; or
(b) fraudulently removed any part of the property of the specified service
provider of the value of ten thousand rupees or more; or
(c) wilfully concealed, destroyed, mutilated or falsified any book or paper
affecting or relating to the property of the specified service provider or its affairs,
or
(d) wilfully made any false entry in any book or paper affecting or relating
to the property of the specified service provider or its affairs; or
(e) fraudulently parted with, altered or made any omission in any document
affecting or relating to the property of the specified service provider or its affairs;
or
(f) wilfully created any security interest over, transferred or disposed of
any property of the specified service provider which has been obtained on
credit and has not been paid for unless such creation, transfer or disposal was in
the ordinary course of the business of the specified service provider; or
(g) wilfully concealed the knowledge of the doing by others of any of the
acts mentioned in sub-clauses (c), (d) or (e); or
(ii) at any time after the date of the order of liquidation, committed any of the
acts mentioned in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (i) or has the knowledge of the doing
by others of any of the things mentioned in sub-clauses ( c) to ( e) of the said
clause; or
(iii) at any time after the date of the order of liquidation, taken in pawn or pledge,
or otherwise received the property knowing it to be so secured, transferred or disposed,
such officer shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to five years, or with fine, which shall not be less than one
lakh rupees, but which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both:
Provided that nothing in this section shall render a person liable to any punishment
under this section if he proves that he had no intent to defraud or to conceal the state of
affairs of the specified service provider.
99.  On or after the date of the order of liquidation, if an officer of the specified service
provider or the specified service provider—
(a) has made or caused to be made any gift or transfer of, or charge on, or has
caused or connived in the execution of a decree or order against, the property of the
specified service provider;
(b) has concealed or removed any part of the property of the specified service
provider within two months before the date of any unsatisfied judgment, decree or
order for payment of money obtained against the specified service provider,
such officer of the specified service provider or the person in control of such specified
service provider shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
Punishment for
concealment
of property.
Punishment
for
transactions
defrauding
creditors.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

59
than one year, but which may extend to five years, or with fine, which shall not be less than
one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both:
Provided that a person shall not be punishable under this section if the acts mentioned
in clause (a) were committed more than five years before the date of the order of liquidation,
or if he proves that, at the time of commission of those acts, he had no intent to defraud the
creditors of the specified service provider.
100. On or after the date of the order of liquidation under section 63, where an officer
of the specified service provider or the bridge service provider, as the case may be,—
(a) does not disclose to the Corporation all the details of property of the specified
service provider or the bridge service provider, and details of transactions thereof, or
any such other information as the Corporation may require; or
(b) does not deliver to the Corporation all or part of the property of the specified
service provider or the bridge service provider in his control or custody and which he
is required to deliver; or
(c) does not deliver to the Corporation all books and papers in his control or
custody and which he is required to deliver; or
(d) fails to inform the Corporation the information in his knowledge that a debt
has been falsely proved by any person during the liquidation; or
(e) prevents the production of any book or paper affecting or relating to the
property or affairs of the specified service provider or the bridge service provider; or
(f) accounts for any part of the property of the specified service provider or the
bridge service provider by fictitious losses or expenses, or if he has attempted to so
account at any meeting of the creditors of the specified service provider or  the bridge
service provider within the twelve months immediately preceding the date of the order
of liquidation,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years,
but which may extend to five years, or with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees,
but which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both:
Provided that nothing in this section shall render a person liable to any punishment
under this section, if he proves that he had no intent to do so in relation to the state of affairs
of the specified service provider.
101. On and after the date of the order of liquidation, where any person destroys,
mutilates, alters or falsifies any books, papers or securities, or makes or is in the knowledge
of making of any false or fraudulent entry in any register, books of account or document
belonging to the specified service provider with an intent to defraud or deceive any person,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years,
but which may extend to five years, or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees,
but which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
102. Where an officer of the specified service provider makes any material and wilful
omission in any statement relating to the affairs of the specified service provider, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to five years, or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which
may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
103. (1) Where the specified service provider or any of its officer contravenes the
provisions of sub-section (5) of section 45 or section 63, any such officer who knowingly or
wilfully committed or authorised or permitted such contravention, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to
Punishment
for misconduct
on liquidation.
Punishment
for
falsification of
books of
specified
service
provider.
Punishment for
wilful and
material
omissions from
statements
relating to
affairs of
specified
service
provider.
Punishment for
contravention
of prohibition
made under this
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

60
five years or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to
three lakh rupees, or with both.
(2) Where any creditor  contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 5) of section 45
or sub-section ( 3) of section 63, any person who knowingly and wilfully authorised or
permitted such contravention by a creditor, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to five years, or with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one crore rupees, or
with both.
104. If any person fails without reasonable cause or refuses—
(a) to produce to an Investigating Authority or any person authorised by him in
this behalf any book, register, other document or record or to furnish any information
which it is his duty under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 14 to furnish;
or
 (b) to appear before the Investigating Authority personally when required to
do so  or to answer any question which is put to him in pursuance thereof by the
Investigating Authority under sub-section ( 4) of section 14; or
(c) to sign the notes of any examination referred to in sub-section ( 5) of
section 14,
such person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine, which may extend to twenty-five crore rupees, or with both, and if the
contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees
for every day after the first during which the contravention continues.
105. (1) Where any employee, manager or person in control of a specified service
provider,—
(a) transfers any assets of the specified service provider in violation of any
order of the appropriate regulator or the Corporation under this Act;
(b) transfers any assets of the specified service provider after such specified
service provider has been classified in the category of imminent risk to viability;
(c) transfers any assets of the specified service provider before it is classified in
the category of imminent risk to viability, with the objective of reducing the amount of
assets available to the Corporation as an administrator or liquidator;
(d) refuses to provide information regarding the specified service provider in
liquidation when required to do so by the Corporation; or
(e) conceals or provides false information regarding a specified service provider
in resolution when required by the Corporation to so provide,
such employee, manager or person in control of the specified service provider shall, in
addition to the payment of the amount disgorged, if any, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to five years, and
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one crore
rupees.
(2) If any person,—
(a) assists a person in committing any offence under sub-section ( 1);
(b) knowingly accepts or deals in any asset of a specified service provider
which is in resolution; or
(c) causes any asset of a specified service provider in resolution to be hidden
from the Corporation,
such person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years, but which may extend to five years, and with fine which shall not be less than
one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one crore rupees.
Punishment for
interference in
investigation.
Other
offences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

61
(3) Whoever in any return, balance-sheet, or other document or in any information
required or furnished by or under or for the purposes of any provision of this Act, wilfully
makes a statement which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or
wilfully omits to make a material statement, shall be punishable with imprisonment which
may extend to three years, or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but
which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
(4) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other document, or to
furnish any statement or information which under the provisions of this Act, it is his duty
to produce or furnish, he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees in respect of each offence and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an
additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day after the first
during which the contravention continues.
(5) Where a specified service provider,—
(a)  fails to intimate a material change in the restoration plan or a resolution
plan under section 41; or
(b) fails to modify and resubmit a restoration plan or the resolution plan under
section 41,
every officer in default of such specified service provider shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to one crore rupees or imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years or with both.
106. (1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who, at
the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company,
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this Act
has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary, or other officer or employee of the company, such director,
manager, secretary, other officer or employee shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(3) Any offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to have been committed
at the place where the registered office or the principal place of business as the case may
be, of the company in India, is situated.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a Corporation, statutory
body, a co-operative society or a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
107. (1) Any person who deliberately contravenes any of the provisions of this Act
or the rules or regulations made under this Act, shall be liable to a penalty which shall not
be less than the amount of unlawful gains accrued out of such contravention, but which
may extend to three times the said amount of unlawful gains or twenty-five crore rupees,
whichever is higher.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of this Act or
rules and
regulations
made
thereunder.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

62
(2) Any person who by gross negligence or any person related to the specified
service provider, who  violates any order, regulation or rule under this Act, shall be liable to
a penalty which may extend up to two times the amount of unlawful gains accrued out of
such violation or extend up to five crore rupees, whichever is higher.
108. (1) Any specified service provider which fails to submit a restoration plan or
resolution plan under section 38 shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty-five
crore rupees.
(2)  Any specified service provider which fails to update a restoration plan or resolution
plan under section 41 shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to five crore rupees.
(3) Any systemically important financial institution which fails to update a restoration
plan or a resolution plan under section 41 shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to
ten crore rupees.
(4) Any specified service provider which fails to intimate a material change in the
restoration plan or a resolution plan under section 41 shall be liable to a penalty which may
extend to ten crore rupees.
(5)  Any systemically important financial institution which fails to intimate a material
change shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty-five crore rupees.
(6) Any specified service provider which fails to modify and resubmit a restoration
plan or the resolution plan under section 41 shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to
ten crore rupees.
(7) Any systemically important financial institution which fails to modify and
resubmit its restoration plan or the resolution plan under section 41 shall be liable to a
penalty which may extend to  twenty-five crore rupees.
109. (1) For the purposes of imposition of penalty under section 107 or section 108,
the Corporation or the appropriate regulator, as the case may be, shall appoint an officer of
such rank and in such manner as may be prescribed, to be an adjudicating officer for
holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner after giving the relevant specified service
provider or the person a reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing
any penalty.
(2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to summon
and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of
the case to give evidence or to produce any document, which in the opinion of the
adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject-matter of the inquiry and if,
on such inquiry, after being satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provisions
of section 107 or section 108, may impose such penalty as the adjudicating officer thinks fit
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(3) The Corporation or the appropriate regulator, as the case may be, may call for and
examine the record of any proceedings under this section and if it considers that the order
passed by the adjudicating officer is erroneous to the extent it is not in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, it may, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as it deems
necessary, pass an order modifying the quantum of penalty, if the circumstances of the case
so justify:
Provided that no such order shall be passed unless the relevant specified service
provider or the person has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall be applicable after an expiry of
a period of three months from the date of the order passed by the adjudicating officer or
disposal of the appeal under section 111, whichever is earlier.
Penalty in
relation to
restoration
and resolution
plans.
Power to
adjudicate
penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

63
 (4) While adjudging the quantum of penalty under this section, the adjudicating
officer shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:—
(a) the nature and seriousness of the violation committed by the relevant
specified service provider or person;
(b) the consequences and impact of the violation including the extent of benefit
or unfair advantage gained by the relevant specified service provider or person or
loss caused or likely to be caused to other persons as a result of the violation;
(c) the amount of loss caused to a consumer or a group of consumers as a result
of the default;
(d) the conduct of the relevant specified service provider or person after
discovery of the occurrence of the violation;
(e)  the repetitive nature of the default;
(f) the deliberate, reckless or negligent nature of the contravention;
(g) offences committed by the relevant specified service provider or person
under this Act.
110. If any person fails to comply with an order issued under this Chapter requiring
him to pay any amount by way of penalty, the Corporation may, by order in writing, recover
the amount of penalty in accordance with the provisions of the Second Schedule to the
Income-tax Act, 1961.
111. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order imposing penalty under  section 109 may
prefer an appeal to the Tribunal.
(2) An appeal under this section shall be filed within a period of forty-five days from
the date on which a copy of the order made by the Corporation or the appropriate regulator
is received by the aggrieved person and shall be in such form and manner and be
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period
of forty-five days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal within that period.
112. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, all offences
under this Act shall be triable by the Special Court established under section 435 of the
Companies Act, 2013.
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, except on the
complaint in writing made by the Central Government, Corporation  or any person authorised
by the Central Government in this behalf.
(3) Save as provided under this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said
provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the person
conducting a prosecution before a Special Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, where the
complainant under sub-section (2) is the Central Government or Corporation or an officer
authorised by the Central Government, the presence of such officer before the court trying
the offences shall not be necessary unless the court requires his personal attendance at the
trial.
113. The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers conferred
by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a High Court, as if
a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court of
Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.
Recovery of
penalty under
this Chapter.
Appeal
against order
of penalty.
Trial of
offences by
Special Court.
Appeal and
revision.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
18 of 2013.
43 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

64
CHAPTER XVI
COMPENSATION
114. (1) If the outcome of a resolution action of the Corporation is not in consonance
with the safeguard for applying methods of resolution specified in clause (b) of sub-section
(1) of section 55, any person aggrieved by such action may, within sixty days of completion
of the resolution, make an application for compensation to the Tribunal.
(2) The Tribunal shall, within fifteen days of the receipt of the application under
sub-section (1), appoint a registered valuer as an independent valuer for the purpose of this
Chapter, subject to such criteria as may be prescribed.
(3) Upon appointment under sub-section ( 2), the independent valuer shall assess
whether the applicant has received less favourable treatment in resolution than he would
have in the event of liquidation of the specified service provider in accordance with
Chapter XII.
(4) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression, "registered valuer" means a
person registered as such in accordance with the Companies Act, 2013 and the rules made
thereunder.
115. The Corporation and the specified service provider shall provide such records,
documents and information to the independent valuer as may be required for the purposes
of this Chapter.
116. (1) The independent valuer appointed under section 114 shall, within sixty days
from the date of appointment, submit a report to the Tribunal setting out its assessment of
whether any compensation is to be awarded to the applicant.
(2) The copies of the report submitted under sub-section ( 1) shall be forwarded,
within seven days of its submission, to the applicant, the specified service provider, the
Corporation, and the appropriate regulator.
(3) On receipt of the valuation report, where the Tribunal is of the opinion that—
(i) the valuation report was not prepared in accordance with this Chapter; or
(ii) the valuer should have had regard to any additional circumstances not
taken into account in the valuation report,
the Tribunal, may by an order in writing, direct the valuer to reconsider the valuation report
or any aspect thereof and submit a revised report or replace the valuer, and pass such other
orders as may be required.
117. (1) The independent valuer shall not divulge any information relating to any
specified service provider, its consumers, the Corporation, or the appropriate regulator
except as required under any other law, or when so authorised by this Act.
(2) The obligation to maintain confidentiality under this section shall continue after
the independent valuer has ceased to perform his functions under this Chapter.
118. (1)The Tribunal may, within thirty days from the receipt of the valuation report
under section 116, if it is satisfied, direct the Corporation to make arrangements to pay such
compensation to the applicant from the Corporation Resolution Fund, as the Tribunal
deems fit.
(2) The Corporation shall pay to the applicant amount of compensation awarded
under sub-section (1) within seven days from the receipt of the order.
119. (1) The applicant or the Corporation aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal
under section 118 may, within sixty days of such decision, prefer an appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal.
Application
and
appointment
of valuer.
Access to
information.
Valuation
report.
Confidentiality.
Award of
compensation.
Appeal and
finality of
resolution
action.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

65
(2) Any decision under this Chapter shall not affect anything done or any action
taken under Chapters IX, X and XI except to the extent provided under this chapter.
CHAPTER XVII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ELIGIBLE CO-OPERATIVE BANKS
120. (1) On the commencement of this Act, an eligible co-operative bank as defined
under clause (gg) of section 2 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
Act, 1961, shall, be deemed to be an eligible co-operative bank for the purposes of this Act
for a period of two years which may be extended  by a further period not exceeding one year,
as may be notified by the Central Government or until the law governing such eligible
co-operative bank meets with the requirements of this Act, whichever is earlier.
(2) If on the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (1), the law for the time being
governing the co-operative bank fails to meet the requirements of this Act, the cooperative
bank shall cease to be an insured service provider under this Act.
121. (1) An eligible co-operative bank may be wound up in the following
circumstances, namely:—
(a) the co-operative bank has failed to comply with the requirements specified
in section 11 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(b) the co-operative bank has by reason of the provisions of section 22 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 become disentitled to carry on banking business in
India;
(c) the co-operative bank has been prohibited from receiving fresh deposits by
an order under sub-section (4) of section 35 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3A) of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934;
(d) the co-operative bank having failed to comply with any requirement of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 other than the requirements laid down in section 11
thereof, has continued such failure or, having contravened any provision of that Act
has continued such contravention beyond such period or periods as may be stipulated
in that behalf by the Reserve Bank of India, from time to time, after notice in writing of
such failure or contravention has been conveyed to the co-operative bank;
(e) the co-operative bank is unable to pay its debts; or
(f) in the opinion of the Reserve Bank of India,—
(i) a compromise or arrangement sanctioned by a competent authority in
respect of the co-operative bank cannot be worked satisfactorily with or without
modifications; or
(ii) the continuance of the co-operative bank is prejudicial to the interests
of its depositors.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, a
co-operative bank shall, for the purpose of clause ( e) of sub-section (1), be deemed to be
unable to pay its debts—
(i) if, on the basis of the returns, statements or information furnished to the
Reserve Bank of India in pursuance of the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949, the Reserve Bank of India is of opinion that the co-operative bank is unable to
pay its debts; or
(ii) if the co-operative bank has refused to meet any lawful demand made at any
of its offices or branches within two working days, if such demand is made at a place
where there is an office, branch or agency of the Reserve Bank of India, or within
Continuation
of deposit
insurance for
eligible co-
operative
banks.
Circumstances
in which
winding up of
eligible co-
operative
banks can be
sought under
this Act.
47 of 1961.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1934.
10 of 1949.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

66
five working days if such demand is made elsewhere and, in either case, the Reserve
Bank of India certifies in writing that the co-operative bank is unable to pay its debts.
CHAPTER XVIII
MISCELLANEOUS
122. (1) Where any amount has been paid by the Corporation under section 30 or
section 72, or any provision for which has been made under section 32, the Corporation
shall furnish to the liquidator or to the insured service provider or to the transferee insured
service provider, as the case may be, information as regards the amount so paid or provided
for.
(2) On receipt of the information under sub-section (1), notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in any other law for the time being in force,—
(a) the liquidator shall, within such period and in such manner as may be
prescribed, repay to the Corporation out of the amount, if any, payable by him in
respect of any deposit, such sum as to make up the amount paid or provided for by
the Corporation in respect of that deposit;
Explanation.—Where the Corporation has been appointed as the liquidator
under section 63, repayment to the Corporation may be by way of an adjustment to
the funds of the Corporation in such manner as may be specified by regulations made
by the Corporation;
(b) the insured service provider or, the transferee insured service provider, as
the case may be, shall within such period and in such manner as may be prescribed,
repay to the Corporation out of the amount, if any, to be paid or credited in respect of
any deposit after the date of the coming into force of the scheme referred to in section
30, such sum as to make up the amount paid or provided for by the Corporation in
respect of that deposit.
123. Every Member, officer or employee, or independent valuer or any other person
whose services are utilised by the Corporation shall, before entering upon his duties, make
a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
124. (1) The Corporation or the appropriate regulator shall not divulge any information
relating to any specified service provider or its consumers, except as otherwise required by
section 128, or under any other law for the time being in force, or when so authorised by this
Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, no court,
tribunal or other authority shall compel the Corporation or the appropriate regulator to
produce, or to give information on any inspection relating to a specified service provider or
its consumers, by the Corporation, or the appropriate regulator, as the case may be, under
this Act.
125. (1) Every Member shall be indemnified by the Corporation against all losses and
expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties under this Act
except such as have been caused by his own wilful act or default.
(2) A Member shall not be responsible for any other Member or for any other officer
or other employee of the Corporation, or for any loss or expenses resulting to the Corporation
from the insufficiency or deficiency of value of or title to any property or security acquired
or taken on behalf of the Corporation or the wrongful act of any debtor or any person under
obligation to the Corporation or anything done in good faith in the execution of the duties
of his office or in relation thereto.
Repayment of
amount to
Corporation.
Declaration
of fidelity.
Disclosure of
information.
Indemnity of
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

67
126. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Corporation or the
appropriate regulator, or any Member or officer of the Corporation or of the appropriate
regulator for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of
this Act or of any rule or regulations made thereunder.
127. Nothing in the Competition Act, 2002, shall apply to any action taken by the
Corporation or the appropriate regulator under Chapters X, XI and XII of this Act.
128. Notwithstanding anything in section 124, the Corporation and the appropriate
regulator shall—
(a) share and exchange, supervisory information, including inspection reports,
relating to such specified service providers which have been classified in the category
of material, imminent or critical risk to viability and in such form and manner as may be
specified by regulations made by the Corporation, in consultation with the appropriate
regulator, or whenever any material information comes to light:
Provided that the Corporation and the appropriate regulator may share and
exchange such information on a reciprocal basis relating to specified service providers
which have been classified in the category of low or moderate risk to viability;
(b) hold regular meetings to discuss any matter under this Act;
(c) have the power to enter into memorandum of understanding;
(d) consult each other regarding any cross-border establishment or investment
by the specified service providers and the insured service providers; and
(e) keep the supervisory information shared confidential and to restrict the
sharing, use and onward disclosure of such information in accordance with the
provisions of the arrangements:
Provided that the appropriate regulator shall submit to the Corporation its
findings on the inspections and the basis of classification of a specified service
provider in any of the categories of risk to viability, in such manner as may be specified
by regulations made by the Corporation.
129. The Corporation shall prepare, in such form and at such time in the financial year
as may be prescribed, the budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts
and expenditure of the Corporation.
130. (1) The Corporation shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial year,
prepare and submit to the Central Government, in such form as may be prescribed, a report
giving an account of its activities during that financial year and the report shall also give an
account of the activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Corporation during the
next financial year.
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is received.
131. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion,—
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Corporation is unable to discharge
the functions and duties imposed on it by or under this Act;
(b) that the Corporation has persistently defaulted in complying with any
direction issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a
result of such default, the financial position of the Corporation or the administration
of the Corporation has deteriorated; or
Protection of
action taken
under this Act.
Provisions of
the Competition
Act, 2002 not
to apply in
certain cases.
Information
sharing
between
appropriate
regulator and
Corporation.
Budget.
Annual
report.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Corporation.
12 of 2003. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

68
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest to
do so, the Central Government, may, by notification, supersede the Corporation for
such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section for the reasons
mentioned in clause (b), the Central Government shall give reasonable opportunity to the
Corporation to show cause as to why it should not be superseded and shall consider the
explanations and objections, if any, of the Corporation.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1), superseding the
Corporation,—
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices
as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Corporation shall, until
the Corporation is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged
by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Corporation shall, until the
Corporation is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section (1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Corporation by a fresh
appointment and in such case the Members who vacated their offices under clause ( a) of
sub-section (2), shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiry of the period
of supersession, take action under this section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to
such action to be laid before both Houses of Parliament in the immediate subsequent
session of Parliament.
132. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contraryin this Act, the Central Government,
on being satisfied that it is necessary to do so in the interest of management or operation of
any central counterparty or in public interest for ensuring the stability of the financial
system,  may, by notification direct that any of the provisions of this Act (other than section
142) or any notification or order issued or direction given thereunder (other than the provisions
relating to the making of rules or regulations), specified in the notification—
(a) shall not apply to a central counterparty or a class of central counterparties;
or
(b) shall apply to a central counterparty or a class of central counterparties with
such exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (1), shall be
laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses
agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or,
as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by
both the Houses.
133. Unless otherwise provided in this Act, no court or other tribunal shall have
jurisdiction to entertain or adjudicate upon any matter which the Corporation, the appropriate
regulator, the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered to decide or determine under
this Act and no court or tribunal shall grant any injunction in respect of any actions
proposed or reverse any such action.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Power to
exempt central
counterparties
from
application of
certain
provisions of
this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

69
134. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Corporation
shall, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act, or of any
rule or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
135. Any amount collected as a penalty under this Act, shall be credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India.
136. Notwithstanding anything in  the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Finance Act, 1994 or
any other law for the time being in force, the Corporation shall not be liable to pay income-
tax, or any other tax with respect to its income, expenditure, profits or gains, or the services
provided to or received by the Corporation.
137. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in
force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law for the time being in force other
than this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act shall override the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force in relation to resolution or liquidation
of a specified service provider notwithstanding anything to the contrary in such law:
Provided that nothing in this Act, other than section 47, shall affect the application of
the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 and the Securities Contract Regulation
Act, 1956 or regulations made thereunder, in respect of the central counterparties.
138. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016, the provisions relating to the information utilities under this Act shall apply to
the specified service providers in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by
the Corporation.
139. (1)  Nothing in the Companies Act, 2013 relating to liquidation shall apply to the
liquidation of the Corporation under this Act.
(2)  The Corporation shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central
Government and in such manner as that Government may direct in consultation with the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India, established under the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016:
Provided that the Central Government and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of
India may be guided by the liquidation process under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016.
(3) On the liquidation of the Corporation,—
(a) the outstanding assets of the Corporation insofar as they relate to the
Corporation Insurance Fund shall be distributed among the insured service providers
in such manner and in such proportion as may be determined by the Central Government
having regard to the amount of premium paid by them during any prescribed period or
the deposits of the said insured service providers as on the date of liquidation of the
Corporation or other relevant circumstances;
(b) the remaining outstanding assets of the Corporation shall be transferred to
the Central Government.
140. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
Members,
officers and
employees of
Corporation
to be public
servants.
Amounts
collected as
penalties.
45 of 1860
43 of 1961.
32 of 1994.
Exemption
from tax on
income,
profits and
gains.
Provisions of
this Act to
override
other laws.
Information
utility.
Liquidation
of the
Corporation.
51 of 2007.
42 of 1956.
31 of 2016.
Power to
make rules.
18 of 2013.
31 of 2016.
31 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

70
(a) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of,
the Chairperson and Members (other than ex officio Members), under
sub-section (7) of section 4;
(b) any other powers and functions of the Corporation under clause ( g) of
sub-section (1) of section 13;
(c) any other matter on which the Corporation may have powers under clause
(f) of sub-section (2) of section 13;
(d) the form and manner of the annual statement of accounts, under
sub-section ( 1), and the intervals in which such accounts shall be audited under
sub-section (2), of section 24;
(e)  the criteria for designation of a financial service provider as a systemically
important financial institution under sub-section (1) of section 25;
(f)  the other matters which shall be taken into consideration while prescribing
criteria for designation of a systemically important financial institutions under clause
(f) of sub-section (3) of section 25;
(g)  the form and manner of submission of report of utilisation of the any amount
from the Corporation Insurance Fund under sub-section ( 7) of section 29;
(h)  the form and manner of the report under sub-section (8) of section 52;
(i)  the other functions of the administrator under clause (b) of sub-section (1)
of section 59;
(j)  the other functions to be performed by the liquidator under clause ( q) of
sub-section (1), and the rules governing the actions of the Corporation as liquidator
under sub-section (3), of section 66 ;
(k)  the rank of officer to be appointed as an adjudicating officer and the manner
of making inquiry for adjudication of penalty under sub-section (1) of section 109;
(l)  the form and manner of filing of appeal and the fee to be accompanied with
it under sub-section (2) of section 111;
(m)  the criteria for appointment of valuer under sub-section (2) of section 114;
(n) the form and manner of repayment under clause ( a) of sub-section (
2) of
section 122;
(o)  the form and the time for preparation of the budget by the Corporation
under section 129;
(p)  the form for preparation of the annual report by the Corporation under sub-
section (1) of section 130;
(q)  any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed, or in respect
of which any provision is to be or may be made by rules.
141. (1) The Corporation or the appropriate regulator may, as the case may be, by
notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the time and place of meeting of the Corporation and the procedure to be
followed in regard to the transaction of business at such meetings (including quorum
at such meetings) under sub-section ( 1) of section 8;
Power to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

71
(ii) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of, such officers and employees of the Corporation under sub-section ( 2) of
section 11;
(iii) regulations for authorising its officers to carry out any functions for the
purposes of this Act under section 12;
(iv) the place and time of discovery and production of books of account and
other documents under sub-section ( 2), sharing of information or disclosures under
clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 13;
(v) the time for submission of report by the Investigating Authority under
sub-section (7) of section 14;
(vi) the manner of constituting committees and the number of members thereof
under section 19;
(vii) the manner of investing moneys by the Corporation under sub-section (3)
of section 21;
(viii) the amount of fee, the manner of payments of such amount and the time
within which it is to be paid under sub-section (1) of section 22;
(ix) the amount of premium and the manner of payment thereof under
sub-section (2), and the manner under sub-section ( 3), of section 22;
(x) the manner and the period for submission of reports by systemically
important financial institutions under sub-section ( 3), and the manner of inspection
of the systemically important financial institutions under sub-section ( 4), of
section 26;
(xi) the matters under sub-section (8) of section 29;
(xii) the form and manner of preparation and submission of list of depositors
under any scheme of resolution under sub-section ( 1) of section 30;
(xiii) manner of payment of unpaid amount to a bona fide depositor under
sub-section (2) of section 32;
(xiv) the form and manner of maintaining registers of specified service providers
and conditions, if any, and the fee to be paid for inspection of such register under
sub-section (4), and the information to be provided by the appropriate regulators
under subsection (5), of section 33;
(xv) the insured service provider which may be subject to cancellation of
registration on the ground of non-payment of the premium under sub-section ( 2) of
section 34;
(xvi) the rate of interest to be paid for default in payment of premium under
sub-section (2) of section 35;
(xvii) time period for investigation, inquiry or inspection for the purpose of
classification of a specified service provider in a category of risk to viability under
sub-section (4) , the objective criteria for classification of specified service providers
under sub-section (5) of section 36;
(xviii) the information relating to business which may be relevant for classification
of material, imminent or critical risk to viability under sub-section (5) of section 37;
(xix)  any other relevant information to be contained in the restoration plan
underclause (e) of sub-section ( 1), the form and manner of restoration plan under
sub-section (3) of section 39;
(xx) the form and manner of resolution plan and the relevant information required
by the Corporation under sub-section ( 2) of section 40;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

72
(xxi) the meaning of the material change in the resolution plan or restoration plan
under sub-section (7) of section 41;
(xxii) the manner replenishing financial resources by such central counterparty
under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1), and the additional funds to be contributed
by its existing participants for the purposes of meaning of "cash call" under
sub-section (2), of section 44;
(xxiii) the form and manner of publication of classification under sub-section (3)
of section 45;
(xxiv) the form and manner of giving show cause notice and the period of
opportunity of being heard to be given under section 46;
(xxv) the other safeguards under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), and the contracts
and agreements and the meaning of termination rights under sub-section ( 5), of
section 47;
(xxvi) the form and manner of schemes or bail-in instruments for resolution of a
specified service provider under sub-section (1), the measures to be taken and manner
of sell or transfer under sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) and clause (b) of sub-section (2),
manner of recovery of amounts under proviso to sub-section (6) of section 48;
(xxvii) any other terms and conditions of resolution of the specified service
providers under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 49;
(xxviii) the form and manner of details of remuneration paid to chairperson,
director etc., under sub-section ( 1) and the portion of such remuneration to be
designated as performance based incentives under sub-section ( 2), of section 51;
(xxix ) the form and manner of bail-in instrument or scheme under
sub-section (2), and the liabilities or class of liabilities under sub-section ( 4) and
clause (h) of sub-section (7), of section 52;
(xxx) the client assets, under clause (b) of sub-section (7) of section 52;
(xxxi) other safeguards relating to the methods of resolution under clause ( d)
of sub-section (1) and  relating to bail-in under clause (d) of sub-section (2), the "client
assets" and "collateral arrangements" under sub-section (5), of section 55;
(xxxii) the continuity of certain function under section 57;
(xxxiii )   the access the books of account, records, and other relevant
documents available to such authority, statutory authority and other persons under
sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 58;
(xxxiv)  manner and additional measures for central counterparties under
sub-section (4) of section 58;
(xxxv)  manner and measures to replenish financial resources under clause (c) of
sub-section (4) of section 58;
(xxxvi)   the times, places and rules of procedure to be observed by the committee
under sub-section (6) of section 62;
(xxxvii)  salary and allowances to the administrator and the members of the
committee constituted by the Corporation under sub-section (7) of section 62;
(xxxviii)   manner of selling the immovable and movable property and actionable
claims of the covered service provider in liquidation under clause (d) sub-section (1)
of section 66;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

73
(xxxix) the manner of reporting the progress of the liquidation process under
clause (n) of sub-section (1) of section 66;
(xl) other means under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 67;
(xli) other assets under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 4) of section 67;
(xlii) other source under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 68;
(xliii) the form and manner of providing financial information relating to the
covered service under sub-section ( 2) of section 68;
(xliv) the manner of receiving or collecting the claims of all consumers and
creditors under sub-section ( 1) of section 69;
(xlv) the form and manner and supporting documents required to prove the
claim of a depositor or operational creditor under sub-section (3) of section 69;
(xlvi) the manner of verification of claims under sub-section (1) of section 70;
(xlvii)  the form, manner and procedure of the list under sub-section ( 1) of
section 72;
(xlviii) the manner of communication of admission or rejection of claims under
sub-section ( 2), and the manner of payment of amounts covered under deposit
insurance under sub-section ( 3), of section 73;
(xlix) the manner of determination of value of claims under section 75;
(l) the manner of realising security interest under clause (b) of sub-section (3)
of section 79;
(li) the period and manner of distribution of liquidation assets; and the amounts
due to insurance policy holders under item ( ii) of clause ( e), of sub-section ( 1) of
section 80;
(lii ) the circumstances in which transactions may be covered under
sub-section (2) of  section 89;
(liii ) the conditions for voluntary liquidation under sub-section ( 1) of
section 93;
(liv) the manner of publication of recognition and enforcement order under
sub-section (3) of section 96;
(lv) the manner of adjustment of funds in case of repayment of amount to
Corporation under the explanation to clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 122;
(lvi) the form and manner of sharing and exchange of supervisory information
of certain categories of specified service providers under clause ( a) of section 128,
and the manner of submitting findings of information under the proviso to thereof;
(lvii) the manner of application of the provisions relating to information utilities
in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 to the specified service providers
under this Act under section 138;
(lviii) any other matter as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of
this Act.
142. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation,
as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be,
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
13 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

74
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule or regulation.
143. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of five years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
144. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Corporation
shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions
on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Corporation shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
145. (1) The Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 is hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal under sub-section ( 1),—
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken
under the repealed Act, shall insofar as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of this Act;
(b) all offences committed, and existing proceedings with respect to offences
which may have been committed under the repealed Act, shall continue to be governed
by the provisions of that Act as if that Act had not been repealed and the Corporation
may continue the existing proceedings as if those proceedings had been initiated by
it:
Provided that the Corporation may initiate a fresh proceeding related to an
offence under the repealed Act, within a period of three years from the date of such
repeal.
(3) On and from the date of repeal under sub-section (1),—
(a) the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation established under
section 3 of the repealed Act, including the Board or any committees constituted
under that Act, shall stand dissolved and every member of such Board or committee
shall cease to hold office as such:
Provided that no such member shall be entitled to any compensation for the
loss of office due to such repeal and the consequent dissolution of the Deposit
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation or for the premature termination of any
contract of management entered into by such member with the said Corporation and
no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority;
(b) notwithstanding anything in section 54AA of the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934, the employees of the Reserve Bank of India holding any office under the
Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation under the repealed Act, shall,—
(i) for a period of one year, hold an office under the Corporation;
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
Repeal and
savings.
2 of 1934.
47 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

75
 ( ii) on the completion of one year, and before the completion of
two years, have the option to continue in the Corporation or return to the
Reserve Bank of India:
Provided that such employees shall be eligible for deputation and other
allowances during the course of their employment in the Corporation and the
seniority of such employees returning to the Reserve Bank of India shall be
protected;
(c) the assets, liabilities, properties, undertakings, rights and claims of the
Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation under the repealed Act, shall
stand transferred to, and vested with, the Corporation;
(d) the assets of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation insofar
as they relate to the Deposit Insurance Fund under section 23 of the repealed Act,
shall stand transferred to the Corporation Insurance Fund under this Act;
(e) the assets, including rights and liabilities, if any, of the Deposit Insurance
and Credit Guarantee Corporation insofar as they relate to the Credit Guarantee Fund
under section 23A of the repealed Act, shall—
(i) stand transferred to the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; and
(ii) all proceedings relating to the Credit Guarantee Fund pending under the
repealed Act, shall be continued and may be enforced by or against the Reserve Bank
of India under the provisions of that Act, as if that Act had not been repealed;
(f) the assets of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation insofar
as they relate to the General Fund under section 24 of the repealed Act, shall stand
transferred to the Reserve Bank of India;
(g) every banking institution registered as an insured bank under the repealed
Act, shall be deemed to be an insured service provider under this Act;
(h) every insured service provider referred to in clause (g), shall pay the premium
determined under section 15 of that Act, as if that Act had not been repealed, to the
Corporation, till the Corporation determines the applicable premium to be paid under
this Act and such premium shall be credited to the Corporation Insurance Fund
constituted under section 21;
(i) any proceeding or cause of action or rights or claims against the Deposit
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation in relation to its assets, liabilities,
properties and undertakings (other than the Credit Guarantee Fund) under the repealed
Act, may be continued or enforced by or against the Corporation as if that Act had
not been repealed;
(j) any amount repayable to the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee
Corporation under the repealed Act or under any law governing an eligible cooperative
bank shall, notwithstanding such repeal be payable to the Corporation as if the
obligation to repay such amount was to the Corporation under this Act;
(k) every officer or employee holding any office under the Deposit Insurance
and Credit Guarantee Corporation immediately before the date of such repeal, shall
hold office in the Corporation, for the same tenure and on the same terms and conditions
of service as such employee would have held such office if the Deposit Insurance and
Credit Guarantee Corporation had not been dissolved:
Provided that nothing in any other law for the time being in force shall entitle
any employee of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation to any
2 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

76
compensation for the loss of office due to such repeal, and the consequent dissolution
of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation, and no such claim shall
be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority;
(l) the concessions, privileges, benefits and exemptions with regard to the
payment of any tax, duty and cess granted to the Deposit Insurance and Credit
Guarantee Corporation with respect to its undertaking shall be transferred to the
Corporation and the Corporation shall be entitled to such concessions, privileges,
benefits and exemptions.
(4) The mention of particular matters under sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) shall
not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses
Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal.
146. The enactments specified in the Fourth Schedule shall be amended in the manner
specified therein.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.
10 of 1897.
5
10

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 2(2)]
APPROPRIATE R EGULATOR
1. The Reserve Bank of India, as constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), for banking institutions, non-banking financial
companies, and payment systems under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007
(51 of 2007).
2. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India, as established
under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
of India Act, 1999 (41 of 1999), for insurance companies.
3. The Securities and Exchange Board of India, as established under sub-section (1)
of section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) for all
entities requiring registration under section 12 of the said Act, recognised stock exchange
as defined in clause (f) of section 2 and clearing corporation as referred to in section 8A of
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), and depository as defined under
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of  the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996).
4. The Pension Fund Regulatory Development Authority, as established under
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
Act, 2013 (23 of 2013) for any entities regulated by them which may be notified as specified
service provider under the Second Schedule to this Act.
5. Any other regulator as may be notified by the Central Government.
77
5
10
15
20

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 2(34) and section 33(1)]
SPECIFIED SERVICE PROVIDER
1. Any banking institution, other than eligible co-operative bank including an insured
service provider.
2. Any insurance company.
3. Any Financial Market Infrastructure.
4. Any payment system, as defined under the Payment and Settlement Systems
Act, 2007 (51 of 2007), not notified under section 227 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016 (31 of 2016).
5. Any non-banking financial company,  not notified under section 227 of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016).
6. Any systemically important financial institution.
7. Any other financial service provider (excluding individuals and partnership firms),
not notified under section 227 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016).
8.  A holding company of any specified service provider enumerated under items 1 to
7, registered in India which is not notified under section 227 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016 (31 of 2016),  subject to the determination by the Corporation under the proviso
to sub-section (1) of section 33.
9. Non-regulated operational entities within a financial group or conglomerate of a
specified service provider enumerated under items 1 to 7 subject to the determination by the
Corporation under the proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 33.
10. Branch offices of body corporates incorporated outside India, carrying on the
business of providing financial service in India.
11. Any other entity or fund which may be notified by the Central Government.
78
5
10
15
20
25

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 123]
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY
I, --------------------------------- (name of person) do hereby declare that I shall faithfully,
truly and to the best of my skill and ability execute and perform the duties required of me as
Member, auditor, officer independent valuer or other employee (strike out which is not
applicable) of the Corporation and which properly relate to the office or position held by me
in the Corporation.
I further declare that I shall not communicate or allow to be communicated to any
person not legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the Corporation
or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the Corporation; nor will I allow any
such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or in the
possession of the Corporation and relating to the business of the Corporation or the business
of any person having any dealing with the Corporation.
Place: ___________________ (Signature)
Date:____________________ Name and Designation
Signed before me:
79
5
10
15

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See section 145]
AMENDMENT TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART I
AMENDMENT TO THE INDIAN STAMP ACT, 1899
(2 OF 1899)
After section 8F, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"8G. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in
force, any property acquired, held or disposed of, or any contract entered into, by the
Resolution Corporation established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and
Deposit Insurance Act, 2017 in accordance with the provisions of that Act, shall not be
liable to duty under this Act.".
PART II
A
MENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934
(2 OF 1934)
1. In section 45MC,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause (d), for the words and figures "the Companies
Act, 1956", the words and figures "the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017 or the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be," shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the words and figures "the Companies Act, 1956", the
words and figures "the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017 or the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be," shall be substituted.
2. After section 45X, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'45XA.(1) Where one of the parties to the specified transaction is a party referred
to in section 45V , notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other law for the
time being in force, netting shall be applicable in the case of insolvency, winding up,
liquidation or resolution of a party to such transaction.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(i) "netting" means determination of any payment or other obligation
arising out of any specified transaction between the parties, whether or not due
or payable, by set-off or adjustment between the parties and a net obligation is
arrived at in the manner specified by the Bank;
(ii) "resolution" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause ( 28) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Financial Resolution and
Deposit Insurance Act, 2017;
(iii) "specified transaction" means a transaction in securities, money market
instruments, derivatives or such other instruments or transactions, as may be
specified by the Bank.
Amendment
of section 8F.
Income of
Resolution
Corporation
to be exempt
from stamp
duty.
Amendment
of section 45
MC.
Insertion of
new section
45 XA.
Netting in
insolvency,
winding up or
resolution.
1 of 1956.
31 of 2016.
1 of 1956.
31 of 2016.
80
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

81
(2) For the purpose of netting under sub-section (1), the following shall be taken
into account, namely:—
(a) the value of cash or security or collateral provided by either party or a
guarantor or other person in respect of such party and the proceeds of sale of
securities available with either parties to the transaction; and
(b) the current value of payment or other obligations due at a future date
arrived at by prematurely terminating the transactions.
(3) The amount payable or other claims that may be made or determined under
sub-section (1), shall be final and irrevocable and shall be binding on the liquidator,
administrator, receiver or trustee, (by whatever name called), of the party in insolvency,
winding up, or liquidation or resolution.
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any agreement or contract
between the parties, for the realisation or appropriation or liquidation of any
collateral to determine the amount payable or other claims that may be made under
sub-section (1), no prior notice to, or consent of, the party in insolvency, winding up,
liquidation or resolution or its liquidator, administrator or receiver or trustee (by whatever
name called) shall be required.'.
PART III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938
(4 OF 1938)
1. In section 33, in sub-section ( 6), for clause ( c), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(c) recommend to the Resolution Corporation established under section 3 of
the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017, to make an application
to the National Company Law Tribunal for the winding up of the insurer under
Chapter XII of that Act, if it is a company, whether the registration of the insurer has
been cancelled under clause (b) or not.".
2. In section 35, after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(4) Where an insurance company is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, the powers exercisable by the Authority under this section, shall, notwithstanding
anything in this Act, be exercised by the Resolution Corporation established under
section 3 of that Act.".
3. Section 36, shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) there of and after the sub-section
so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) Where an insurance company is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, the powers exercisable by the Authority under this section, shall, notwithstanding
anything in this Act, be exercised by the Resolution Corporation established under
section 3 of that Act".
4. In section 37, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that where an insurance company is classified in the category of
imminent or critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017, the powers exercisable by the Authority under this section, shall,
notwithstanding anything in this Act, be exercised by the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of that Act.".
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment
of section 36.
Amendment
of section 37.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

82
5. In section 37A, after sub-section (13), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(14) Where an insurance company is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, the powers exercisable by the Authority under this section, shall, notwithstanding
anything in this Act, be exercised by the Resolution Corporation established under
section 3 of that Act.".
6. In section 52B, in sub-section ( 1), for clause ( c), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(c) the winding up of the insurer, in accordance with the provisions of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017;".
7. After section 52G, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"52GA. Where an insurance company is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, the powers exercisable by the Authority under sections 52A, 52B, 52C, 52D, 52E,
52F and 52G, shall, notwithstanding anything in this Act, be exercised by the Resolution
Corporation established under section 3 of that Act.".
8. For section 53, the following section shall be substituted namely:—
"53.(1) Where the Authority is satisfied,—
(i) that the company having failed to comply with any requirement of this
Act has continued such failure or having contravened any provision of this Act
has continued such contravention for a period of three months after notice of
such failure or contravention has been conveyed to the company by the
Authority,
(ii) that it appears from any returns or statements furnished under the
provisions of this Act or from the results of any investigation made there under
that the company is , or is deemed to be insolvent, or
(iii) that the continuance of the company is prejudicial to the interest of
the policy-holders or the public interest generally,
it may make a recommendation to the Resolution Corporation established under section 3 of
the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017, to make an application to the
National Company Law Tribunal for the winding up of the insurer under Chapter XII of that
Act.
 (2) All the provisions of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 relating to winding up shall apply to a proceeding under this section.".
9. In section 54, after the words and figures, "the Companies Act, 2013", the words and
figures "but without prejudice to section 93 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017" shall be inserted.
10. In section 55, sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
11. In section 57, after sub-section ( 6), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(7) All the provisions of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, relating to liquidation shall mutatis mutandis, apply to a proceeding under this
section.".
Amendment
of section
37A.
Amendment
of section
52B.
Amendment
of section
52G .
Resolution of
an insurance
company.
Amendment
of section 53.
Winding up of
an insurer.
Amendment
of section 54.
Amendment
of section 55.
Amendment
of section 57.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

83
12. In section 58, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(5) Where the insurance company is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, the Authority shall not exercise any power under this section.".
13. In section 60, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that where the insurance company is classified in the category of
imminent or critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017, the powers exercisable by the liquidator or assignee under this section shall
be exercised by the liquidator appointed under that Act.".
14. In section 61, for sub-section (3), the following sub -section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(3) The Resolution Corporation established under section 3 of the Financial
and Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017 may, in consultation with the Authority,
make an application for an order in accordance with the provisions of that Act.".
15. In section 64VA, after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(8) Notwithstanding anything in this section, the powers under this section
shall not be exercised by the Authority where an insurance company is classified in the
category of imminent or critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and
Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.".
PART IV
A
MENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949
(10 OF 1949)
1. In section 5, after clause (ne), the following clause shall be inserted namely:—
'(nf) "Tribunal" means the National Company Law Tribunal" established under
section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013;"
2. In section 35, in sub-section (4) sub-clause (b) shall be omitted.
3. Part IIC and sections 36AE, 36AF, 36AG, 36AH, 36AI and 36AJ shall be omitted.
4. Sections 36B and 37 shall be omitted.
5. In section 38,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words and figures "section 391, section 392, section 433 and
section 583 of the Companies Act, 1956", the words and figures "section 230,
section 231, section 271 and section 375 of the Companies Act, 2013" shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the word "High Court", the word "Tribunal" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3), in clause (b), in sub-clause (i), for the word "court", the
word "Tribunal" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (4), for the words and figures "section 434 of the Companies
Act, 1956", the words, figures and brackets "sub-section ( 2) of section 271 of the
Companies Act, 2013" shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 58.
Amendment
of section 60.
Amendment
of section 61.
Amendment
of section
64V A.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 35.
Omission of
Part IIC.
Omission of
sections 36B
and 37.
Amendment
of section 38.
1 of 1956.
18 of 2013.
18 of 2013.
1 of 1956.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

84
(d) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(6) All the provisions of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017, relating to liquidation shall apply to a proceeding of winding up
initiated on the application made by the Reserve Bank under this section.".
5. Sections 38A, 39, 39A, 40, 41, 41A, 42, 43, 43A and 44 shall be omitted.
6. In section 44A, after sub-section ( 7), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(8) Where the banking company is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, the Reserve Bank shall not exercise any powers under this section.".
7. In section 44B,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "High Court", the word "Tribunal" shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the words and figures "section 391 of the Companies Act, 1956", the
words and figures "section 230 of the Companies Act, 2013" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words "High Court" at both the places, wherever they occur,
the word "Tribunal" shall be substituted;
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Where a banking company is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017, the powers of the Reserve Bank exercisable under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2), shall be exercised by the Resolution Corporation established
under section 3 of that Act.".
8. In section 45, after sub-section ( 14), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(14A) Where a banking company is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, the powers under this section shall not be exercised by the Reserve Bank.".
9. Sections 45B, 45C, 45D, 45E, 45F, 45G , 45H, 45-I and 45J shall be omitted.
10. In section 45L,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Where an application for sanction of a compromise or arrangement
in respect of a banking company is made under section 230 of the Companies
Act, 2013, or where such sanction has been given and the Tribunal is of the
opinion, whether on a report of the Reserve Bank or the Corporation established
under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017,
Amendment
of sections
38A, 39,
39A, 40, 41,
41A, 42, 43,
43A and 44.
Amendment
of section
44A.
Amendment
of section
44B.
Amendment
of section 45.
Omission of
sections 45B,
45C, 45D,
45E, 45F, 45G,
45H, 45-I and
45J.
Amendment
of section 45L.
1 of 1956.
18 of 2013.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

85
that any person who has taken part in the promotion and formation of the
banking company or has been a director or auditor of the banking company
should be publically examined it may direct such examination of such person
and the provisions of section 77 of that Act shall apply to the banking company
as they apply to a specified service provider which is being liquidated under that
Act.";
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) Where a compromise or arrangement is sanctioned under section 230
of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of a company, the provisions of
section 340 of the said Act and of section 78 of the Financial Resolution and
Deposit Insurance Act, 2017, shall apply to the banking company as they apply
to a specified service provider which is being liquidated under that Act, as if the
order sanctioning the compromise or arrangement were an order for the liquidation
of the banking company.".
 (c) in sub-section (3), for the words "High Court" at both places, wherever they
occur, the word "Tribunal" shall be substituted;
(d) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) Where a scheme of reconstruction of a banking company has been
sanctioned by the Central Government under section 45, the provisions of
section 340 of the Companies Act, 2013, and of section 78 of the Financial
Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017 shall apply to the banking company
as they apply to specified service provider which is being liquidated under that
Act, as if the order sanctioning the scheme of reconstruction or amalgamation,
as the case may be, were an order for liquidation of the specified service provider;
and any reference in said section 340 to the application of the official liquidator
shall be construed as a reference to the application of the Central Government.".
11. Sections 45M,45N, 45-O, 45P , 45Q, 45S, 45T and 45U shall be omitted.
PART V
A
MENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955
(23 OF 1955)
1. In section 24A, after sub-section (10), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(11) The powers of supersession of the Central Board under this section shall
not be exercised where the State Bank is classified in the category of imminent or
critical risk to viability under the provisions of the Financial Resolution and Deposit
Insurance Act, 2017.".
2. In section 35, after sub-section ( 13), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(14) The powers of acquisition under this section shall not be exercised where
the State Bank or the relevant banking institution, as the case may be, is classified in
the category of imminent or critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and
Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.".
3. In section 45, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may appoint the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
Omission of
sections 45M,
45N, 45-O,
45P, 45Q, 45S,
45T and 45U.
18 of 2013.
18 of 2013.
Amendment
of section
24A.
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment
of section 45.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

86
4. After section 45, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'45A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017, shall have the powers to carry out resolution of the State Bank under that Act
(other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART VI
A
MENDMENTS TO THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1956
(31 OF 1956)
1. In section 38, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may appoint the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
2. After section 38, the following section to be inserted, namely:—
'38A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution of the Corporation under that Act
(other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART VII
A
MENDMENTS TO THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) ACT, 1956
(42 OF 1956)
1. In section 2, after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely—
'(ca) "netting" means the determination by clearing corporation of net payment
or delivery obligations of the clearing members of a recognised clearing corporation
by setting off or adjustment of the inter-se obligations or claims arising out of buying
and selling of securities, including the claims and obligations arising out of the
determination by the clearing corporation or stock exchange, on the insolvency,
winding-up, liquidation or resolution of any clearing member or trading member or
client or such other circumstances as the clearing corporation may specify in its bye-
laws, of the transactions admitted for settlement at a future date so that only a net claim
be demanded, or a net obligation be owned;'.
2. After section 19, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"19A. Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the
right of clearing corporation to recover their dues from clearing members, incurred in
discharge of their clearing and settlement functions, from the collaterals, deposits and
the assets of clearing members held by the clearing corporation for this purpose, in
Insertion of
new section
45A.
Power of
Resolution
Corporation.
Amendment
of section 38.
Amendment
of section 2.
Insertion of
new sections
19A and 19B.
Insertion of
new section
38A.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
Right of
clearing
corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

87
case of insolvency, winding-up, liquidation or resolution, as the case may be, of such
clearing member, shall take precedence over the rights of other persons in such
insolvency, winding-up, liquidation or resolution proceedings.
19B. (1) The payment and settlement in respect of transactions in a recognised
stock exchange a recognised clearing corporation shall be determined in accordance
with the netting (or gross) procedure as per the bye-laws of a recognised stock exchange,
or clearing corporation, as the case may be, with the prior approval of the Securities
and Exchange Board of India.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, a
payment and settlement referred to in sub-section ( 1), between the parties thereto,
effected as per the bye-laws of a recognised stock exchange or clearing corporation, as
the case may be, shall be final, irrevocable and binding on such parties.
(3) Where a trading member or a clearing member or an investor client is declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction as insolvent or is dissolved or wound-up or
resolved, or a liquidator, administrator, receiver or assignee (by whatever name called),
whether provisional or otherwise, is appointed in a proceeding relating to insolvency,
resolution or dissolution or winding up of a system participant, then such order of
adjudication, dissolution, winding-up, or resolution, as the case may be, shall not
affect any settlement that has become final and irrevocable and the right of the
recognised clearing corporation or recognised stock exchange, as the case may be, to
appropriate any collaterals or deposits or margins contributed by the said trading
member or clearing member or client towards its settlement or other obligations in
accordance with the bye-laws of such recognised stock exchange or clearing
corporation, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the settlement,
whether gross or net, referred to in this section shall be final and irrevocable as soon
as the money, securities or other transactions payable as a result of such settlement is
determined, whether or not such money, securities or other transactions is actually
paid.
(4) Where an order referred to in sub-section ( 3) is made with respect to a
clearing corporation or a stock exchange, then, notwithstanding such order or anything
in any other law for the time being in force, the payment obligations and settlement
instructions between the clearing corporation and the clearing members including
those arising from transactions admitted for settlement at a future date, shall be
determined forthwith by the clearing corporation, in accordance with the gross or
netting procedure, as the case may be, in accordance with the bye-laws of such clearing
corporation, and such determination shall be final and irrevocable.
(5) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the
liquidator, administrator, receiver or assignee (by whatever name called) of the clearing
corporation, whether appointed as provisional or otherwise, shall—
(a) not re-open any determination that has become final and irrevocable;
(b) after appropriating in accordance with the bye-laws of the clearing
corporation, the collaterals provided by the clearing members towards their
settlement or other obligations, return the collaterals held in excess to the clearing
members concerned;
(c) while distributing the assets, apply the assets in priority against the
dues arising out of settlement obligations of the clearing corporation and only
thereafter apply the assets against third party claims.".
Settlement
and netting.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

88
PART VIII
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS)
ACT, 1959
(38 OF 1959)
1. In section 38, after sub-section ( 13), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(13A) The powers of acquisition under this section shall not be exercised
where the relevant banking institution or the subsidiary bank, as the case may be, is
classified in the category of imminent or critical risk to viability under the Financial
Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.".
2. In section 57, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
 "Provided that the Central Government may appoint the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
3. After section 57, the following section to be inserted, namely:—
'57A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution for any subsidiary bank under that
Act (other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART IX
A
MENDMENT TO THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961
(43 OF 1961)
In section 178, in sub-section (6), after the words and figures "except the provisions of
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016", the words and figures "and the Financial
Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017" shall be inserted.
PART X
A
MENDMENT TO THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
In section 142A, for the words and figures "and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016", the words and figures “, the insolveney and Bankruptey Code, 2016 and the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017” shall be substituted.
PART XI
A
MENDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1970
(5 OF 1970)
1. In section 18, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may appoint the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
Amendment
of section 38.
Amendment
of section 57.
Insertion of
new section
57A.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
Amendment
of section
178.
31 of 2016.
Amendment
of section
142 A.
31 of 2016.
Amendment
of section 18.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

89
2. In section 18A, after sub-section (10), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(11) The powers of supersession of Board under this section shall not be
exercised where the relevant corresponding new bank is classified in the category of
imminent or critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017.".
3. After section 18A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'18B. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution of any corresponding new bank
under that Act (other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART XII
A
MENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS (NATIONALISA TION) ACT, 1972
 (57 OF 1972)
1. In section 16, after sub-section ( 8), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(9) The powers relating to merger under this section shall not be exercised
where the relevant Indian insurance company is classified in the category of imminent
or critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017.".
2. In section 33, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may appoint the Resolution Corporation
as established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
3. After section 33, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'33A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution of the Corporation and any acquiring
company under that Act (other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART XIII
A
MENDMENTS TO THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976
(26 OF 1976)
1. In section 26, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:——
"Provided that the Central Government may appoint the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
Amendment
of section
18A.
Insertion of
new section
18B.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
Amendment of
section 16.
Amendment of
section 33.
Insertion of new
section 33A.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
Amendment
of section 26.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

90
2. After section 26, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"26A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the provisions of the Financial Resolution and Deposit
Insurance Act, 2017, shall have the powers to carry out resolution of the Regional
Rural Bank under that Act (other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART XIV
A
MENDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1980
(40 OF 1980)
1. In section 18, the following provisons shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may appoint the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
2. In section 18A, after sub-section (10), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(11) The powers of supersession of Board under this section shall not be
exercised where the relevant corresponding new bank is classified in the category of
imminent or critical risk to viability under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017.".
3. After section 18A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'18B. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the provisions of the Financial Resolution and Deposit
Insurance Act, 2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution of any corresponding
new bank under that Act (other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART XV
A
MENDMENTS TO THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1981
(28 OF 1981)
1. In section 38, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may appoint Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
2. After section 38, the following section to be inserted, namely:—
'38A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution of the Exim Bank under that Act
(other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment of
section 18A.
Insertion of new
section 18B.
Amendment
of Section 38.
Insertion of
new section
38A.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
Insertion of new
section 26A.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

91
PART XVI
AMENDMENTS TO THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK ACT, 1987
(53 OF 1987)
1. In section 54, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may appoint the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 as the liquidator for the purposes of this section.".
2. After section 54, the following section to be inserted, namely:—
'54A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution of the National Housing Bank under
that Act (other than powers in relation to liquidation).
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART XVII
A
MENDMENT TO THE FINANCE ACT, 1994
(32 OF 1994)
In section 88, after the words and figures "the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016", the words and figures "the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017" shall be inserted.
PART XVIII
A
MENDMENTS TO THE MULTI-STA TE COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES ACT, 2002
(39 OF 2002)
1. In section 3, after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
(va) "Resolution Corporation" means the Resolution Corporation established
under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017;".
2. In section 17, in sub-section (6), in clause (a), after the words "has been obtained",
the words "and in the case of a co-operative bank, previous sanction in writing of the
Reserve Bank has also been obtained" shall be inserted.
3. After section 18, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'18A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution of any co-operative bank under that
Act.
(2) The exercise of powers by the Resolution Corporation under the Financial
Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017 for resolution of a co-operative bank
referred to in sub-section ( 1) or the resolution methods used by the Resolution
Corporation for such resolution, shall not be subject to any limitation contained in this
Act.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
Amendment of
section 54.
Insertion of
new section
54A.
Amendment
of section 88.31 of 2016.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 17.
Insertion of
new section
18A.
Powers of the
Resolution
Corporation.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

92
4. For section 20, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"20. Notwithstanding anything in section 17 or any other provision of this Act,
where a co-operative bank, is under resolution under the provisions of the Financial
Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017 and the Resolution Corporation has become
liable to pay to the depositors of such insured service provider under section 29 of that
Act, the transferee or acquiring entity under the scheme sanctioned for such resolution
or the liquidator in case of liquidation of co-operative bank, shall be under an obligation
to repay to the Resolution Corporation in the circumstances, to the extent and in the
manner referred to in section 122 of that Act.".
5. In section 86, for sub-section ( 5), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(5) Notwithstanding anything in this section, no co-operative bank shall be
wound up, except in accordance with the provisions of section 87.".
6. For section 87, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"87. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act, the National Company
Law Tribunal established under section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall make an
order for the winding up of a co-operative bank, if so required, on an application—
(i) by the Resolution Corporation in accordance with the provisions of
section 63 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017; or
(ii) by the Reserve Bank, if any, in the circumstances mentioned in clauses
(a) to (f) of sub-section (1) of section 121 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit
Insurance Act, 2017.
Explanation.—For removal of doubts, it is clarified that all the provisions
of Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017 relating to winding
up shall apply to a proceeding under this section.".
7. Section 88 shall be omitted.
PART XIX
A
MENDMENTS TO THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013
(18 OF 2013)
1. In section 419, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify such number
of benches of the Tribunal as may be necessary for the purposes of exercising the
jurisdiction under the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.".
2. In section 424,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after the words and figures "or of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016", the words and figures "or the Financial Resolution and
Deposit Insurance Act, 2017" shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words and figures "or under the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016", the words and figures "or the Financial Resolution and
Deposit Insurance Act, 2017" shall be inserted.
3. In section 429, in sub-section (1), after the words and figures "the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016", the words and figures "and the Financial Resolution and Deposit
Insurance Act, 2017" shall be inserted.
Substitution of
new section
for section 20.
Liability to
Resolution
Corporation
in case of
resolution of
co-operative
bank.
Amendment
of section 86.
Substitution of
new section for
section 87.
Winding up of
co-operative
bank.
Omission of
section 88.
Amendment
of section 419.
Amendment
of section 424.
Amendment
of section 429.
31 of 2016.
31 of 2016.
31 of 2016.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

93
PART XX
AMENDMENT TO THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 2013
(23 OF 2013)
After section 19, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'19A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Resolution Corporation
established under section 3 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act,
2017 shall have the powers to carry out resolution of any pension fund or any other
entity connected to such pension fund, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "resolution" shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of the Financial
Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART XXI
A
MENDMENT TO THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE, 2016
(31 OF 2016)
In section 59, after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
'(10) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, a specified service
provider eligible to be voluntarily liquidated in accordance with section 93 of the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017, may be voluntarily liquidated
under this section, subject to such conditions as may be specified by the regulations
made by appropriate regulator:
Provided that the proceeds of liquidation shall be distributed in accordance with
section 80 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.
Explanation 1.—The expressions "specified service provider" and "appropriate
regulator" shall have the same meaning as respectively assigned to them under the
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Act, 2017.
Explanation 2.—The constitution of liquidation estate for the purpose of
voluntary liquidation of a specified service provider under this section shall be in
accordance with the provisions of section 67 of the Financial Resolution and Deposit
Insurance Act, 2017.'.
PART  XXII
A
MENDMENT TO THE CENTRAL GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017
(12 OF 2017)
In section 82, after the words and figures "the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016", the words and figures "and the Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance
Act, 2017" shall be inserted.
——————
Amendment
of section 19.
Amendment
of section 59.
Powers of
Resolution
Corporation.
31 of 2016.
Amendment
of section 82.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 At present, there is no specific law in India for resolution of failures of financial
service providers. However, some provisions relating to the failures of financial service
providers can be found scattered in certain enactments, such as, the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949, the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Insurance Act, 1938, the Life Insurance
Corporation Act, 1956, the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) India Act, 1972,
the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1980, the State Bank of India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 and the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.
2. The impact of failures of financial service providers is much wider and can have
a systemic effect on the economy and financial stability of a country, unlike traditional
insolvency, where the affected parties are limited to the creditors of the insolvent entity.
Since financial service providers handle consumer funds, some of them are critical for
stability of the financial system, it is important to resolve failing financial service providers
expeditiously through a specialised resolution process, as  lengthy resolution proceedings
can lead to losses for consumers, or instability in the financial system. The existing laws
are inadequate, ineffective and fail to address the larger issue of preserving financial
stability as they do not provide effective resolution tools and powers to the resolution
authorities. Therefore, with a view to comply with the emerging international norms for
establishing effective resolution regime for financial sector, it is proposed to regulate
certain categories of financial service providers listed in the Second Schedule to the
proposed legislation.
3. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 has been enacted with a view to
comprehensively reform the legislative framework for insolvency and bankruptcy. However,
at present the said Code does not automatically cover financial service providers. The
proposed legislation together with the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 is expected
to provide a comprehensive resolution mechanism for our economy with the objective of
protecting consumers of specified service providers and public funds, thereby contributing
to the stability and resilience of the financial system.
4. The proposed 
Financial Resolution and Deposit Insurance Bill, 2017, inter alia,
provides for,—
(a) establishment of a Resolution Corporation and to confer upon the
Corporation certain powers of resolution relating to transfer of assets to a healthy
financial firm, merger or amalgamation, liquidation to be initiated by an order of the
National Company Law Tribunal and some new methods of resolution, such as
bail-in and creation  of a bridge service provider;
(b) designation of certain financial service providers as Systemically Important
Financial Institutions, based on the criteria to be determined by the Central
Government, the failure of which may disrupt the entire financial system and in
view of their importance for the economy, the proposed legislation confers some
additional powers in respect of such institutions;
(c) constitution of certain funds for the purposes of the proposed legislation,
namely, (i) the Corporation Insurance Fund for deposit insurance provided by the
Corporation to the insured service providers; ( ii) the Corporation Resolution Fund
for meeting the expenses of carrying out resolution of specified service providers;
and (iii) the Corporation General Fund for all other functions of the Corporation;
94

95
(d )  repeal of the Deposit insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
Act, 1961;
(e)  amendment of certain enactments, in the manner provided in the Fourth
Schedule to the proposed legislation, with a view to give resolution powers to the
Resolution Corporation under those Acts.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
        ARUN JAITLEY
N
EW D ELHI;
The 28th July, 2017.

Notes on clauses
Clause 2 defines the various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3  provides for the establishment of a body corporate by the name of
Resolution Corporation, with perpetual succession, a common seal, power to acquire,
hold or dispose of property, power to enter into contracts and the power to sue and be
sued in its own name, with its headquarters in Mumbai.
Clause 4 seeks to provide that t
he general superintendence, direction and
management of the affairs of the Corporation shall vest in the Members of the Corporation,
which may exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised by the
Corporation. It further provides for the constitution of the Corporation, including the
qualifications, term, salaries and allowances of the Chairperson and the Members.
Clause 5  seeks to impose restrictions on future employment of the Chairperson
and Members, including the time period applicable for such restriction and the requirement
of previous approval of the Central Government before obtaining certain types of
employment.
Clause 6 seeks to specify the circumstances in which the Central Government may
remove the Chairperson or a Member from the Corporation, including being declared an
insolvent, physical or mental incapacity, conviction for an offence which involves moral
turpitude, and abuse of position which renders the continuation in office detrimental to
public interest. It further provides for all Members to be given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard, before being removed.
Clause 7
 seeks to provide that the Chairperson shall have the powers of general
superintendence and control in respect of all administrative matters of the Corporation
and may also exercise such other powers, except the powers exercisable under clause 12,
as may be delegated to him by the Corporation.
Clause 8 seeks to provide that the Corporation shall meet at such times and places,
and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings (including quorum at such meetings) as may be specified by regulations made
by it.
Clause 9 prohibits Members from participating in meetings in certain cases. It
provides that any Member, who is a director of a company and who as such director has
any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a
meeting of the Corporation, shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have
come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such
disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Corporation, and the Member shall
not take any part in any deliberation or decision of the Corporation with respect to that
matter.
Clause 10 seeks to provide that n o act or proceeding of the Corporation shall be
invalid merely by reason of  any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the
Corporation or any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member or any irregularity
in the procedure of the Corporation not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 11 seeks to empower the Corporation to appoint officers and employees,
for the efficient discharge of its functions under the Bill. It further makes provision for
the Corporation to utilise and for the appropriate regulator to make available, the services
of such employees of the appropriate regulator on such terms and conditions as may be
agreed upon by the Corporation and the appropriate regulator.
Clause 12 seeks to empower the Corporation to make suitable regulations,
consistent with the provisions of the Bill and to authorise officers to carry out functions
under the Bill.
96

97
Clause 13 seeks to specify the powers and functions of the Corporation, including
the functions relating to the provision for deposit insurance, specifying objective criteria
for the classification of a specified service provider into one of the categories of risk to
viability, powers in relation to exercise of early termination rights, resolution of a specified
service provider, and acting as an administrator. It further vests the 
Corporation with the
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in
matters relating to the discovery and production of books of accounts and other
documents, summoning, and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on
oath; issuance of commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and other
matters which may be prescribed in the rules.
Clause 14 seeks to empower the Corporation with the powers of investigation
where the Corporation has reasonable grounds to believe that the activities of a specified
service provider are being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the
consumers or any person or entity related to the specified service provider has violated
any of the provisions of the Bill or the rules or regulations made or any directions issued
thereunder.  It further 
requires the managers, managing directors, officers and employees
of the specified service provider or the related entity to preserve and produce to the
Investigating Authority any specified books, registers, documents and records. It also
subjects the Investigating Authority to the Banker’s Book of Evidence Act, 1891, and
requires him to furnish a report to the Corporation. It also empowers the Investigating
Authority to keep such books and registers in its custody, and to examine persons and
entities and requires such examination report to be recorded in writing and forwarded to
the appropriate regulator.
Clause 15 seeks to  provide for the powers of the Corporation, pending an
investigation. It empowers the Corporation to authorise any of its Members to carry out
certain functions, inter alia , including restraining a specified service provider, or an
office bearer of a specified service provider from carrying out any business activity;
impounding and retaining the proceeds of an activity under investigation, and provisional
attachment.
Clause 16 seeks to empower the Corporation to conduct search and seizure in
certain cases. It empowers the Corporation to authorise an officer to enter and search
any building, break open the lock, seize books, accounts and other documents, and place
marks of identification on the seized documents. It further authorises the  Corporation, or
its authorised officer to  requisition the services of a police officer. It further provides
that the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply on matters relating to such search
and seizure.
Clause 17 seeks to empower any officer or agent of the Corporation or of the
appropriate regulator to enter the place of business of a specified service provider; to
inspect any equipment and documents at the premises; and to call upon any employees
of the specified service provider to furnish documents and information as may be required.
 Clause 18  seeks to provide that the Corporation shall exercise its investigation
powers under clauses 14, 15, 16 and 17 only when the relevant specified service provider
is classified to be at imminent or critical risk to viability under the Bill.
Clause 19 seeks to empower the Corporation to constitute committees for the
efficient discharge of its functions.
Clause 20  seeks to provide that  the Corporation or the appropriate regulator shall
hold due consultations with  all relevant stakeholders before making any regulations
under the Bill and shall ensure transparency in the discharge of its powers and functions.
Clause 21 seeks to provide that the Corporation shall create the following funds,
namely, the Corporation Insurance Fund, the Corporation Resolution Fund and the

98
Corporation General Fund, for the purposes of providing deposit insurance, meeting
expenses of the process of resolution, and for other functions. It further requires that the
Corporation shall utilise the amounts in each fund only for the purpose for which the
Fund was created.
Clause 22 seeks to specify the fees to the be paid to the Corporation by all
specified service providers for resolution and for administrative expenses. It further requires
all insured service providers to additionally pay premium for the cover of deposit insurance
under the Bill.
Clause 23 seeks to provide for the payment of grants and loans to the Corporation,
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, on such terms, as the
Central Government may think fit, for being utilised for the purposes of this Bill.
Clause 24  seeks to provide that the Corporation shall maintain proper accounts
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as
may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India. It further provides that the accounts of the Corporation as
certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India in this behalf, together with the audit
report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government who shall cause
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 25 seeks to provide that the Central Government may, in consultation with
the appropriate regulator, designate a financial service provider, which meets such criteria
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the appropriate
regulator, as a systemically important financial institution after giving such systemically
important financial institution an opportunity of being heard. It further seeks to provide
that any person designated as Domestic Systemically Important Bank by the Reserve
Bank of India shall be deemed to be a systemically important financial institution for the
purposes of the Bill, for a period of six months with effect from  such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify. It also empowers the Central Government to
designate any holding, subsidiary or associate companies, or such other body corporate
related to, or associated with the financial service provider as systemically important
financial institutions, jointly with the financial service provider, or separately. It also
provides that persons designated as such shall have a right of appeal to the Tribunal.
Clause 26  seeks to provide 
that the provisions of the Bill shall apply to a
systemically important financial institution,  as if it were a specified service provider,
whether or not it is a specified service provider. It further provides that every systemically
important financial institution shall submit a  restoration plan to the appropriate regulator
and a resolution plan  to the Corporation. It also seeks to provide that the regulation and
supervision of systemically important financial institutions shall continue to be governed
by the appropriate regulator with which the systemically important financial institution is
registered,  subject to the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 27 seeks to empower the Central Government to de-designate a  systemically
important financial institution if it ceases to meet the criteria specified therein, for reasons
to be recorded in writing.
Clause 28 seeks to empower the Central Government to delegate its powers under
Chapter III of the Bill (except the powers to prescribe rules or issue notifications),  by an
order published in the Official Gazette, to such person or committee as may be specified
in the order.
Clause 29 seeks to specify the liability of the Corporation in respect of insured
deposits, and provides that the Corporation, in consultation with the appropriate regulator
shall specify the amount to be paid to insured depositors. It further provides that the
Corporation Insurance Fund shall be utilised for specified purposes, including the payment

99
in cases of liquidation; for payment under a scheme of compromise or arrangement or
amalgamation sanctioned for an eligible co-operative bank; or a scheme of resolution,
except bail-in; and that the payment out of the Corporation Insurance Fund will have
priority over other claims in resolution.
Clause 30 provides for the manner of payment of insurance deposits by the
Corporation to the insured service providers, except in case of the liquidation, where the
manner of payment by the Corporation shall be as laid down under clause 72 of the Bill.
Clause 31 provides for the discharge of liability of the Corporation from the payment
of deposit insurance, to the extent already paid by it under clause 29 of the Bill.
Clause 32 seeks to provide for payments in cases w
here any depositor, to whom
any payment is to be made in accordance with the provisions of clause 29 or clause  72,
cannot be found or is not readily traceable.
Clause 33 seeks to provide for registration of  the specified service provider. It
deems, every specified service provider under the Second Schedule to be registered
under the  Bill and provides that a holding company or the non-regulated operational
entity within a financial group or conglomerate of the specified service provider which is
classified into a category of risk to viability, shall be deemed to be registered from the
date of such classification. It further deems, inter alia,  a banking institution registered
under the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 to be registered
as an insured service provider under the Bill. It also makes provision for the Corporation
to maintain a register with such details and information, of each specified service provider.
Clause 34 seeks to provide that n otwithstanding the withdrawal or cancellation by
the appropriate regulator of a specified service provider to carry on business, such entity
shall be deemed to be a specified service provider for the purposes of the Bill. It further
seeks to specify the circumstances in which the registration of an insured service provider
shall be withdrawn, including, when there is a permanent prohibition on the receipt of
fresh deposits; or when the insured service provider has ceased to be a banking company
or a co-operative bank; or on the cancellation of the license of an insured service provider
by the Reserve Bank of India; or on the appointment of a liquidator in respect of such
insured service provider; or the non-payment of premium for three consecutive years by
an insured service provider classified to be at imminent risk to viability. It also specifies
cases where the Corporation, in consultation with the appropriate regulator may restore
the registration of an insured service provider.
Clause 35 seeks to  provide that the withdrawal or cancellation of registration of
the specified service provider or the insured service provider shall not entitle 
such specified
service provider or insured service provider, as the case may be, to any refund for any
fees or premia paid to the Corporation; or affect their liability for payment of premium or
fees and of any interest due for the period before such withdrawal.
Clause 36 seeks to specify the various stages of risk to viability, and provides
some of the objective criterion for the classification of specified service providers by the
Corporation and by the appropriate regulator, as the case may be, into low, moderate,
material, imminent and critical risk to viability. It further specifies the factors to be
considered for the classification, such as, capital, asset and liquidity adequacy, capability
of the management, asset quality, earnings sufficiency, leverage ratio, risk of failure of a
holding company, and the sensitivity of the covered service provider to adverse market
conditions. It also provides that the classification by the Corporation or by the appropriate
regulator shall be final and such classification shall be confidential, except the classification
in the category of critical risk to viability.
Clause 37 seeks to provide for consultation process to be followed by the
Corporation and the appropriate regulator, in case of a difference in opinion over a
classification, between the Corporation and the appropriate regulator. It further provides

100
that in case such a consultation process does not lead to a consensus over the assessment
of the classification, the Corporation is empowered to conduct an independent inspection
to confirm its view, with the appropriate regulator being present, if deemed necessary by
the appropriate regulator. It also empowers the Corporation, after considering the
comments of the appropriate regulator, to make a final determination of the imminent or
critical risk to viability of the specified service provider.
 Clause 38  seeks to provide for the submission of a restoration plan to the
appropriate regulator, and a resolution plan to the Corporation by a specified service
provider classified  in the category of material or imminent risk to viability, with a copy of
every such plan being sent to the Corporation and the appropriate regulator, as the case
may be, within ninety days of classification under clause 36. It further provides that a
systemically important financial institution shall submit a resolution plan within ninety
days of its designation as such by the Central Government.
Clause 39 seeks to specify the information to be included in the restoration plan,
which inter alia, include, the distinct identification of the assets and liabilities of a
specified service provider; 
any contingent liabilities of the specified service provider;
steps which the specified service provider shall take to qualify for classification in the
category of at least moderate risk to viability and how such steps may result  in such
classification; and the period within which the entire restoration plan and each step of
the plan will be executed. It further provides that a systemically important financial
institution classified in the category of low or moderate risk to viability shall submit the
information assuming that it is classified in the category of material or imminent risk to
viability.
Clause 40 seeks to specify the information to be included in the resolution plan,
inter alia, including, the distinct identification of the assets and liabilities; any contingent
liabilities of the specified service provider; distinct identification of critical functions of
the specified service provider;  direct or indirect access to financial market infrastructure
services; and strategy plans to exit the resolution process which may provide for the
consideration of legal or regulatory requirements as may be required by the Corporation
to sell or transfer the assets and liabilities of the specified service provider, or change its
ownership. It further empowers the Corporation to require a specified service provider to
provide any information as may be necessary for the purpose of resolution, including
any information required for the transfer or sale of the assets of the specified service
provider.
Clause 41 seeks to provide for every restoration plan and every resolution plan to
be revised  annually, and the Corporation and the appropriate regulator to be informed of
such revised plan within seven days of the revision. It further provides that every material
change in the restoration plan or the resolution plan shall be immediately informed to the
appropriate regulator and the Corporation. It also provides that the  appropriate regulator
shall review the information provided in the restoration plan the Corporation shall review
the resolution plan and if the appropriate regulator or the  Corporation determines that
the plan would not ensure restoration or resolution within a reasonable period, it shall
inform the specified service provider of such deficiency, and the specified service provider
shall re-submit the restoration plan or the resolution plan within such period as may be
directed by the appropriate regulator or the Corporation, as the case may be. It also
provides that the appropriate regulator  or the Corporation may, if considered necessary
in the interest of restoration
 or of resolution of the specified service provider, modify
such deficient restoration plan or the resolution plan and such modified plan shall be
binding on the specified service provider.
Clause 42 seeks to provide that the appropriate regulator may carry out additional
inspections to monitor the risk to viability where a specified service provider is classified
to be at material risk to viability. It further empowers the appropriate regulator to prevent,

101
by order, the specified service provider, from various actions, namely, accepting funds,
payment of dividends to shareholders, acquiring any interest or establishing new locations
of carrying out business. It also empowers the appropriate regulator to require the specified
service provider to increase the capital, issue new securities, sell identified assets and
take other required actions.
Clause 43 seeks to specify the various circumstances under which the appropriate
regulator or the Corporation is empowered to classify a specified service provider to be
at imminent risk to viability, including, non-submission of restoration plan or resolution
plans, fraud in the business, etc. It further provides that upon such classification, the
Corporation may prevent such specified service provider from undertaking various actions
like accepting funds, declaration of payment of dividends, etc. It also empowers the
Corporation to require the specified service provider to increase its capital, issue new
securities and sell identified assets. It also provides that any classification of a central
counterparty in the category of imminent risk to viability shall only be made by the
appropriate regulator, which shall record its reasons for such classification and inform
the Corporation within fifteen days of the classification. It also provides that in respect
of a specified service provider classified in the category of imminent risk to viability or
critical risk to viability, the appropriate regulator shall exercise its powers under the law
regulating such specified service provider, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
such law, to the extent it is not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 44 seeks to provide for certain additional powers of the appropriate regulator,
with respect to central counterparties which are classified at material or imminent risk to
viability, including taking measures such as to allocate uncovered losses caused by
participant default, to address uncovered liquidity shortfalls, to replenish financial
resources, to re-establish a matched book, set-off, close-out, netting and collateralisation,
amongst others.
Clause 45 seeks to provide that a specified service provider may be classified to
be at critical risk to viability by the appropriate regulator or by the Corporation, through
an order and the provisions of Chapters X, XI and XII shall apply to the specified service
provider on the date of such classification. It further provides that on such classification,
the Corporation shall be deemed to be an administrator and  prohibits, inter alia,
continuance of legal actions and proceedings against the specified service provider, till
such period as may be specified in the order, or until conclusion of resolution, or until the
date of the order appointing the Corporation as the liquidator. It further provides that the
Corporation shall make payment of deposit insurance in accordance with the provisions
of clause 29. It also empowers the appropriate regulator to withdraw or modify
authorisations or licenses of the specified service provider to carry out any financial
service.
Clause 46 seeks to provide that a specified service provider shall not be classified
in the category of material or imminent or critical risk to viability without issuance of a
show cause notice and affording of an opportunity to be heard to the specified service
provider.
Clause 47 seeks to provide that entry into resolution of a specified service provider
shall not cause early termination of a specified contract so long as the substantive
obligations of the contract continue to be performed subject to such safeguards,
notwithstanding the provisions relating to netting and set-off under the Payments and
Settlement Systems Act, 2007, the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and the Securities
(Contracts) Regulation Act, 1956 . It further provides that if a termination right under a
specified contract becomes exercisable, the Corporation shall have the power, subject to
such safeguards, to temporarily stay the exercise of such rights of any party to a specified
contract with the specified service provider or its subsidiary if the relevant termination

102
right is exercisable solely on entry into resolution or in connection with the exercise of
any resolution power, except liquidation, in respect of such specified service provider or
its subsidiary, under this Bill.
Clause 48 seeks to provide  the various methods of resolving a specified service
provider  classified in the category of critical risk to viability through a scheme or a bail-
in instrument. It  empowers the 
appropriate regulator to classify an insurance company
as a run-off entity and to allow the present insurance policies to run to their expiration
dates and to sell or transfer the portfolios of an insurance company to another insurance
company or a run-off entity. It further provides that no such scheme shall be made by the
Corporation unless the proposed transferee entity has obtained the consent of the
appropriate regulator in this regard. It also provides that a scheme made under this
clause shall have regard to the treatment  of all liabilities of the specified service provider
in accordance with the priority they would have in liquidation; and the treatment of such
persons affected adversely by the order of classification in the category of critical risk to
viability, in accordance with the priority they would have on a liquidation, to bear losses
on an equal footing with each other, except in such circumstances as the Corporation
may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, specify.
Clause 49  seeks to specify the matters which may be contained in scheme of
resolution prepared under clause 48 including,  inter alia, details about the constitution,
name and registered office, assets, rights, interest, transfer of properties, assets and
liabilities to the transferee specified service provider, a change in the board of directors,
alteration of the memorandum and articles of association of the specified service provider
and reduction of interest or rights of the members, depositors and other creditors against
the specified service provider. It further provides that the contents of the scheme may be.
Clause 50 seeks to  provide for the creation of 
a bridge service provider and to
transfer the assets and liabilities of a specified service provider under resolution to such
bridge service provider, with the aim of eventual resolution.  It provides that the Corporation
shall resolve the bridge service provider as expeditiously as possible, and in any event,
within one year from the date of its incorporation.  It further provides that the Corporation
shall resolve the bridge service provider by transferring, by way of a scheme, the whole
or any part of the assets, liabilities, businesses, properties or undertakings of the bridge
service provider to another person capable of providing the services of a specified service
provider, on such terms as may be agreed between the Corporation and such person; or
by sale, by way of a scheme under section, of the shares of the bridge service provider
constituting more than three-fourths of the equity capital of the bridge service provider;
or by liquidation of the bridge service provider under the Bill.
Clause 51 seeks to  provide the Corporation with the power of claw-back of
performance incentive, requiring the return of certain performance based remuneration of
senior management of a specified service provider under resolution, through an order in
writing, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the person concerned. It
provides that an officer of a specified service provider shall be subject to such order if
the officer acted, or omitted to act in a manner that caused, or materially contributed to,
the specified service provider to be classified in the category of critical risk to viability;
and the act was done, or the omission was made, intentionally, recklessly or negligently.
It further requires the Corporation to ensure the proportion of performance based incentive
which is to be returnes is commensurate with the act or omission.
It also provides that no payment made before three years from the date on which
the specified service provider was classified in the category of critical risk to viability,
shall be required to be returned to the specified service provider.
 Clause 52 gives the Corporation the power to carry out bail-in, as a method of
resolution, either through a bail-in instrument or a scheme made specifically for this

103
purpose. It empowers the  Corporation to cancel a liability, and to modify or change the
form of a liability, including the power to convert an instrument from one class to another,
replace an instrument with another, create a new security, and for central counterparties
specifically, direct a haircutting of collaterals and margins, and the issuance of equity to
creditors. It also specifies which liabilities the bail-in instrument or scheme will not affect.
It also provides that the appropriate regulator in consultation with the Corporation, shall
require certain specified service providers to maintain liabilities that may be subject to
bail-in and for the bail-in instrument to contain a specific provision clarifying that such
liabilities may be subject to bail-in. It also requires the Corporation to forward the bail-in
instrument to the Central Government together with a report stating the reasons  for
making such an instrument or scheme, along with its effects and a copy of the said report
be laid before each House of Parliament by the Central Government.
Clause 53 seeks to provide that the Corporation may use a bail-in instrument, inter
alia, to cancel or modify securities to which clause 52 applies, convert such securities
from one form or class to another, or make a provision with respect to their rights,
provide for their listing or transfer or make other provisions in their regard.
Clause 54 seeks to provide that where the Corporation has made a provision for
transfer of securities in the bail-in instrument under clause 53, the Corporation may make
one or more onward transfer bail-in instruments by providing for a transfer of securities
issued by the specified service provider, before or after the issuance of the instrument
and the 
form and manner of the bail-in instrument under clause 52 shall apply to the
onward transfer bail-in instrument.
Clause 55 seeks to provide for safeguards while carrying out resolution, such as,
ensuring the continuity of critical functions of the specified service provider; ensuring
that no creditor of the specified service provider is left in a worse position as a result of
application of any method of resolution, than such creditor would have been in the event
of its liquidation;  protecting the client funds, and client assets of the specified service
provider, to no less an extent than they would be protected in liquidation; and such other
safeguards as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation. It further 
provides
for certain additional safeguards for the use of bail-in as a method of resolution, such as,
cancellation of the liabilities of any specified service provider to be done in accordance
with the order of priority laid down in clause 80 where the instrument creating it contains
a provision to the effect that the parties to the contract agree to the liability being eligible
for a bail-in; equal treatment to be given to all rights and liabilities of the same class; and
such other safeguards as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation in
consultation with the appropriate regulator. It also provides that the Corporation shall,
while exercising its powers, take measures to ensure the protection of such collateral
arrangements, set-off or netting arrangements.
Clause 56 seeks to specify the time limit for resolution. It provides that resolution
specified service provider shall be completed expeditiously and not later than one year
from the date on which such specified service provider is classified to be at critical risk to
viability which may be extended by the Corporation, by an order, for a further period not
exceeding one year for reasons to be recorded in writing. It further provides that one year
time limit shall not be applicable in case of liquidation. It also provides that in case
resolution is not completed within the specified time, the Corporation shall liquidate such
specified service provider under Chapter XII. It also empowers the Corporation to specify
different time periods for resolution of specified service provider, depending on the process
of resolution, the size and complexity of the specified service provider.
Clause 57 seeks to provide  that the supply of services relating to the continuance
of the critical functions of the specified service provider or any other person as determined
by the Corporation shall not be terminated, suspended or interrupted during the resolution
of such specified service provider.

104
Clause 58 seeks to provide that the Corporation shall be the administrator from the
date the specified service provider is classified in the category of critical risk to viability
and all powers over the management of the relevant specified service provider, including
exercise of all powers of its board of directors shall vest in the Corporation. It further
provides that Corporation shall act and execute decisions on behalf of the relevant specified
service provider, including authority to access books of account, electronic records, and
the power to resolve the specified service provider, except by way of liquidation. It also
specifies certain restrictions on the specified service provider which is under administration.
It also lays down certain curbs on the specified service provider which is under
administration and provides for certain additional measures that the Corporation may
take, in consultation with the appropriate regulator, in the case of central counterparties,
including measures to allocate uncovered losses, address uncovered liquidity shortfalls,
replenish financial resources, re-establish a matched book, issuance of equity to creditors,
and imposing a temporary stay on early termination rights. It also provides that the
Corporation may, subject to the provisions of clauses 48 and section 49, place the specified
service provider, except a central counterparty, in liquidation in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter XII.
Clause 59 seeks to provide for the functions of the Corporation as an administrator,
such as, taking control and custody of certain assets of the specified service provider;
and performing such other functions as may be laid down in regulations by the Corporation.
Clause 60 seeks to empower the Corporation to remove from office  any Chairperson,
director, chief executive officer or other officer or employee of the specified service
provider which has been classified in the category of imminent risk to viability or critical
risk to viability, as the case may, by giving reasons in writing, after affording a right of
hearing to such persons. It also provides for a right of appeal against the order of
removal to the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 61 seeks to empower the Corporation to appoint additional directors, for
specified service providers classified in the category of imminent or critical risk to viability.
It provides that such directors shall hold office during the pleasure of the Corporation
and they shall not incur any liability or obligation by reason 
only of being a director or
for anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of
the office or in relation thereto. It further provides that such directors shall not hold
qualification shares in the specified service provider. It also provides that for the purpose
of reckoning any proportion of the total number of directors of the specified service
provider, any additional director appointed under this clause shall not be taken into
account.
Clause 62 seeks to empower the Corporation to supersede the board of directors
of a specified service provider classified in the category of imminent or critical risk to
viability,
 for a period not exceeding two years, as may be specified in the order and to
appoint an administrator for such an entity. It further provides that upon such supersession,
the Chairperson, managing director, and other directors shall vacate their offices, and the
powers, functions and duties of the board of directors shall be exercised by the
administrator. It also empowers the 
Corporation to constitute a committee to assist the
administrator in discharge of his duties. It also requires the administrator to vacate his
office immediately after the board of directors of the specified service provider has been
constituted. 
Clause 63 seeks to provide that w here the Corporation determines liquidation to be
the most appropriate method for the resolution of a specified service provider, it shall
make an application to the Tribunal for an order of liquidation in respect of such specified
service provider and the Tribunal shall pass an order of liquidation appointing the
Corporation as a liquidator for a specified service provider and the Corporation may
designate any of its officers as the liquidator. It also provides that the order of liquidation

105
may prohibit the commencement or continuance of all legal actions and proceedings
against such specified service provider, till the continuance of the period of liquidation.
It also provides that on the appointment of the liquidator, all powers of the board of
directors, key managerial personnel and the partners of the specified service provider,
shall cease to have effect and shall vest in the liquidator. It also provides that any person
aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal may, within thirty days from the receipt of the
order, prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal and  any person aggrieved by an order
of the Appellate Tribunal may, within forty-five days from the date of receipt of the order,
prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court on a question of law arising out of such order. It
also deems the order of liquidation to be a notice of discharge to the officers, employees
and workmen of the specified service provider, except when the business of the specified
service provider is continued during the liquidation process by the liquidator.
Clause 64 seeks to provide that on the appointment of the Corporation as the
liquidator, the liability of an insured service provider to pay premium under clause 21
shall cease.
Clause 65 seeks to bar the jurisdiction of any court or tribunal other than the
Tribunal in any proceeding for liquidation of a specified service provider and provides
for the transfer of proceedings to the Tribunal. It further bars the institution of any suit
or legal proceeding against the specified service provider before any other court or
authority other than the Tribunal, when an order of liquidation has been passed, except
with the prior approval of the Tribunal. It also provides that nothing in this clause shall
apply to any proceeding pending in appeal before the Supreme Court or a High Court.
Clause 66 seeks to specify the various powers of the Corporation as a liquidator,
which inter alia, include, the power to verify claims of the creditors, carry on the business
of the covered service provider under liquidation, sell the properties and claims of such
a covered service provider, institute or defend suits and other legal proceedings, apply to
the Tribunal for necessary orders or directions, and to perform all other functions
prescribed by the Central Government.
Clause 67  seeks to provide that the liquidator shall, for the purposes of liquidation,
form an estate of the assets which shall be called the liquidation estate in relation to the
specified service provider and the liquidator shall hold the liquidation estate as a fiduciary.
It further specifies the assets which shall comprise the liquidation estate and the assets
which shall not be included in the liquidation estate for the purposes of recovery in the
liquidation. It also provides that the payments and recoveries with regard to central
counterparties shall be made in accordance with the, rules, bye-laws or regulations of the
central counter party and such liabilities shall be discharged before making any
distributions under clause 80.
Clause 68 seeks to provide that
 the liquidator shall have the power to access any
information system for the purpose of admission and proof of claims and identification of
the liquidation estate assets relating to the specified service provider
. It further provides
that the liquidator shall provide the information to creditors who have requested for such
information within a period of seven days from the date of such request or provide
reasons for not providing such information.
Clause 69 seeks to provide for the liquidator to receive or collect the claims of all
consumers and creditors within a period of ninety days from the date of the
commencement of the liquidation process. It further provides that a depositor or operational
creditor shall submit a claim to the liquidator to prove the claim and deems every depositor
of a specified service provider which is a banking institution to have submitted its claim
for the amount shown in the books of the specified service provider as standing to its
credit and the liquidator shall presume such claims to have been proved, unless it has
reason for doubting its correctness. It also provides that a creditor who is partly a
financial creditor and partly an operational creditor shall submit claims to the liquidator to

106
the extent of the financial debt and the operational debt. It also provides that a creditor
may withdraw or vary his claim within fourteen days of its submission.
Clause 70 seeks to provide for the verification of claims submitted under clause 69
and empowers the liquidator to require any creditor or the specified service provider or
any other person to produce any other document or evidence which in the opinion of the
liquidator is necessary for the purpose of verifying the whole or any part of the claim.
Clause 71 seeks to empower the Tribunal to make a call on, and order payment by
any contributory, if such contributory has been placed on the list of contributories by
the liquidator and has not appeared to dispute his liability.
Clause 72 seeks to provide for the manner of payment of deposit insurance by
Corporation in case of liquidation. It provides that the deposit of each depositor shall be
paid directly to the depositor, or through an agency and the expenses incurred by the
liquidator in making such payments shall be treated as expenses incurred in the liquidation
of the insured service provider.
Clause 73 seeks to lays down the procedure for the admission and rejection of
claims. It provides that 
where the liquidator rejects a claim, he shall record in writing the
reasons for such rejection and where the liquidator has accepted the claims made by
depositors, it shall proceed to pay out any amounts covered under deposit insurance in
such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
Clause 74 seeks to make provision for an appeal before the Tribunal  by a creditor
or depositor aggrieved by the decision of the liquidator rejecting the claims under clause
73, within a specified time.
Clause 75 seeks to provide that the liquidator shall determine the value of claims
admitted under clause 73 in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the
Corporation.
Clause 76 seeks to specify the documents of a specified service provider  that can
be admitted in evidence.
Clause 77 seeks to provide for public examination of directors and auditors of a
specified service provider being liquidated by the Corporation. It provides that if the
liquidator is of the opinion that any promoter or any person who has taken part in the
conduct of business of the specified service provider or has been a director or an auditor
of the specified service provider should be publicly examined, it may file an application
before the Tribunal to hold a public sitting on a date to be appointed for that purpose
and thereupon, the Tribunal may direct that such person, director or auditor shall attend
there at and shall be publicly examined as to the promotion or formation or the conduct
of the business of the specified service provider, or as to his conduct and dealings,
provided that no such person shall be publicly examined unless he has been given an
opportunity to show cause why he should not be examined. It further provides that any
creditor or contributory may take part in the examination either personally or through a
person entitled to appear before the Tribunal. It also seeks to provide that if the person
being examined is exculpated from any charges made or suggested against him, the
Tribunal may allow him such costs in its discretion as it may deem fit; and where on such
examination, the Tribunal is of the opinion, whether or not a fraud has been committed,
that the person, who has been a director of a specified service provider, is not fit to be a
director of a specified service provider, or that the person, who has been an auditor of a
specified service provider or a partner of a firm acting as such auditor, is not fit to act as
an auditor of a  specified service provider  or to be a partner of a firm acting as such
auditor, the Tribunal may make an order that the person shall not, without the leave of
the Tribunal, be a director of, or in any way, whether directly or indirectly, be concerned
or take part in the management of any  specified service provider  or, as the case may be,

107
act as an auditor of, or be partner of a firm acting as auditors of any  specified service
provider, for such period not exceeding five years, as may be specified in the order.
Clause 78 seeks to empower the Tribunal in a liquidation proceeding to inquire
into the conduct of the person, who is or has been a director, manager, or officer of the
specified service if such person has misapplied, or retained, or become liable or accountable
for, any money or property or has been guilty of any misfeasance or breach of trust in
relation to the specified service provider, and order him to repay or restore the money or
property or any part thereof, with interest at such rate, or to contribute such sum to the
assets of the specified service provider by way of compensation in respect of such
misapplication or retention of any money or property or any misfeasance or breach of
trust, in relation to the specified service provider. It further provides that if the specified
service provider under liquidation is a banking institution, the Tribunal may make an
order for the repayment, restoration, and even attachment of the money and property.
Clause 79 seeks to provide for realisation of security interest of a secured creditor
in a liquidation proceeding. It provides that the secured creditor may choose to relinquish
its security interest to the liquidation estate and participate in the distribution of assets
or realise its security interest outside the liquidation proceedings. It further provides that
a secured creditor may enforce, realise, settle, compromise or deal with the secured assets
in accordance with such law as may be applicable to the security interest being realised
to the secured creditor and apply the proceeds to recover the debts due to it. It also
provide that if in the course of realising a secured asset, any secured creditor faces
resistance from the specified service provider or any person connected therewith in
taking possession of, selling or otherwise disposing of the security, the secured creditor
may make an application to the Tribunal  for an order to realise such security interest in
accordance with the law for the time being in force and the Tribunal may pass such order
as may be necessary to permit a secured creditor to realise security interest.  It also
provides that the amount of resolution costs payable by the secured creditor shall be
deducted from the realised proceeds and where there is a surplus realised from the
enforcement of a security interest, the secured creditor shall account for the same to the
liquidator. It also provides that if the proceeds of the realisation of the secured assets are
not sufficient to repay the debts owed to the secured creditor, the creditor may claim the
same in accordance with the priority of payments under clause 80 for such unpaid portion.
Clause 80 seeks to provide for distribution of assets in liquidation. It provides that
notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the proceeds from
the sale of the liquidation assets shall be distributed in the order of priority  specified in
sub-clause (1). It further provides that a ny contractual arrangements between recipients
with equal ranking, if disrupting the order of priority under sub-clause ( 1) shall be
disregarded by the liquidator. It also provides that the fees payable to the liquidator shall
be deducted proportionately from the proceeds payable to each class of recipients and
the proceeds to the relevant recipient shall be distributed after such deduction.
Clause 81 seeks to provide for the dissolution of the specified service provider.  It
provides that once the affairs of the specified service provider have been wound up and
its assets completely liquidated, the liquidator will make an application to the Tribunal for
the dissolution of the specified service provider and the Tribunal shall order that the
specified service provider shall be dissolved from the date of that order and the specified
service provider shall be dissolved accordingly.
Clause 82 seeks to provide for the avoidance by the liquidator of a preferential
transaction in certain transactions. It provides that a specified service provider shall be
deemed to have given a preference, if there is a transfer of property or an interest thereof
of the specified service provider for the benefit of a creditor or a surety or a guarantor for
or on account of an antecedent financial debt or operational debt or other liabilities owed

108
by the specified service provider; and such transfer has the effect of putting such creditor
or a surety or a guarantor in a more beneficial position than it would have been in the
event of a distribution of assets being made in accordance with clause 80. It also prohibits
avoidance of transaction at a relevant time and deems a preference to be given at a
relevant time, if it is given to a related party (other than by reason only of being an
employee), during the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date;
or a preference is given to a person other than a related party during the period of one
year preceding the liquidation commencement date.
Clause 83 seeks to empower the Tribunal, to pass orders in relation to the avoidance
of a preferential transaction, which have the effect of reversing the preferential transaction,
and requiring the person to whom the preference is granted, to pay back any gains he
may have made as a result of such preference. It further deems a person who has acquired
an interest in property from another person other than the specified service provider, or
who has received a benefit from the preference or such another person to whom the
specified service provider gave the preference, to have acquired such interest or received
the benefit otherwise than in good faith unless the contrary is shown, if he had sufficient
information of the initiation or commencement of liquidation process of the specified
service provider or is a related party. It also provides that a person shall be deemed to
have sufficient information or opportunity to avail such information if an order of
liquidation has been made under clause 63.
Clause 84 provides for the avoidance of undervalued transactions such as gifts, or
transactions where the value of the consideration received by the specified service
provider is significantly less than the value provided by such specified service provider.
It provides that the liquidator shall make an application to the Tribunal to declare such
transactions as void and reverse the effect of such transaction in accordance with this
Chapter.
Clause 85 seeks to provide that in an application for avoiding a transaction which
has been undervalued, the liquidator shall demonstrate that such transaction was made
with any person within the period of one year preceding the liquidation commencement
date; or such transaction was made with a related party within the period of two years
preceding  the liquidation commencement date. It empowers the Tribunal to require an
independent expert to assess evidence relating to the value of the transactions.
Clause 86 seeks to permit the creditors, shareholders or partners of the specified
service provider to make an application to the Tribunal for setting aside an undervalued
transaction where the liquidator has not reported such transaction to the Tribunal. It
provides that the Tribunal shall pass an order restoring the position as it existed before
such transactions and reversing the effects thereof, if after examination of the application,
it is satisfied that undervalued transactions had occurred and the liquidator after having
sufficient information or opportunity to avail information of such transactions did not
report such transactions to the Tribunal.
Clause 87  seeks to provide that the order of the Tribunal setting aside the
undervalued transaction shall have the effect of reversing the undervalued transaction
and requiring the person who benefits from such transaction to pay back any gains he
may have made as a result of such transaction.
Clause 88 seeks to provide that where the Tribunal is satisfied that the specified
service provider had deliberately entered into undervalued transaction for keeping assets
of the specified service provider beyond the reach of any person who is entitled to make
a claim against the specified service provider; or in order to adversely affect the interests
of such  person in relation to the claim, it shall make an order restoring the position as it
existed before such transaction as if the transaction had not been entered into and for
protecting the interests of persons who are victims of such transactions.

109
Clause 89  seeks to empower the liquidator to make an application to the Tribunal
for avoidance of extortionate credit transaction  where the  specified service provider has
been a party to an extortionate credit transaction involving a financial or operational debt
during the period within two years preceding the liquidation commencement date, the if
the terms of such transaction required exorbitant payments to be made by the  specified
service provider. It also seeks to clarify that any debt extended by any person providing
financial services which is in compliance with any law for the time being in force in
relation to such debt shall not be considered as an extortionate credit transaction.
Clause 90 seeks to empower the Tribunal to pass orders relating to extortionate
credit transactions, including, to 
restore the position as it existed prior to such transaction
or to set aside the whole or part of the debt created on account of the extortionate credit
transaction, if it  is satisfied that the terms of a credit transaction required exorbitant
payments to be made by the specified service provider .
Clause 91 seeks to empower the Corporation, on being appointed as a liquidator or
as an administrator, to require parties related to the specified service provider to continue
to provide such services or honour such contracts as the Corporation may direct, for a
period not exceeding two years from the date of such appointment, for effective resolution
of the specified service provider.
Clause 92 seeks to provide that the appropriate regulator shall provide necessary
assistance and co-operation to the Corporation in the discharge of its duties under
Chapter XII. It also requires the District Magistrate, on a  request in writing by the
Corporation, to take possession of the property, books of accounts or other documents
within his jurisdiction; and to forward them to the Corporation; or to sell such property
and effects by public auction and forward the net proceeds of the sale to the Corporation.
It further requires the  District Magistrate to provide necessary assistance and co-operation
to the Corporation in the discharge of its duties under the said Chapter.
Clause 
93 seeks to permit  a specified service provider classified in the category of
low or moderate risk to viability to close its business and liquidate itself voluntarily
under section 59 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, subject to such conditions
as may be specified by regulations made by the appropriate regulator. It seeks to prohibit
voluntary liquidation by a specified service provider  classified in the category of material
or higher risk to viability.
Clause 94 seeks to prohibit  the Tribunal from entertaining any petition for winding
up of a specified service provider, or a bridge service provider, under section 271 of the
Companies Act, 2013, except on a report from the Corporation that such a specified
service provider should be liquidated. It further provides that upon submission of the
report by the Corporation, if the  Tribunal is satisfied that the specified service provider
has to be liquidated, it shall appoint the Corporation as the liquidator.
Clause 95 seeks to empower the Central Government to enter into an agreement
with the Government of any country outside India for enforcing the provisions of the
Bill.  It further empowers the  Corporation, with due approval of the Central Government,
to enter into memorandum of understanding with other international organisations and
authorities, to share information on a reciprocal basis. It also provides for maintenance of
confidentiality by all the parties involved. It also requires the Tribunal, on an application
to that effect by the Corporation, to issue a letter of request to be sent to foreign courts
and authorities, for seeking evidence or action relating to assets situated in that country.
Clause 96 seeks to provide for the recognition and enforcement or refusal of
recognition and enforcement of foreign resolution actions. It provides that that the
Corporation may, subject to any agreement or memorandum of understanding entered
into by the Central Government or the Corporation under clause 95, make an order of
recognition or enforcement of a foreign resolution action, provided the foreign resolution
action shall not be in derogation of the safeguards contained in clause 55 of the Bill in

110
relation to the Indian stakeholders affected by such resolution action; and that the creditors
of the specified service provider in India shall have the first charge on the assets of the
specified service provider in relation to which such recognition and enforcement order is
being made. It further provides that the Corporation may refuse to recognise and enforce
a foreign resolution action where the action could have an adverse impact on the financial
stability of India, or may be inconsistent with the objectives of the Bill or be opposed to
public policy or be inconsistent with the laws of India or where an independent resolution
action by the Corporation in India is considered necessary to secure the objectives of
the Bill.
Clause 97 of the Bill seeks to provide for the rights of the local creditors in certain
cases. It empowers the appropriate regulator to initiate resolution against a branch office
of a body corporate incorporated outside India, whose branch office in India is a specified
service provider, in the event of a foreign resolution action, subject to any memorandum
of understanding or agreement referred to in clause 95. It provides that such branch
office may be classified in the category of  critical risk to viability by the appropriate
regulator, and resolved in accordance with the provisions of the Bill; and in such case,
the creditors of the specified service provider in India shall have first charge on the
assets of the specified service provider for the purpose of resolution or liquidation under
the Bill.
Clause 98 seeks to specify punishment for wilful concealment, fraudulent removal,
destruction, mutilation, falsification, concealment of knowledge, or the creation of a security
interest in relation to a property of a specified service provider, by 
any officer of the
specified service provider if such officer has committed any of those acts within the
twelve months immediately preceding the date of the order of liquidation; or at any time
after the date of the order of liquidation, committed any of the acts or has the knowledge
of the doing by others of those acts; or at any time after the date of order of liquidation
taken in pawn or pledge, or otherwise received the property knowing it to be so secured,
transferred or disposed. It provides that such officer shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to five years, or
with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one
crore rupees, or with both. It also provides that nothing in this clause shall render a
person liable to any such punishment if he proves that he had no intent to defraud or to
conceal the state of affairs of the specified service provider.
Clause 99 seeks to specify punishment for transactions defrauding creditors of a
specified service provider on or after the date of the order of liquidation, by an officer of
the specified service provider or the specified service provide either by  making or causing
to be made any gift or transfer of, or charge on, or causing or conniving in the execution
of a decree or order against, the property of the specified service provider; or by concealing
or removing any part of the property of the specified service provider within two months
before the date of any unsatisfied judgment, decree or order for payment of money
obtained against the specified service provider. It provides that such officer of the specified
service provider or the person in control of such specified service provider shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which
may extend to five years, or with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but
which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both. It also provides that nothing in this
clause shall render a person liable to any such punishment if the acts were committed
more than five years before the date of the order of liquidation, or if he proves that, at the
time of commission of those acts, he had no intent to defraud the creditors of the specified
service provider.
Clause 100 seeks to specify punishment for any misconduct in the course of
liquidation of a specified service provider or a bridge service provider, such as, non-
disclosure to the Corporation, with respect to the details of the property of the specified
service provider, or of books and accounts in the officer’s custody; for the prevention of

111
the production of books and papers, and the failure to inform the Corporation of any
debt falsely proven by any person during liquidation, by either an officer of the  specified
service provider, or the bridge service provider. It provides that such officer shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but
which may extend to five years, or with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees,
but which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both. It further provides that  nothing
in this clause shall render a person liable to any punishment, if he proves that he had no
intent to do so in relation to the state of affairs of the specified service provider.
Clause 101 seeks to specify punishment for the falsification of books of a specified
service provider. It provides that on and after the date of the order of liquidation, where
any person destroys, mutilates, alters or falsifies any books, papers or securities, or
makes or is in the knowledge of making of any false or fraudulent entry in any register,
books of accounts or document belonging to the specified service provider with an
intent to defraud or deceive any person, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to five years, or with
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one crore
rupees, or with both.
 Clause 102 seeks to specify punishment for wilful and material omissions from
statements relating to the affairs of a specified service provider. It provides that w
here an
officer of the specified service provider makes any material and wilful omission in any
statement relating to the affairs of the specified service provider, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may
extend to five
Clause 103 seeks to specify punishment for a contravention of prohibition under
clause 45 and clause 63 of the Bill. It provides that any such officer who knowingly or
wilfully committed or authorised or permitted such contravention, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may
extend to five years or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which
may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both. It further provides that any person who
knowingly and wilfully authorised or permitted such contravention by a creditor, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which
may extend to five years, or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but
which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
 Clause 104 
seeks to specify punishment for interference in investigation in
contravention of clause 14, making such offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, which may extend to twenty-five crore rupees,
or with both, and if the contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine which may
extend to ten lakh rupees for every day after the first during which the contravention
continues, if such person fails without reasonable cause or refuses to produce to an
Investigating Authority or any person authorised by him in this behalf any book, register,
other document or record or to furnish any information, or fails or refuses to appear
before the Investigating Authority personally when required to do so  or to answer any
question which is put to him in pursuance thereof.
Clause 105 seeks to specify other offences for which any employee, manager, or
person in control of a specified service provider shall, in addition to the payment of any
amount disgorged, be punishable with imprisonment for a minimum period of three years,
extending up to five years, or with fine for a minimum amount of one lakh rupees, extending
up to one crore rupees. It further provides that any person who assists a person in
committing any such offence or knowingly accepts or deals in any asset of a specified
service provider which is in resolution; or causes any asset of a specified service provider
in resolution to be hidden from the Corporation, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to five years,

112
and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one
crore rupees. It also specifies punishment for offences, including, wilfully making a false
statement of a material particular, failure to produce books, accounts, documents,
statements and information under the Bill.
Clause 106 seeks to provide that where an offence has been committed by a
company, every person who was in charge of the company for the conduct of business,
or with whose consent or connivance such default occurred, shall be liable for prosecution,
and punishment accordingly. It further provides that an offence punishable under the Bill
will be deemed to have been committed at the place where the registered office, or the
principal place of business in India, of the company is situated.
Clause 107 seeks to provide that any person who deliberately contravenes any of
the provisions of the Bill or the rules or regulations made thereunder, shall be liable to a
penalty which shall not be less than the  amount of unlawful gains accrued out of such
contravention, but which may extend to three times the said amount of unlawful gains or
twenty-five crore rupees, whichever is higher. It further provides that any person who by
gross negligence or any person related to the specified service provider, who  violates
any order, regulation or rule under this Act, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend
up to two times the amount of unlawful gains accrued out of such violation or extend up
to five crore rupees, whichever is higher.
Clause 108 seeks to specify the penalties in relation to restoration and resolution
plans, including, for non-submission, failure to intimate material changes, and non-revision
of the plans by the relevant specified service providers and the systemically important
financial institutions, as the case may be.
Clause 109  seeks to empower the Corporation and the appropriate regulator to
appoint an adjudicating officer to impose penalty under clauses 107 and 108 of the Bill. It
provides that the adjudicating officer shall hold inquiries, summon and enforce attendance
of persons, and impose penalty, after giving the relevant specified service provider and
the person an opportunity of being heard. It further empowers the Corporation or the
appropriate regulator, as the case may be, to call for and examine the records of such
proceedings. It also specifies certain factors for the adjudicating officer to consider for
deciding the quantum of penalty to be levied, including amongst others, the nature and
seriousness of the violation committed, the repetitive nature of the violation, and the
consequences and impact of the violation.
Clause 110 seeks to specify the manner of recovery of penalty. It provides that if
any person fails to comply with an order issued under Chapter XV requiring him to pay
any amount by way of penalty, the Corporation may, by order in writing, recover the
amount of penalty in accordance with the provisions of the Second Schedule to the
Income-tax Act, 1961.
Clause 111 seeks to provide for an appeal to the Tribunal against an order of
penalty under  clause 109. It provides that such appeal shall be filed within a period of
forty-five days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the Corporation or
the appropriate regulator is received by the aggrieved person.
Clause 112 seeks to provide for trial of offences by the Special Court established
under section 435 of the Companies Act, 2013 and bars any court from taking cognizance
of any offence under the Bill, except on the complaint in writing made by the Central
Government, Corporation  or any person authorised by the Central Government in this
behalf. It further provides that the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 will
apply to the proceedings before a Special Court. It also provides that where the
complainant under is the Central Government or Corporation or an officer authorised by
the Central Government, the presence of such officer before the court trying the offences
shall not be necessary unless the court requires his personal attendance at the trial.

113
Clause 113 seeks to confer on the special Court all the powers conferred by Chapters
XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a High Court, as if a Special
Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court of Session
trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.
Clause 114 seeks to provide for making an application to the Tribunal for
compensation by any person aggrieved by a resolution action of the Corporation. It
requires the Tribunal, on receipt of such application, to appoint an independent valuer to
assess whether the said person received a less favourable treatment in resolution, than
what would have been received if the specified service provider had been liquidated.
Clause 115 seeks to provide that Corporation and the specified service provider
shall provide records, documents, and information to the independent valuer, as may be
required for the purposes of valuation.
Clause 116 seeks to provide that the independent valuer appointed under clause
114 shall submit a valuation report specifying the assessments undertaken, and
determination of the compensation to be awarded, with the copies of the report being
forwarded to all the parties involved, including the applicant, the
 Corporation and the
Tribunal. It further provides that Tribunal may by an order in writing, direct the valuer to
reconsider the valuation report or any aspect thereof and submit a revised report or
replace the valuer, and pass such other orders as may be required.
Clause 117 seeks to provide that the independent valuer shall maintain confidentiality
in respect of any information relating to the relevant specified service provider, its
customers, and the Corporation, unless it is required by any law to divulge the information
and the obligation to such maintain confidentiality shall continue after the independent
valuer has ceased to perform his functions.
Clause 118 seeks to empower the Tribunal to direct the Corporation to pay such
compensation to the applicant from the Corporation Resolution Fund, as the Tribunal
deems fit.
Clause 119 seeks to provide for an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, against any
decision of the Tribunal for compensation under clause 118. It further provides that any
decision taken under the Chapter XVI on compensation shall not affect any action taken
under Chapters IX, X and XI of the Bill, except to the extent provided under the said
chapter on compensation.
Clause 120 seeks to provide for the continuation of deposit insurance for existing
eligible co-operation banks for two years from the date of commencement of the Bill,
which may be extended  by a further period not exceeding one year, or until the law
governing such eligible co-operative bank meets with the requirements of the Bill,
whichever is earlier. It further  provides that if on the expiry of the said period, the law for
the time being governing the co-operative bank fails to meet the requirements of the Bill,
the co-operative bank shall cease to be an insured service provider.
Clause 121 seeks to specify the circumstances in which the winding up of co-
operative banks can be sought under the Bill, which include, amongst others, non-
compliance, or disentitlement, or prohibition with respect to receiving fresh deposits
under certain provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and inability to pay debts.
Clause 122 seeks to provide for repayment of amount paid under clause 30, or
clause 72, or provision for which has been made under clause 32, to the Corporation. It
provides that the liquidator shall repay to the Corporation out of the amount, if any,
payable by him in respect of any deposit, such sum as to make up the amount paid or
provided for by the Corporation in respect of that deposit. It further provides that where
the Corporation has been appointed as the liquidator, repayment to the Corporation may
be by way of an adjustment to the funds of the Corporation. It also provides that the
insured service provider or, the transferee insured service provider, as the case may be,

114
shall repay to the Corporation out of the amount, if any, to be paid or credited in respect
of any deposit after the date of the coming into force of the scheme referred to in clause
30, such sum as to make up the amount paid or provided for by the Corporation in
respect of that deposit.
Clause 123 seeks to provide that every member, officer or employee, or independent
valuer or any other person whose services are utilised by the Corporation shall, before
entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in
the Third Schedule.
Clause 124 seeks to provide that t
he Corporation or the appropriate regulator shall
not divulge any information relating to any specified service provider or its consumers,
except as otherwise required by clause 128, or under any other law for the time being in
force, except in circumstances in which it is necessary in accordance with that law or
when so authorised by the Bill. It further provides that no court, tribunal or other authority
shall compel the Corporation or the appropriate regulator to produce, or to give information
on any inspection relating to a specified service provider or its consumers, by the
Corporation, or the appropriate regulator, as the case may be, under the Bill.
Clause 125 seeks to indemnify every Member of the Corporation against all losses
and expenses incurred by him in, in relation to, the discharge of his duties under the Bill
except such as have been caused by his own wilful act or default. It further seeks to
indemnify a Member from the actions of the other Members or any other officer or
employee of the Corporation, or from any loss or expenses resulting to the Corporation
from the insufficiency or deficiency of value or title to any property or security acquired
or taken on behalf of the Corporation or from 
the wrongful act of any debtor or any
person under obligation to the Corporation or anything done in good faith in the execution
of the duties of his office or in relation thereto .
Clause 126 seeks to provide for protection of action taken under the Bill. It provides
that no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Corporation or the appropriate
regulator, or any Member or officer of the Corporation or of the appropriate regulator for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the Bill or
of any rule or regulations made there under.
Clause 127 seeks to provide that nothing in the Competition Act, 2002, shall apply
to any action taken by the Corporation or the appropriate regulator under Chapters X, XI
and XII of the Bill.
Clause 128 seeks to provide for the information sharing between the appropriate
regulator and the Corporation and specifies the information to be shared between
themselves, in relation to specified service providers classified in the categories of material,
imminent, and critical risks to viability. It further provides that such information shall be
shared on a reciprocal basis, for specified service providers classified to be at low and
moderate risks to viability. It also requires the two authorities to inter alia, hold regular
meetings and consult each other on a regular basis. It also requires the appropriate
regulator to submit to the Corporation its findings on the inspections and the basis of
classification of a specified service provider in any of the categories of risk to viability, in
such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
Clause 129 seeks to provide that the
 Corporation shall prepare, in such form and
at such time in the financial year as may be prescribed, the budget for the next financial
year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Corporation.
Clause130 seeks to provide that the Corporation shall prepare and submit to the
Central Government, an annual report giving an account of its activities and of the
activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Corporation during the next financial
year and the Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before both Houses
of Parliament

115
Clause 131 seeks to empower the Central Government to supersede the Corporation
if it is of the opinion that on account of a grave emergency, the Corporation is unable to
discharge the functions and duties; or the Corporation has persistently defaulted in
complying with any direction issued by the Central Government under the Bill or in the
discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of the Bill
and as a result of such default, the financial position of the Corporation or the
administration of the Corporation has deteriorated; or circumstances exist which render it
necessary in the public interest to do so. It also provides that upon such supersession,
all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of the Bill, be
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Corporation shall, until the Corporation is
reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central
Government may direct.
Clause 132 seeks to exempt central counterparties from application of  certain
provisions of the Bill.  It empowers the Central Government, to direct by a notification
that any of the provisions of the Bill (other than clause 142) or any notification or order
issued or direction given there under (other than the provisions relating to the making of
rules or regulations), specified in the notification shall not apply to a central counterparty
or a class of central counterparties; or shall apply to a central counterparty or a class of
central counterparties with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be
specified in the notification and to lay such notification before each House of Parliament
Clause 133  seeks to bar the jurisdiction of courts and tribunals in respect of
matters in respect of which the Corporation, the appropriate regulator, the Tribunal, or
the Appellate Tribunal is empowered to act under the Bill. It further bars grant of
injunctions or reversal by any court of tribunal in respect of actions taken under the Bill.
Clause 134 seeks to deem the Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees
of the Corporation, whenever acting, or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of the Bill, to be public servants, as per section 21 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860.
Clause 135 seeks to provide that any amount collected by the Corporation or the
appropriate regulator as a penalty shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
Clause 136 seeks to exempt the Corporation from being liable to pay income tax,
service tax, and other taxes with respect to its, income, expenditure, profits or gains.
Clause 137 seeks to provide that the provisions of the Bill shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in
force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law for the time being in force
other than this Bill. It further provides that the provisions of this Bill shall override the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force in relation to resolution or liquidation
of a specified service provider.  It also provides that nothing in this Bill, other than clause
47, shall affect the application of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 and the
Securities Contract Regulation Act, 1956 or regulations made there under, in respect of
the central counterparties.
Clause 138 seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, the provisions relating to the information utilities
under this Bill shall apply to the specified service providers in such manner as may be
specified by regulations made by the Corporation.
Clause 139 seeks to provide that nothing in the Companies Act, 2013 relating to
liquidation shall apply to the liquidation of the Corporation under this Bill. It further
provides that  the  Corporation shall not be placed in liquidation, except by an order of
the Central Government and that the manner of the liquidation shall be determined by the
Central Government in consultation with the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India

116
and the  manner of liquidation shall be guided by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016. It also lays down the manner of the distribution of the outstanding assets of the
Corporation.
Clause 140 seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of this Bill. It enumerates the various matters in respect of which such
rules may be made by the Central Government.
Clause 141 seeks to empower the Corporation and the appropriate regulator to
make regulations, for carrying out the provisions of this Bill. It enumerates the various
matters in respect of which such regulations may be made by the Corporation and the
appropriate regulator.
Clause 142 seeks to provide that every rule or regulation made under the Bill to be
laid before each of the Houses of Parliament.
Clause 143 seeks to empower the Central Government to make such provisions as
may be necessary for removing any difficulty for bringing the provisions of the Bill into
force. It further provides that every such order shall be laid before each of the House of
Parliament.
Clause 144 seeks to provide that the Corporation shall, in discharge of its functions
and duties under this Bill, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time after giving to the Corporation
an opportunity to express its views before any such direction is given.
Clause 145 seeks to repeal the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
Act, 1961, and to save certain actions done or taken or purported to have been done or
taken under the repealed Act. The effect of repeal of the said Act , inter alia, include, the
dissolution of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation and of the Board
or any committees constituted under that Act, and requires every member of such Board
or committee to cease to hold office as such;  and that the employees of the Reserve
Bank of India holding any office under the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee
Corporation under the repealed Act, shall, for a period of one year, hold an office under
the Corporation and on the completion of one year, and before the completion of two
years, have the option to continue in the Corporation or return to the Reserve Bank of
India and the transfer of 
the assets, liabilities, properties, undertakings, rights and claims
of the  Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation under the repealed Act, to
the Corporation.
Clause 146  seeks to make amendments to certain enactments specified in the
Fourth Schedule in the manner specified in that Schedule.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Corporation
by the name of the Resolution Corporation.
2. Clause 21 of the Bill provides for the constitution of certain funds for the purposes
of the Bill, namely, ( a) a fund for deposit insurance provided by the Corporation to the
insured service providers, called the Corporation Insurance Fund; ( b) a fund for meeting
the expenses of carrying out resolution of specified service providers, called the
Corporation Resolution Fund; and ( c) a fund for all other functions of the Corporation
called the Corporation General Fund. It further provides that the Corporation shall utilise
the amounts in each fund only for the purpose for which the fund was constituted.
3. Clause 23 provides for payment of grants and loans to the Corporation, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, on such terms, as the Central
Government may think fit, for being utilised for the purposes of this Bill.
4. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of approximately one hundred
and forty crore rupees in the first year of establishment of the Corporation as initial
establishment expenses, including salaries and allowances and other remuneration of
Chairperson and Members (other than ex officio Members) of the Corporation and of its
officers and other employees. This would include non-recurring capital expenditure of
one hundred crore rupees and a further recurring expenditure of about forty crore rupees.
Eventually, it is expected that major recurring expenses of the Corporation would be
funded out of the fees and charges as may be received by the Corporation.
5.  The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not involve any other
expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.
117

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 140 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules with respect
to the matters specified under sub-clause (2) which, inter alia, relate to the salaries and
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members
(other than ex officio Members); the form and manner of the annual statement of accounts
and the intervals at which such accounts shall be audited; the criteria for designation of
a financial service provider as a systemically important financial institution; the
appointment of adjudicating officer and the manner of making inquiry for adjudication of
penalty; the form and manner of filing of appeal and the fee to be accompanied; the
criteria for appointment of valuer; and the form for preparation of the annual report by
the Corporation.
2. Clause 141 of the Bill empowers the Corporation to make regulations with respect
to the matters specified under sub-clause (2) which inter alia, relate to the time and place
of meeting of the Corporation and the procedure to be followed for the transaction of
business at such meetings (including quorum at such meetings); the salary and allowances
payable to and other terms and conditions of service of officers and employees of the
Corporation; the manner of constituting committees and the number of members thereof;
the manner of investing moneys by the Corporation; the amount of fee, the manner and
time of payments; the amount and the manner of payment of premium; the manner and
the period for submission of reports by systemically important financial institutions; the
manner of payment of unpaid amount to a bona fide depositor;
 the time period for
investigation, inquiry or inspection for the purpose of classification of a specified service
provider in a category of risk to viability and the objective criteria for classification of
specified service providers; the information relating to business which may be relevant
for classification of material, imminent or critical risk to viability; the form and manner of
resolution plan and the relevant information required by the Corporation; the form and
manner of bail-in instrument or scheme and the liabilities or class of liabilities; the additional
measures by the administrator in respect of Central Counterparties; the manner of receiving
or collecting the claims of all consumers and creditors; the manner of determination of
value of claims; the manner of realising security interest; the period and manner of
distribution of liquidation assets and the amounts due to insurance policy holders; the
conditions for voluntary liquidation; the manner of publication of recognition and
enforcement order; the manner of adjustment of funds in case of repayment of amount to
Corporation; the form and manner of sharing and exchange of supervisory information of
certain categories of specified service providers; and the manner of application of the
provisions relating to information utilities in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016
to the specified service providers.
3. Clause 142 of the Bill requires that the rules and regulations made under the
proposed legislation be laid before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.118

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the resolution of certain categories of financial service providers in
distress; the deposit insurance to consumers of certain categories of financial services;
designation of systemically important financial institutions; and establishment of a
Resolution Corporation for protection of consumers of specified service
providers and of public funds for ensuring the stability and resilience
of the financial system and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Finance, Corporate Affairs and Defence)
GMGIPMRND—1821LS(S3)—08.08.2017.