THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES,
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS AND FULL PARTICIPATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYY A SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Persons With Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 165 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section 43 of the Persons With Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"43a. (1) The appropriate Government shall—
(a) pay disability allowance to every person with disability at the rate of
rupees four thousand per month through a Government agency or a nationalised
bank:
Provided that disability allowance shall be reviewed, from time to time, by
the Central Government according to prevailing cost index;
(b) establish adequate number of homes for persons with disability in
every district;
(c) provide medical facilities free of cost to every person with disability in
Government hospitals and other designated dispensaries for the purpose;
(d) provide a residential unit free of cost in deserving cases; and
(e) constitute a Welfare Fund for the welfare and rehabilitation of persons
with disability.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, credit adequate sums to the Welfare Fund for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.".
Insertion of
new section
43A.
Facilities to
be provided
to disabled
persons by
the
appropriate
Government.
Central
Government
to credit
adequate sums
to the
Disabled
Persons
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
1 of 1996.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has a large number of persons with disability. These helpless persons
have to face much difficulties due to lack of adequate measures for their care and rehabilitation.
In the absence of adequate welfare measures, these persons are living in a pitiable condition.
It has been a tradition in our country to take care of persons with disability but due to
financial constraints, all persons, particularly belonging to lower income group, are not in a
position to help these persons to lead a dignified life.
Most of the persons with disability do not have any regular source of income and
cannot afford their daily needs of livelihood. Being a welfare State, it is foremost duty of the
Government to provide social security to all persons with disability.
These persons with disability are being provided assistance under ongoing social
security schemes but the same are inadequate. In several countries including United States
of America, Canada, Denmark, financial assistance through pension scheme is provided to
persons with disability. It is, therefore, felt that there is an urgent need for empowerment of
persons with disability in our country by way of providing disability allowance, health
facilities free of cost, residential units, homes for persons with disability in every district and
other welfare measures for them.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
May 7, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide certain
facilities like disability allowance, healthcare facilities free of cost, constitution of a Welfare
Fund for persons with disability. It further provides that the Central Government shall credit
adequate sums to the Welfare Fund for the purposes of the Act. The expenditure in respect
of providing certain facilities to persons with disability in the States will be met from the
Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure to be incurred in
respect of providing certain facilities to the persons with disability in Union territories will be
borne by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees two thousand crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees thirty crore is also likely to be
involved.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1240LS—14.07.2015.