As INTRODUCEDrIN J.,~K SABHA ON 
2 9·AUu '9S~ 
Bill No. _ of 1185 
« 
THE SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES (SPECIAL 
PROVISIONS) BILL, 1985 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. 
2. Declaration. 
3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
BOARD AND APPELl;An: AUTHORITY FOR INDUSTRIAL AND FINANCIAL 
REcoNSTRUCTION 
4. Establishment of Board. 
5. Constitution of Appellate Authority. 
6. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and other 
Members. 
7. Removal Members from office in certain circumstances. 
8. Secretary, oftlcers and other employees of Board or Appellate 
Authority. 
9. Salaries, etc., be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
10. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board and 
Appellate Authority. 
11. Members and staff of Board and Appellate Authority to be public 
servants. 
i2. Constitution of Benches of Board or Appellate Authority. 
13. Procedure of Board and Appellate Authority. 
14. Proceedings before Board or Appellate Authority to be judicial 
proceedings. 
CHAPTER III 
REFERENCES, INQt11RIES AND SCHEMES 
15. Reference to Board. 
16. Inquiry into working of sick industrial companies. 
17. Powers of Board to make suitable order on the completion of 
inquiry. 
18. Preparation and sanction of-schemes. 
19. Rehabilitation by giving financial assistance. 
(i) 

(ii) 
'CLAUSES 
20. Winding up of sick industrial company. 
21. Opei'ktlhg agency to prepare complete inventory, etc. 
22. Suspension of legal pr~dings contracts, etc. 
CHAPTER IV 
PRoca:DINas IN CASE OF POTENTIALLY SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES, MISFEAS-
ANCE PROCIlEDUf~ APPEALS AND MISCELLANEOUS 
. , 
23. Loss of 50 per cent. net worth by industrial companies. 
\ 24. Misfeasance proceeditlgs. 
25. Appeal. 
26. Bar of juri~ction. 
27. Delegation of powers. 
28. Returns and information . 
. 29. Powe.r to seek the assistance of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and 
District Magistrate. 
30. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
31. Saving of pending proceedings. 
32. Effect of the Act on other laws. 
33. Penalty for certain offences. 
34. Offences by companies. 
35. Power to remove difficultie1. 
36. Power to make rules. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

BiIJ No. 165 of 1. 
THE SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES ('SPECIAL i 
~VISIONS) BILL, 1985 
A. 
BILL 
to make, in the public interest, special provisions with a view to seCUring 
the timely detection Of sick and potentially ii/:k. companie8 owm,.g 
ind1J,8tr;al undertakings, the speedy determination by a Board of 
e~ert~ of the preventive, ameUorative, remed.ial and other mea.sures 
which need to be taken with respect to such co.mp&n.ie8 and the e:z:pedi-
tioUB enforcement of the measures so detennined and for matters 
co'lt.necied thereWith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of Indi,a as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Sick Industrial Companies (~p"cial 
Provisions) Act, 1985, 
(~) It extends to the Whole of India. 
(3)- It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govemm'3nt 
may, by·notiftcatiOll in the Official Gazette, appoint and di1ferent dates may 
10 be appointed for different ~rovisions of this Act and any reference in any 
Short 
title, 
extent, 
com-
mence-
ment 
and 
applica-
tion. 

2 
provision of this Act to the commencement of this Act shall be construed 
as a reference to the commencement of that provision. 
(4) It shall apply, in the first instance, to all the scheduled industrl.es 
other than the scheduled industry relating to ships and other vessels 
drawn by power. 5 
(5) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank of India, by notification, apply the provisions of this Act, Qll and 
from such date as may be specified in the notification, to the scheduled 
industry relating to 'Ships and other vessels drawn by power. 
Declaration. 2. It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to the policy 10 
of the State towards securing the principles specified in clauses (b) and 
(c) of article ·39 of the Constitution. 
Deftni- 3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
tiona. 
('a) uAppellate Authority" means the Appellate Authority for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction constituted under section. S; 15 
(b) "Board" means the Board for Industrial and Financial Re-
construction established under section 4; 
(c) uChairman" means the Chairman of the Board or, as the case 
may be, the Appellate Authority; 
(d) "company" means a company as defined in section 3 of 20 
fhe Companies Act, 1956, but does not include a Government com- 1 of 1958. 
pany as defined in section 617 of that Act; 
(e) "industrial company" means a company which owns oIne or 
more industrial undertakings; 
(f) Uindu'Strial undertaking" means any undertaking pertain- 25 
ing to a scheduled industry carried on in one or more factories by 
any company but does not include. 
(i) an ancillary industrial undertaking as defined in clause 
(aa) of section 3 of the Industries (Development and Regula-
tion) Act, 19S1; and 3065 of1951. 
(ii) a small scale industrial undertaking as defined in 
clause (j) of the aforesaid section 3; 
(g) "Member" means a Member of the Board or, as the case 
may be, the Appellate Authority and includes the Chairman thereof; 
(h) "notification" means a notific~ticm published in the Om.- 35 
cial Gazette; 
(i) "operating agency" means any public 1fnancial institution 
as may be specified by general or special order as its agen.ey by the 
Board; 
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 40 
Act; 

La< SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
tC" 
1'ME...£IP<-.INDUSTRIAL...COMPANIES (SPECIAL-iROV~TI I~ 1985--
(La baJAs introduced in Ltk .Sabha) 
...l..... ___ ._ P-age. .. .t.1). line 11. against clause tin. 1.-
I 
after ttRemova~ "of" 
2. Page (ii). line 8. against .clause-Na.23.-
i.e£ ".50 ~~. cent." ¥ "fifty per cent." 
~3..~ line 1,-
~_ .. ~re.ad "in-sti:tuti.on" 
.. 4 • .,-.Page 4, against line 3, in the marginal citarton.- • 
~,. -
for "43 of 1951." read "63 of 1951." -
----... 
sfter --"'(;l~_ omit 
6. Page 5, line 43,-
1 
for "until" read "till" 
7. Page 6, line 6,-
. after "Schedule" omit "to this Act" -
8. 
for "bas~" read "ban~" 
- -
9. Page 9, line 8,-
,after "respect to" read "such company" 
r · Page 12, 
for -U. Page 12, 
. i.<l£ 
line 2,-
"eftcumberances" 
line 3,-
• "encumberances" 
12. Page 13, line 5,-
, 
12£ "sub-sectien (.4)" 
read - "encumbrances" 
n encumbrances" 
read "sub4;&<::Uen (5)" 
\ '. 

-' 
... - .... .. ·z .. ~··-· 
for "said" read "sie'<" 
-
f or--. -... ~··-cent.1t read "f ifty per eent." 
- I 
15. Page 16. line 7,-
read 
-
16~ Page 16. lin. 42.-
for "interest"-: read ... -" interest" 
~ ,-, .---' 
17. Page 17, line·14.-
.!.2£ "if deems" .£!£ "it deems" 
1.6. _ .. .Pag e '17. line 23.-
is:. "llmi.tat~rrJf·"'··"read .. ..--!!-limitations" 
'-'--'1.9... __ .t'.3.Q~ .. 17.. line 24,-
for IIf or" read "or" -. ~ 
~" .p'~'Je 17. line 25',-
i..2!: .. ~,~ 1J"1:~ons"" ~ "person ft 
2:1. Page 17, line. 29.-
for "sub-section" read·tI.-sub-sections" - _. 
, . .22.. .. ...Page· 17, . lines 28 and 29,-
i2!: "sub-.l-sectilJri (4)" read "and (4)" 
.23.. .Page 18, line 12,-
for "Magistrate ef'J'fead "Magistrate or" .. 
24. Page 18, line 15,-
for "be" read " lie" - -
~ 2'5. Page 18, line 30.-
iEt "and Urban" ~ ft and the' Urba~" 
26. Page 18. against line 31, in the marginal eitation.-
27. 
~ 
• for "33 to 1976." read "33.f 1976." -. .' 
Pag9 18, 11ne 42,-
aft.er "'any" ~ •• It 5 anct ioned" 

3 
29. Page 19, line 41,-
aftef "Secretary" insert-
"and fl'ther f)ff icers and employees" 
29. Page 21, line 1~,-
i..<2£ "owned" ~ "ewning" 
30. Page 23. line 17,-
~ "1e'ls" ~ "less" 
31. Page 23, line 20.-
!2£ "existin~" ~ "excee~ingn 
32. Page 23, line 1 fr~m bettom.-
for "Auhority" r~ad " Authorityr. - -
33. Page 25, line 9,-
.!i?£. " enquiry" read " inquiry" 
34. Page'2,), line 2'),-
Lo..!: "ind usria 1" read "industria 1" 
35. Page 26, line 7 frnm bottr"lm,-
fer " comitted" liC!1. " cemmitted" -
36. Page 28, line ?4,-
fOI' "clJ'Jse 19(1)" read "clause 19" 
- -
37 •. Page 29, line 17,-
for "commencement of the ~ct" 
-
:read "the assent .f the Pres ident" -
NEW DELHI; 
h ra 6,907 (saka) 

3 
(k) "public financial institutions" mean& any of the follow-
ing institutions, namely:-
(i) the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of 
7 of 1913.5 
India Limited, a company formed and registered under the Com-
panies Act, 1913; 
15 of 1948. 
18 of 1964. 
62 of 18M. 
2 of 19M. 
2 of 1934. 
65 of 1951. 
10 
(ii) the Industrial Finance Corporation of India establish-
ed under section 3 of the Industrial Finance CorpW'ation Act, 
1948; 
(iii) the Industrial Development Bank of India, establish-
ed under section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of riuiia 
Act, 1964; 
(iv) the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India establish-
ed under section 3 of the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of 
India Act, 1984; 
15 (v) such other institutions as the Central Government may, 
by notification, specify: 
Provided that no institution shall be so specified unless it 
has been established or constituted by Or under any Central 
Act, or not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share 
20 capital of such institution is held Or controlled by the Central 
Gdvernment or by anyone or mMe of the institutions mentioned 
in sub-clauses (i) to (iv) or partly by the Central Government 
and partly by one or more of the institutions mentioned in sub-
clauses (i) to (iv); 
\ 
(l) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India consti-
tuted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India ·Act, 1934; 
(m) "Scheduled Bank" means a bank for the time being includ-
ed in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(n) "scheduled industry" means any of· the industries specified 
for the time being in the First Schedule to the Industries (Deve-
lopment and Regulation) Act, 1951; 
(0) "sick industrial company" means an industrial company 
(being a company registered for not less than seven y~ars) 
which has at the end of any financial year accumulated losses equal 
35 to or exceeding its entire net worth and has also suffered cash 
losses in such. financial year and the financial year immediately pre-
ceding such financial year. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause-
(i) "cash loss" means loss as computed without providing 
40 for depreciation; 
45 
(ii) "net worth" is the sum total of the paid-up capital 
and free reserves; 
(iii) "free reserves" means all reserves credited out of 
the profits and share premium account but does not include re-
serves credited out of re-evaluation of assets, write back of de-
preciation provisions and amalgamation; 
(p) "State level institution" means any of the following insti-
tutions, namely:-

:r..t.ab-
liahment 
of Board. 
4 
(i) State Financial Corporations established under. sec-
tion 3 or section 3A and institutions notified under .ection 46 
of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951; 43 of 1951. 
(ii) State industrial development corporations registered 
under the Companies Act, 1956; 5 1 of 1958. 
(iii) such other institutions, beini companies and not being 
public financial institutio~s, el)gaged in the development . or 
financing of industrial undertakings, as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification, specify: 
Provided that no institution shall be so specified unlelS not less 10 
than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share capital thereof is held 
by any State Government or GQvernrn~nts or by any inlltitution or 
institutions mentioned in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) or. partly by one or 
more public financial institutions or institutions mentioned in sub-
clauses (i) and (ii) and partly by one or more State Governments. 15 
(2) (0) Words and expressions used and not defined in thi; Act 
shall have the meanings, if any, respectively assigned to them in the 
Companies Act, 1856. 1 of 1958. 
(b) Words and expressions used but not defined either in this 
Act or in the COmpanies Act, 1956 shall have the meanings, if any, :lO 1 of 1958. 
respectively assigned to them in the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951. 65 of 1951. 
(3) Any reference in this Act to any other enactment or any pro-
vision thereof, shall, in relation to an area in which such enactment 
or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the 25 
corresponding ·law Or the relevant provision of the corresponding 
law, if any in force in that area. 
CHAPrER II 
BOARD AND APPELLA'n AumoRITY FOR INDtrSTlUAL AND fuA¥CIAL 
RIlooNSTBUCTIOX ~~o 
4. (~) With eilect from sucla lllate as the Central Govemment 
may. by netifieatioa, appoint, tbere .hall beestablisbed • Board to 
be known... the ''Board lor Indutrial and Financial Beeonlltnu:-
tion" to e:.:erci.. the jurisdiction aad powers and diaeharge the 
_ctins and duties eoaferred 01' imposed on the BoanI by or lIu.er 35 
this Act. 
(2) 'lhe Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than 
two and not more than fourteen other Members, t~ beappoiDted by 
the Central Government. 
(3) The Chairman and other Members of the Board sball be 40 
persons who are or have .been or are qualified to be Hirh Court 
Judges, or persons of ability, integrity and standing who have $pecial 
knowle~ge of, and professional experi~nce of not less than twenty 
years in science, technol!JGY, economics, banking indU'StfY, law, ~bdur 
matters, indtmtrial finance, industrial manJlgement, industrial recOlns- 45 
trumon, administration, investment, accountancy, marketing Or any 
other matter, the special lmowledge of, or professional experience 
in wl:lich, wo1.1ld ·In. the opinion of the .Central Government JJe use-
ful to the Board. 

5 
10 
15 
20 
5 
I. (1) The Central Government may bY':Botilcation, eonstitute, 
with effect hom sueh date as may be specified thereia, an appellate 
authority to be called the "Appellate Authority for industr!al aIld 
Financial Beeonstruction" consisting of a Chairman and DOt more 
than three other Members, to be appointed by that Government, for 
hearing appeals against the orders of the Board UDder this Act. 
(2) The Chairman of the Appellate Authority shall be a per-
son who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or who is or 
has been a Judge of a High Court for not less than five years. 
(3) A member of the Appellate Authority shall be a person 
whd is 01" has beeD a Judge of a High Court or who is or has been an 
ofticer not below the rank of a Secretary to the Government of 
India or who is or has been a Member of the Board for not less 
than three years. 
6. (1) Before appointing any person as the Chairman or other 
Member, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that the per-
son does not and will not, have any such financial or other int~rest 
as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions· as such Member. 
(2) The Chairman and every other Member shall hold office 
for such period, not exceeding ftve years, as may be specified by the 
Central Government in the order of his appointment, but shall be 
eligible for reappointment: 
Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairman or 
other Member after he bas attained the age of sixty-five years. 
(3) Notwithstandihg anything contained in sub-section (1), a 
Member may-
(a) by writing under his hand and addressed to the Central 
Government resign his office at any time; 
(b) be removed from his office in aecordance 'With the provisions 
of section 7. 
(4) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal of the Chairman 
or any other Member under sub-section (3) or otherwise shall be filled 
by fresh appointment. -
(5) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the oftlce of 
35 the Chairman by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, Neb one 
of the Members as the Central Government may, by notUic:etkm, autho-
rise in this behalt shall act as the Chairman till the date OIl which a 
new Chairman, appointed in accordance with the provisiQns of this Act 
to fill s~ch vacancy, enters upon his office. 
40 (6) WMn the ChairlDa!1 is 'UDIlble to dise~ his :functions 
0wi.Dg to abteDee, ilJJ'less or lIllY other cause, sUdl one of the Members 
as the Chairman may authorise in writing in this behalf, shall. dis-
charge the functions of the Chairman; untiltbe date on whieh. the 
Chairman resumes his duties. -
45 ~1) The .!aries ami aDbWIIIIeeII payable .. ad tile -8tIaer ..... and. 
ee. .... -.t ...... ., tile CIJairIua ... otJ.r Me_._ ...... be ..oJa 
.. may be pr.eiW: 
Consti-
tution of 
Appellate 
Aufho-
rity. 
Tenn of 
Oftlce, 
condi-
tions of 
service, 
etc., of 
Chdrman 
and 
other 
MC'm-
l;"T!>. 

'Removal 
of Mem-
b,·I.I; frolll 
office ,in 
ct:T1.aiD 
circum-
stances. 
Sf'tre_ 
tary, 
officers 
and 
other 
emplo-
Y(1!S of 
Board or 
Appel. 
late 
Autho-
rity. 
6 
Provided that. neither the salary and aHowances nor the other terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairman or any other Mein~ shall 
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment 
(8) The Chairman and every other Member shall before entering 
upon his office, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form 5 
set out in the Schedule to this Act 
(9) The Chairman or any other Member ceasing to hold office as 
such shall not hold any appointment or be connected with the man-
a~ement or administration in any campany in relation to which any 
matter has been the subject matter of consideration before the Board 10 
or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority. for a period of five 
years from the date on w;hiCh he ceases to hold such office. 
7. (1) The Central Government may remove from office any Mem-
ber, who--
(4) has been adjudged, as insolvent, or J 5 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in tbe opinion of 
the Central Government, involves moral turpitude, or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a 
Member. or 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 20 
affect prejudicially his functions as a Member, or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in 
office prejudicial to the public interest. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) no' 
Member shall be removed from his office on the ground specified in 25 
clause {d) or clause (e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court on 
a reference being made to: it in this behalf by the Central Government, 
has on an inquiry held by it in accordance with such procedure as it may 
specify in this behalf, reported that the Member ought, on such grounds, 
to be removed. 30 
8. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the 
Board and a Secretary (by whate'ver name called) to the AptJellate 
Authority to exercise and perform, under the cODtrol of the ,Chairman, 
such powers an~ duties as may be prescribed or as may be ipecified by 
the Chairman. 
(2) Subject to such restrictions and' conditioDs as may be pres-
eribed, the Board or, as the case may' be, the Appellate Authority may 
appoiat sueh other oIieers and employees as may be necessary for 
the efficieDt performance 'of its functions. 
35 
(3) ~he eaJari. and aUowaneet payable to and the conditioas of ser- 40 
vice of the SeeretarJ and other omcen aDd employees ,of the Board aad 
the Appellate Authority shall be such as may be pretCrllted: 

450111160. 
7 
. Provided that such Secretary, officer or othe: employee shall, before 
entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the 
farm set out in the Schedule. 
9. The salaries and allowances payaille to the Members and the 
5 adlDiniitrative eXpe8Ie1, iDe1udml' aJaries, allowaaees and pension, pay-
able to or in respect of the olieers aad other employees of th~ Board 
and the Appellate Authority shall be delrayed DOt of tbe eoaioudated 
Fund Qf India. 
( 
10. No act or proceeding of the Board or, as the case may be, the 
10 Appellate Authority shall be questioned on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Board or 
the Appellate Authority or any defect in the appointment of a person 
acting as a Member of the. Board or the Appellate Authority. 
11. The Chairman and other Members and the officers and other em-
15 ployees of the Board and the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code. 
12. (1) The jurisdiction powers and authority of the Board· or the 
Appellate Authority may be e](ercised by Benches thereof. 
Salaries, 
etc., be 
defrayed 
out of the 
Col18oli. 
dated· 
Fund of 
India. 
Vacancies, 
etc., not 
toinvali-
date pro-
ceedings 
of Board 
and 
Appellate 
Autho-
rity .. 
Members 
andstaft 
ofBoarQ 
and 
Appellate 
Autho-
rity to 
be public 
servants. 
Conatitu~ 
tionot 
Benches 
110 (2) The Benches Ahall be canstituted by the Chairman and each of 
Bench shall consist of not less than two ~embers. 
(3) If the Members of a Bench di1fer in opinion on any point, they 
shall state the 'p'oint or points on which they differ and the case shall be 
referred by the Chairman of the Board or,as the case may be, the Appel-
115 late Authority for hearing on such point or points by one or more other 
Members and such point or pOints shall be decided according to the 
opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case includ-
ing those who first heard it. 
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board or, as the 
30 case may be. the Appellate Authority, shall have powers to regulate---
. (a) ,the procedure and conduct of the business; 
(b) the procedure of the Benches, including the places at Which 
the sittings' of the Benches shall be held; 
. (c) the delega'tion to one or more members of sueh powers or 
35 fUnctions as the Board or, 8s the case may be, the Appellate Autho· 
rity may specify. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going provisions, the poi.vers of the Board or, as the case may be, the 
Appellate Authority, shall include ~he power to determine the extent to 
Boaril or 
Appellate 
Autho-
rity. 
Proce-
dureot 
Board 
and 
Appellate 
Autho-
rity. _ • 
40 which' persons interested or -claiming. to- be interested in the subject 
matter of .8ny proceeding petore it may be allOWed to be present or to be 
heard, eithe.r by themselves or by their representatives 01' to cross-exa· 
mine witnesses or otherwise to take part in the proceedings. 

a 
I) of 1008. 
CHAPTER III 

"1 
1 of 1966. 
h) ;1:"1'1'1'" 
;j J I,., 1-,,11 
lHJ( .',;-J...;nt 
'Hil HI; 
.}i ... UlO 1 
'\n 11',11 
·'fi;l/I'rl! 
Inquiry 
into 
working of 
sick iBolus-
'rilli co. ~ 
pllnies. 
""4,'j 
b",. 
i 01 filiI t·.i ~ h 
~:'.)~ 1I' .. d }.' 

Powers (If 
Board to 
make suit-
able order 
on the 
comple-
tion of 
inquiry. 
Pre- • 
paration 
and 
sanction of 
schemes. 
10 
1'1. \1) If after making an inquiry und~r section 16, the, Board is 
satisfied that a company has become a sick industrial company, the Board 
shall, after considering all the relevant facts and circu~stances of the 
case, decide, as soon as may be by order in writing. whether it is prac-
ticab\e for the company to make its net worth positive within a reaSOll- 5 
able time. 
(2) If the Board decides under sub-section (1) that it is practicable 
for a sick industrial company to make its net worth positive within a 
reasonable time, the Board, shall. by order in writing and subject to such 
l'estrictions or conditions as may be specified in the order, give such time 10 
to the company as it may deem fit to mak~ its net worth positive. 
(3) If the Board decides under sub-section (1) that it is not prac-
ticable for a sick industrial company to make its net worth positive with-
in a reasonable time and that it .is necessary or exp~ient in the public 
interest to adopt all or any of the measures specified in section 18 in l'e- 15 
lation to the said company it may, as soon as may be, by order in writ-
ing, direct any operating agency ~pecifted in the order to prepare, hav-
ing regard to such guidelines as may be specified in the order, a scheme 
oroviding for such measures' in relation to such company, 
(4) The Board may,- :.10 
(a) if any of the restrictions .or conditions specified in an order 
made under sub-section (2) are not complied with by the com-
pany concerned, review such order on a reference in that behalf 
from any agency referred to in sub-section (2) of section 15 or on its 
own motion and pass a fresh order in respect, ot such company under 25 
sub-section (3); 
(b) if the operating agency specified in an order made under 
sub-section (3) makes a submission in that behalf, review such 
order and modify' the order in such manner as it may deem approp-
ri~. ~ 
18. '(1) Where an order is made under sub-section (3) of section 17 
in relation to any sick industrial company, the operating agency sp-
ecifted in the order shall ,prepare, as expeditiously as possible and 
ordinarily within a period of ninety days from the date of'such order, 
a scheme with r'!Spect to such company providing for anyone or, 35 
more of the following measures;' namely: _ 
- • (4) the reconstruction, revival or rehabilitation of the sick 
industrial company; , 
(b) the ,proper mana'gent~nt' of < the skJt ,i~dlls,trial company 
by change in, or take over of, management of the 'sick industrial ,~o 
company; ,,' 
(c) the amalgamation of 'the, sick industrial company, with 
any other industrial company (referr~d to in this section as 'trans-
feree industrial company'); 
(d)', the sale or le.Se of a part or whole' ot any jndustrial 45 
undertaking. Qf the sitkindustr~l cQmp~y,; 
(e) such other preventive. ameliorative and' ';erJiedial meRsurc~' 
as may be appropriate; 
(t) such .inc1dent~ •. consequentiaJ oi'stippiem'ental measures 
as may be necessary 01' expedient ih;,c'OrlJ'i.eetion with qr rdr',the pur- 5n. 
pgses of the me~$ures speQ1ftfJd in ctQ~!Ses (a) to (er\~ ,_,:'1 

It 
(2) ~e scheme relerred to in sub-section (1) may provide tor allY 
one· or more of the ,following, namely:-
(a) the constitution, name and registered office, the capi.tal, 
assets, powers, rights, interests. authorities and privileges, duties 
5 and obligations of the sick industrial company or, as the case may 
be, af the transferee industrial company; 
10 
15 
!olO 
lZ5 
35 
(b) the transfer to tpe transferee industrial company of the 
business, properties, assets and liabilities of the sick industrial rom-
pany on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the scheme; 
(c) any change in the Board of Directors, or the appointment of 
a new Board of Directors, of the sick industrial company and the 
authority by whom, the manner in which and the other terms and 
conditions on which, such change or apppintment shall be made and 
in the case of appointment of a new Board of Directors or of aoy 
director, the period for which sucn appointment shall be macie; 
(d) the alteration of the memorandum or articles of association 
of the sick industrial company or, as the case may be of the trans-
feree industrial company for the purpose of altering the capital 
structure thereof or for such other purposes as may be necessary to 
give effect to the reconstruction or amalgamation; 
(e) the continuation by, or against, the sick industrial company 
or, as the case may be, the transferee indUstrial company of any 
action or other legal proceeding pendin~ against the sick industrial 
company immediately before the date of the order made under sub. 
section (3rof section 17; 
(f) the reduction of the interest or rights which the shareholders 
have in the sick industrial cQmpany to such extent as the Board 
considers necessary in the interests of the reconstruct!on, revival or 
rehabilitation of ~he s.ick industrial company or for the maintenance 
of the business of th'! sick industrial company; 
(g) the allotment to the shareholders of the sick industrial com-
pany, of shares· in the sick industrial C'9mpany or, as the case may be, 
in the transferee indll'Strial company and where any sharehold~r 
claims payment in cash and not allotment of shares, or wliere it is 
not possible to allot shares to any shareholder the payment of cash 
to those shareholders in full satisfaction of their claims-
(i) in respect of their interest in shares in the sick industrial 
company before its reconstruction or amalgamation; or 
,(ii) where' 8\reh interest has been reduced under clause (f) 
40 in respect of their interest in shares as so reduced; 
(h) any other terms and conditions for the ~()nstruction nr 
amalga~atiQ~ ot t.b.~ ~~~ iIlqu~t:riaJ company; 

ib 
'011, 11'1 (lflsiil84 Of'Hfhel '1hc:Ha'tffM"'iii1d~trtr'lorl'JlhWl1~jfa 9'.6ldd~ial 
company free from all encumb~ 8tRtVi'fiI!la!tfiltAtk W"u?~~ 
pany or other such encumberances and liabilitiel as may be specified 
!" ,-,..,:,to.ffit r~a~ pI'1Icd~"stiuh; ~.htfP :,' I" I:l.'p'" "':,i I ttl 
. Ht,rf-; ~;-".~~'.:tJ·)li lrl:t,;" iti1nd~'I!; ~d, '~I_': :i .. ,·~d,ti': ,·~r'}liiliq . d·);,,~'· 
!.:.n :' c(;)"~:thOdi'ot~~r~iI~~'f':'r;lJi~~: ;~~1b ~j_if!e=~~9g. of 5 
the sick industrial company ~uFas ~ PU~bC auctIon or by mvitIllg 
,)1'il t~?de~'~~~I~ ~?Ji;iW~!~~~.f1!'i~~fll~~jm~~ ,b,e ,~~~~i'~~;li"a~~ I for" the manner cal. pUOUCl ereI°r., 'j I . ' /,(., I ./;;"" fl,!")-:J;,"),:l )/.'Ir:~" ,,~ .. )l,':dIIJ;! ""11; ",),';-:1; ,I'!"t/"i',"':,,'j(/ ,;;',", r:,I; 
l!:'i: 1·) '{t);;fol'icf(l~rlciliedtil.':)~offi~dl!Jaainikili?~of6'j,Te~Jedtif ~'~hitis as . 
;iWfY'Jb~(:n~~t!$~a~'Jt'6J:~~~({6(t~ ii?W tke;jr~bo1i~~~U8H of'Jatri~gi~tilln .~ 
or other measures mentioned in the scheme are fully and effectively 
!~t:iiP.fi«~~~ P.Jl~,)rJ;I-~lf 'i~1 llil .• !Jl:I~:'·'(I!·dl: ',j. : •• ,!.q:.:"\' ~i .. ';1:- !",', 
~.n;i'd ~ldJ 1" ",d '!.ht:! 'I; f·;· \ ~.t1f1 ~;I. "I.: '-:1.>'1';"" i';; Lt.·.!'; ;:j :~ 'i': ·H~.! I': 
,; , iq (;.1) (1$ A!~o*P!t j of1th81~e 'p!epMed !br; ,tlle BoiIidlliIRill',1re1 lent, 
itt d ....... ~rthal sn-dDtl_!iaJ'Dqll~ 8ml~ the' otaeNtiJqJ1a"'ytland in 
the case of amalgamali08Jjr,_1_C11:o ·1ther.inlDderee,·tncb8ltnal1wlbpany.,; and *p 
any other industrial company concerned in the amalgamation for sug- . 
g.~" an,d 1 P~4~,~~i~~~ ~~! :an~\ i~J!~~, s\lch, ))~r.i?r~ l ~s.t~~. Bp.~rd may 
sr'F.~ "ftt 'l!.:.I~,~-;.l'· : .• ;rt···,:.~·: ~J· •• ~·)~:· ... ,.t:.:.:~ .. );~ ."\.; .,; ... ~: ~""" .. ~.~ ,'I 
"'.:(4)Vl'He"sc1'reme,ShaM1tfhitutler·'M IIlnt,·tNIMcWilf. sObri,ldi.s"')!inW be, I. 
by the Board r·{tiereitliftdf' teNMi4itto 1i1t"JtHej 'tiIfti~tt~ti~i;scti~'J" and 
shall come into force on such date as 'the, ~oard may ~pecify in this IbehiHth (\: .. I.,! . , :f' , ~: ." j r ~ :' ~ ,.! ( : it: ~ j I t i·. ~ . !' ~ d;, .. ,: ;,: i ( I 
-p, '~" d"J\ll~-·:t,':ir~i '!') p.,:j "fi" J',"":"~' L '1·1./t ) 'jl:l.q I' 
I ; ,PPI'JriIh~"""t di."t dat8 Wi.yjBe'~tk~ fbl"'RifteH!6t provisions 40 
of the scheme. :!,."1I',;;r·,Ijo'I" ... ,~.,.,,,,(; 'II J''''''ll''1 't i ,',,{; '; -, I ':"l'.'), ;Ii r'l 

1 of 1'56. 
~nt, ,:.i '(l 
;.jJIl; 1(1 (!i.' 
I "1.1Wt.nt 
\'n .. ,QH,lt:. 
;.,n;.'.: '')'1(. 
I ~I (.C"'."':.i,j 
,1"'11111'" 
v'It)'n~'I"IIi 
.J'!) 
Rehabilita-
tion by 
elvin" 
ftnan-
cial 8811110 
lance. 
.q'.fU 

W'indana 
up ot BWk 
lalhutrial 
company. 
Operatin, 
ap"" to 
prepare 
complete 
banntory, 
etc. 
801penaion 
of le,al 
pro-
eeecUnlll, 
cont_", 
etc:. 
38. (1) Where the Board, after making inquiry under s~ction 16 and, 
alter cODl:lidel'auc.m of all the relevant facts apd circumstances and after 
giving an opportunity of being heard to all' concerned parties, is of opi-
nion that it is just and equitable that the sick industrial company should 
be wound up. it may record and forward its,..opinion to the concerned 5 
High Court. ' 
(2) The High Court shall, on the basis of the opinion of the Board. 
order winding up of the sick industrial company and may proceed and 
cause to proceed with the winding up of the sick i!ldustrial company in 
aecordance with the provisions of the Companies Act. 1956. 10 1 of 19.56. 
- (3) For the purpose of winding up of the said industrial com-
pany, the High Court may appoint any officer of the operating agency, 
if the operating agency gives i~ consent,. as the liquidator of the sick 
industrial company and the officer so appointed shall for the purposes of 
the winding up of the sick industrial company,be deemed to be, and 15 
have all the powers ,of, the official liquidator under the Companies Act, 
1956. 1 of 19.56. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (3), the Board may cause to be, sold the assets 9f the sick in-
dustrial company in such manner as it may deem fit and forward the sale 20 
proceeds to the High Court for orders for distribution in accordance with 
the provisions of section 529A, and Qther provisions of the Companies 
Act, 1956. 
21. Where, in relation to an inquiry or scheme, the circumstances so 
require, the Board may, through any operating agency, cause to be pre- 15 
pared-
(CI) with respeCt to an industrial company, a complete inventory 
of-
(i) all assets and liabilities of whatever nature; 
(ii) all books. of account, registers, maps, plans, records, go 
documents of title or ownership of property and all other docu-
merits of whatever' nature relating ~heret~; 
(b) a list of shareholders and a list of creditors showing separa-
tely in the list of creditors, the secu,red credi'tOrs and the unsecured creditors;' >, • ,., "'.'" , 35 
(c) a valuation re~rt in r~t of th~ slIares and assets in order 
to arrive at 'the reserve price f~r tQe s(lle of a part .or ,whole df the 
.industrial undertaking of the company or for fixation of, the lease 
rent or share exchange ratio; 
(d) an estimate of reserve price, lease rent or share exchange 4D 
ratio; and 
(e) proforma accounts, where no up-to-date audited accounts, 
are availaHie. ' 
,22'. (1) Where an inquiry under section 16 is initiated or any scheme 
referred to in section 17 is under consideration of th~ Board or where 45 
a sanctioned scheme is under implementation, notwithstanding anything 
10f 1956. 
contained in the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law or the memoran- 1 ot 1956. 
dum and articl~ of association of the sick industrial company or 'any 
other instrument having effect under the said Act or other law no· pro-
ceeding for the winding up of such sick industrial company or for any 50 
proceedings for execution. djstress, or the llke against any of the propertlet 
• 

1 of 1956. 
1011956. 
, 
15 
of the sick ind~trial company Qr for the appointment of receiver in 
respect thereof, shall lie or be ·proceeded with further, except with the 
consent of the Board, . 
(2) Where the management of the sick industrial company is taka 
5 over or changed, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies 
Act, 1956 or any other law or in the memorandum 'and artiC;Jes Of' asso-
ciation of such company or any instrument having effect under the said 
Act or other law-
JO 
(al it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such company 
or any other person to nominate or appoint any person. to bea 
director of the company; 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of 
such company shall be given effect to unless approved by the Board. 
(3) During the period of consideration of any ~cheme under sedim 1'3 
15 or where any such scheme is sanctioned thereunder, for due implemen" 
tation of the scheme, the Board. may by order declare with respect to 
the sick industrial company concerned that the operation of all or any 
of the contracts, assurances ot property, agreements, settlementB,awards, 
standing orders or other instrum~ts in force. to which such sick indus-
20 trial company is a party or which may be applicable· to such sick indus-
trial company immediately before the date· of such order, slJ,j11 ~ 
main suspended or that all or any of the rights, privileges, obligations 
and liabilities accruing or arising thereunder before the said date, shall 
remain suspended or shall be enforceable with such adaptations and in 
25 such manner as may be specified by the Board: 
Provided that such declaration shall not be made for a period ex-
ceeding two years which may be extended by one year at a time so, how-
ever, that the total period shall not exceed seven years in the aggregate. 
(4) Any declaration made under sub-section .(3) with respect to a ·sick 
30 industrial company shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law the memorandUm and articles 
of association of the company or any instrument having effect under the 
said Act or other law or any agreement or any decree or order of a court, 
1;ribunal, ofticer or other authority or of any 'subinission, settlelllent or 
35 standing order and accordingly,- . 
(4) any remedy for ·the enforcement of any . right., privilege, 
obligation and liability suspended or modified by such declaration, 
and all proceedings relating· thereto pending before any court, t.ribu-
rlal, oftlcer or other authority 'Shall remain stayed or be continued 
subject to such declaration; and .. 
(b) on the declaration ceasing to have effect-
(i) any right, privilege, obligation or ~ability so. tem~ing 
suspended or modified, shall become revived and enforceable as 
if the declaration had never been made;' and .. _ 
<:, 
45 (ii) any proceeding so remaining stayed shall 'be proce.edecl 
with, subject to the provisions of any law which may thlril be 
in force, from the stage which had been reachedwheri the pro-
ceedings became stayed. ..., .... -,.-
(5) In computing the period of limitation for the enforcement of any 
50 right, privilege, obligation or liability, the period diiliigwmch it or the 
remedy foa- the enforcement . thereof remains suspended under ttys see-
tion shall be excluded, 

Loa of 50 
per cent 
net 
'WOldI by 
iDClUltriai 
compuiel. 
Mill_ace 
proceed-
inII· 
• 
16 
PaOCDDINGS IN CASE OF POTENTIALLY SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANDs" 
MIsn:AsANCE PaocaDIlfGS, APPMLS AND MISCI:LLANIlOUS 
!s. (1) If the accumUlated losses of an industrial company, as at the 
end of any fthanetal year (here1na:ftei. referred to as the ,relevant flnanctal 5 
year) have resulted in erosion of :fifty per cent. or more of itS peak net, 
worth during the immediately preceding fiye financial year,-
(~) the company shall, within a period of sixty days from the 
ci8te (hereinafter referred to as the relevant date) of finalisatiOn of 
the duly audited accounts of the company for the relevant financial 10 
year-
(i) report the fact of such erosion to the Board; and 
(ii) hold a general meeting of the shareholders of the 
company far considering such erosion; . ~ 
(b) . the Board of ~ectors shall, at least twenty-one days before 15 
the "date on which the m.eeting under sub-clause (ii) of claUSe (a) 
is held, fQI'Warci, to every member of the company a report as to 
such erosion and the causes for such erosion; . ... . 
(0') the company may, by ordinary NsQlution passed at the 
meeting held under clause (a) remove a d1rectGr (being a dintctor 20 
a~iDted by. the memberso£ the company) and fill the vaeancy 
created by such removal, SO far as may be, in accordance with the 
preeedure provided in sub-aeetioBs (2) to (6) of section 284 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, 1 of 1956 • 
.. 
(2) A director removed under sub-section (1) shall not be entitled to 25 
any compEmsation or d~mages for termination of his appointment as 
director or of any appointment tenDinating with that as director. 
(3) If default is made· in complyiDg with the provisions of tbiJI 
sactiOD~ every director or ether oftlcer of the company who is indefault 
shall ~ punishable with iIQprisomnent which shall not be less thaIl six 30 
months but which may extend to two y88ft and with fine. 
z:4. (1) If, inthe'coUflie of serutiny or imp1etnentation of any scheme 
Or proposal, il-~ Lppears to the Beard that any person who bas faken part in' the 
oromotion, formation or mstlagt1t1ent of the sick inClustrial company ~lI'. ita 
unifertaking, mcluding any past tH present director, manager or otlicer 0': em- 35 
rloyee of the sick inollstrial company-
(a) has misappli'!d. or ·retained, or become liable or accountable 
for, any money or property of the sick industrial company; or 
(b) has been guilty of any. misfeasance, malfeasance or non-
feuance or breach of trust in relation to the sick industrial companY'40 
tbe BtlIud' may direct him to rep., or testDrc the mone.y or pr.rty or any 
part thereof. with or without interest, as it thinks just, or to cOntribute 
suchwm'to the assets of the sick industIial oompany or the other person 
entitled. thereto by w:.y, of cOJapeusation in respect of the misapplication', 
retainer, misfeasance·. OJ" tn-t.h oJ. 1nzst, as the Board thinks just, anti 45 
aIM JePOrt the matter· .. the ·c..tral Qavernuumt for any other aetiGD 
which that Government may deem fit. 

. 
(Z) No directions al\all be giveJl ~y ~he Bow under this 8~aIi ~ss 
lIuch ,person ~ heeD given an opptUllity for ma1Qng bissubiDi...-. 
, '. , .'.' I. " •. ,. 
(3) This section shall apply notwithstanding that the matter is one for 
which the persoomay bt ~y liable. . 
5 25. (1) Any pel'$On aggrieved by an order of the Board made under 
this Act may, within forty-five days from the date on which a copy of the 
o.rder is issued to him, prefer an appeal to the Appellate Autho,rity: 
Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain a~y appeal after 
the IBid period of forty-fived~s but D.O.t $Iter aixty WS frcun. the date 
10 aforesaid if it is satisfied that 'the appel.llpU was prevented by sulle4ent 
ca_ from filing the appeal in tim.e. 
(~ On receipt of an appeal under sub-section a), the .AppeUate 
Authority may, after giving an opportunity to the appellant to be heard, 
if he so d.esires, and after makin.g such further inquiry as if deems fit, 
15 confirm, modUy or set aside the order appealed against. 
26. No order passed or proposal made under tills 'Act shall be appealablG! 
except as provided therein and no civil court shaD ha~ juriMlic:tinn' in respect 
of any matter which the Appelltte AUthoriiy or the Board is empowered by, or 
1!nder, this Act to Od.cmline aD(- 00 injunction sMll lte granted: ttylDY court 
Ie Or other authori~' in rr~r.ect ri any action taken or to be, taken hi: 'pursUimccj 
of any power conferred by or under this Act. ' 
27. The Board may, by general 0( special ordor, delegate, !ubject to 'SUCh 
conditioD'S and limitation, if any, as may be specified in the ord8r" to any 
Member for Secretary or other officer or employee of the Board or other 
25 persons authorised by the Board to mallage ~. industrial company or 
industrial undertaking or any operating ~ency. such powers and duties 
(except the powers and duties under sub-secticlns (2) .nd (4) o~ section 
16, lIlection 17, sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 19, 'Sub:"section (1) sub-
section (4) of section 20, sub-section (3) of section ~ and sectiton '241 
30 under this Act as it Dlay deem neceuary. 0 
28. (1) The Board shall fumish from time to'time to the Celttral 
Government such returns as the' Central Go.vemment may require. ' 
(2) The Board may, ,for the purpose of efficient dtscharp of its 
functiQns und~r this Act, collect from, or furnish to-
35 (a.) t~ C~tral Government, 
(b) the Reterw Bank, 
. . (c) the scheduled bank or any other Bank, 
(d) the public ,financial institution, or 
(e) the State-level institution, 
40 fiu.ch information as it may consider useful for tile purpose in such man-
ner and with~ suQb. time as it Inay think fit. 
~. (1) The Board or any oPerating aeEmcy;on being directed by the 
Board may'. in order to take into custody or undP.r its control aUpra-
perty, effects and actionable claimR to which a sick Industrial,com1)8!lY 
45 fs or a'PJ)ears to be entitled. request, in ~ttn~, the Chief' Metropolitan 
MaJlistrate or the District Ma~strate within whoie 1urisdiction any ~ 
perty, books of aceotmt C1r any other dOcument. ot such sick induatrlal 
'QI11IIIIl1ina . 
., ....... 
~ 
ad iDfor-
matioa. 
Powr to __ tho 
..... 
of CIHef 
Metropoli-
tan 
MlIIIIlra. 
and 

ProtectiOn 
of action 
tatn. 
iDpd 
faith. 
E6ct of 
IIIe Act 
OD other 
I ..... 
. . 
coiitP'ty be situate or be found, to take poaseasion thereof,· and the Chief 
~litan Magistrl!~ or the Distriet Magistrate, as the cue may be, 
shall, on such request being made to him,-
(i) take possession of such property, books of account or other 
dOCUments; and 5 
'(ii) cause the same to be entrusted to the Board or the operating 
agency. 
(2) For the pul"pOSe of securing compliance with the provisionS of 
sub-section (1), the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Map 
trate may take or cause to be taken: such steps and use or cause to be used 10 
sueh force as may, in his opinion, be n8Celli8l"y. 
(3) No act. of the Chief Metropolitan. Magistrate of the District 
Magistrate done in pursuance of this section shall be called in question 
in any court or before any authority.OJ). any ground whatsoever. 
30. No suit OJ" other legal proceeding shan be against the Board or 15 
the Appellate~uM1OpW or the Chairman or any other Member, officer or 
other employee of the Board or the Appellate Authority, or operating 
agency or any other person authorised by the Board or the Appellate 
Authority to discharge any fwiction under this Act for any loss or 
damap caused or likely to be caused by any action which is in IOOd 20 
faith done or intended to be done in purSuance of this Act or any other 
l:aw or proviSion haVing. the force of law. 
31. Where a receiver or an official liquidator has been appointed in 
any .. ,proceeding pending immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, in any High Court for winding up of an industrial company such 25 
proceeding shall not abate but continue in that High Court. 
32. (1) The provisions of this Act and of any rules or schemes made 
thereunder .shall have etIect notwithstanding anything inconsistent there-
with contained in any otlrer taw except the provisions of the Foreign 
Exehmge Regulation Act, 1973 and Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) 30 -4, of 1973. 
Act,. 1976 for the time being in force or in the Memorandum or Articles 33 to 1978 
of Aasociation of an industrial company or in any other instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
(2) ~e there has beea under JUY scheme under tllis Act an amalp-
mation of a sick industr~1 cOJDpany with another company, the proviaioas 35 
of. seetion 7ZA ~of the Income-tax Act, 1961, shall, subject to the modift- 43 of 1961 
eatioDS that the power of the Central Government under that section may 
be exercised by the Boerd without any recOmmendation· by the speeifled 
authdy referred to in that section, apply in relation to such amalpma-
tiCIII as they apply in relation to the amal,amation of a ':company owning 40 
an industrial undertaking with another company. 
33. (l) Whoever violates the prov~sions of this Act !>r any s.an.ctioned 
scheme, or any order of the Board, or the Appellate Authority and 
whoever makes a false statement or gives false evidence to the Board or 
the Appellate Authority, shall be punishable with simple- imprisonment 45 
for a tenn which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
ftne. .-
(2) No cOurt shall take cognizance of any offeJ1ce under suh-section 
(1) except on a complaint in writing of the Secretary OJ" any such other 
ofticer of the Board or any such officer of an operating agency as may be 50 
au.thori~ in this behalf by the Board. 

K.. ~(l) Where any offence, punishable under this Act has been . Off~ bY committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was compuies. 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 
the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
5 be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained. in this sul>eection shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he' proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised aU due 
10 dtligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence punishable under this Act has been committed by a.company 
and it is proved that the offence has been conimitted with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
15 manager, 'Secretary or other officer of the company such director,manager, 
secretary or other ofticer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that oft'ence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
E.1."pl4n4tiDn.-Fo.r the purposes of this section,-
(II) "company" means any body corporate and includes a finn 
:10 or other associatido of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in ~ 
ftrm. . 
35. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision. of this Act 
or the rules, schemes Or orders made thereunder, the Central Govern-
25 ment may, by notification, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such notification shall be made by the Central Gov-
ernment ·after the expi,ry of a period of three years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President. 
36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
30 carrying out the provi~ions of this Act. 
(2) Tn particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the foUowiog ~atters, namely:-
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to and other -tet"IDs and condi-
tions of service of the C1Pairman and other Mem·bers under sub-section 
35(7) of section 6; 
(b) the powers which may be ex.eroised and the duties which may be 
performed by the Secretary to the Board or the Appellate Authority uDder 
sub-section (J) of section 8; ..... 
(c) the restrictions and conditiOns subject to which officers and 
40 employees may be appointed to the Board or the Appellate Authority 
under sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(d) the salaries and allowances and other oonditions of serYicc of 
the Secretary of tbe Board or the Appellate Authority lDlder sub-eectiton (3) 
of section 8; 
45 (e) the additional matters referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 13; 
(1) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
Po..- en 
mate ruloa. 

(a) &wry rule macNt under dlis Act sbaJI be laid, as IOOB as may be 
atter it is made, before each Bouse ofParliameJ;l1i, wWIe it is ill III. I., 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in oDe seasion 
or ill two or more St.lc-.ive,~ aDd. if, befoJre the expiry of the 
SMlion iJnIDediate)y ibUowing the session or the auocessive sessioftl 5 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making .. y' modification in the rule or 
bQij:l H~'Qaes agree tbat the l'ule sD.ould J;l.Ot be ~ ~e l'IJle .allall 
t~ter h,aveeifect ~ ill.uch mDdiIle4 ~~ ~ be Qf np enact;, .... 
t~ ca~ may be; so, ~Vle~, 'ti;alat ~Y*'l. ~atiQD 01' lU$~t 
shall be without prej.u4icf to the \'alidif;J 1>f ~i~ p"vi,oJlsJ.y ""0 
unde' that rull.!. 
THE S(lIE.I)ULJi 
[See sections 6 (8) and 8(3)] 
~N 01' '1'D>-.u'Y AJm SIQQaY 
I, """'" .. ' ...... '" .... , do hereby declare that I will faithfully, 15 
trqiyllnd to the best of ~y skill and ability, ex~te &Pod penorm the 
duties required of me as ~ ~~X.ber/Stt£retBty/o~ ofBeer or 
employ.ee of Ute BOIar4, for the Industrial and Fin~cial Reconst~~tion/the 
Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction and which pro-
perly re-Iate to the office or position held by me in or in relation to the 110 
I&id Boatd/Appellate Authority, 
I further declare that I will DDt communicate or allow to be com-
municated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information 
relating to the affairs of the B~rdl Appellate Authorlty, nor wiU I allow 
any such person to in~pect or have access to any books or documents 115 
belonging to or in possession of the Board I Appellate Authority or the 
businels of any person having any dealing with the said Board/Appellate 
Authority. ' 
Signature. 
Signed before me. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The ill effects of sickness . in industrial companies such as loss of 
production, loss of employment, loss of revenue to the Central and State 
Governments and locking up of investible funds of banks anc;! financial 
institutions are of serious concern to the 'Government and the Society at 
targe. The aoncetn of the Gove1'1Unetrt is accelltuated by the alarming 
thcrease in the incidence of sickness in industrial compaDies. It has been 
Mc:oFisecl that in order to fully utilise the productive i1imutrial assets; 
afford maximum protection of employment and optimize the use of the 
funds of the banks ahd financial institutions, jt .would be imperative to 
revt\te and i'eh'abilitate the potentially viable sick industrial companies 
as quickly as possible. It would also be equally -imperative to sal'fage the 
productive assets and realise the amounts due to the banks and .mancia1 
institutiol)s, to the extent PQssible, from the non-viable siek iiotdustrial 
companies through Uquidation of tbose companies. 
2. It has been the experience that the existing institutional arrange-
ments and procedures for revival and rehabilitation of potentially viable 
sick industrial companies are both inadequate and time-consuming. A 
multiplicity of laws and agencies makes the adoption of a co-ordinated 
approach for d~aling with sick industrial companies difficult. A need has, 
therefore, been felt to enact in public inter~st a legislation to provide 
for timl'ly detection of sickness in i-ndustrial companies and 'for expedi-
tious determination by a body of experts of the preventive, ameliorative, 
remedial and other measures that would need to be adopted with respect 
to such companies and for enforcement of the measures considered 
appropriate with utmost practicable despatch. 
3. The salient features of the Bill are-. 
(i) application of the legislation to the industries specifted in 
the First Schedule to the Industries (DevelopmeDtand Regulation) 
.Act, 1911, with the initial exception of the scheduled indUitry·relattDg 
to . ships and other vessels drawn by power, which may however be 
. brought Within the ambit of the legislation in due course; 
(ii) iden:tification of sickness in an industrial eompany, regIs-
tered for not less than seven years, on the basis of the symptomatic 
indices of cash losses for two consecutive financial years and accumu-
lated losses equalling or exceeding the net worth of the company as 
at the end of the second financial year; 
(iii) the onus of reporting sickness and impending sickness at 
the stage of erosion of fifty per' cent. or more of the net worth of 
an industrial company is being laid on the Board of DirectOrs of such 
company; where the Central Government or the Reserve Bank is 
satisfied that an industrial company has become sick, it may make a 
1.11 

22 
'. -'.-
reference to the Board; likewise if any State Government, scheduled 
bank or public financial institution having an interest in an 
industrial company is satisfied that the industrial comp3ny has 
become sick, it may also make a reference to the Board; 
(iv) E:stablishment of a Board' consisting of experts in various 
relevant fields with powers to enquire into and determine the inci-
dence of sickness in industrial companies and devise suitable reme-
dial measures through appropriate schemes or other proposals apd 
for proper'implementation thereof; 
(v) constitution of an Appellate Authority consisting of per-
son~ wh~ are or have been Supreme Court 'Judge~, senior High Court 
Judges and Secretaries to the Government of India. etc., for hearing 
appeals against the orders of the Board. 
4. The notes on clauses appended to the B,ill explain the various 
provisions of the, Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
VISHW ANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 6(3) 185-1. F-ii, dated the 20th August, 1985 
from Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, Minister of Finance to the Sec-
retary-General, Lok Sabhal. 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under clause (1). of article 117 read. with 
clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution, the introduction of the Sick 
Industrial Companies (Spe¢al Provisions) Bill, 1985 in Lok Sabha· and 
also recommends to Lok Sabha under clause (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitution, the consideration of 'the Bill. 

Notes on clD:u.ses 
Clause 1 deals with the short title, extent, commencement and: appli-
cation of the l~gislation. The enactment would, in the first instance, 
apply to all industries included in the First Schedule to the Industries 
(Development an~ Regulation) Act. 1951,' except the industry relating to 
ships and other vessels drawn by power which, may, however, be subse-
quently brought under the purview of the enactment by a notf'ft.cation 
issued by the Central Govemment in consultation with the Reserve Bank 
of India. . 
Clause 2 carries a declaration that the legislation is being enacted 
for giving effect toi the policy of the State towards securing the pr~nci­
pIes specified in clauses (b) and (e) of article 39 of the Constitution. 
Clause 3 contains definitions of the terms used in the legislation. Spe-' 
cia! mention may be made about the definition of the term "industrial' 
company" which means a company owned one or more industrial un~er­
takings; and the term "sick industrial company" which means an tndus-
trial company registered as company for not lees than seven :tears and 
has suffered cash losses for two consecutive financial years and at the 
end of the second of 'Such financial years has acc~mulated, losses equal 
or existing its net worth. 
Cl.ause 4 provides for the establishment of a Board consisting of a 
Chairman and not less than two and not mOre than fourteep. other 
Members being experts in various relevant fields to be appointed by the 
Central Government. 
Clause . 5 provides for the constitution of an Appellate Authority 
consisting of a Chairman and three other Members being. persons who 
are or have been Judges of the Supreme Court, Senior Judges of High 
Courts and the Secretaries to the Government of India. etc., to be appoint-
ed· by the Central Government. 
Clause 6 contains provisions rela.ting to the conditions on which the 
Central Government should be satisfied befor~ appointing a perlon as 
a ¥ember of the Board or the Appellate Authority; the tenure of the 
Members; resignation or removal of a Member; the mode of filling up of 
u vacancy and the fixation of salaries and allowances 'and prescription 
of other terms and conditions ot service of the M'!mbers. etc. 
Clause 7 deals with contingenci.es in which the Central Govern-
ment may remove a Member from the Board or the Appellate Authority 
and the contingencies in which the Ceptral Government may remove 
such Members only with the consent of the Supreme Court. 
Clause 8 provides for appointment by the Central Government of 
a. Secretary each to assist the Board and the Appellate Authority and! 
appointment by the Board and the Appellate Auhority of such other 

officers and employees as may be prescribed with such salaries and allow-
ances and other conditions of service as may be prescribed. 
Clause 9 provides for the salaries and allowances of the Mempers 
and the salaries, allowances, and pension of the Officers and employees 
of the Board and Appellate Authority to be defrayed out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of India. 
Clause 10 affords prot~tion for ,acts or proceedings of the Board 
or the Appellate Authority from being questioned merely on account of 
:my vacancy or defect in constitution of the Board or Appellate 
Authority. 
Clause 11 specifies that the Members, officers and other employees 
of the Board and the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be public 
servants. • 
Clause 12 provides for the Benches of the Board and Appellate 
Authority. 
Clause 13 empowers the Board and the Appellate Authority to regu-
late their own procedure and conduct of Business. 
Clause 14 lays down that the Board or the Appellate Authority shall 
be deemed to bea civil court for the purposes of certain provisions of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the indian Penal Code. 
Clause 15 lays down that 'a sick industrial company should· make a 
reference to the Board within sixty days from the date of finalisation of 
duly audited accounts or even Defore such finalisation if there are suffi-
cient reasons to form. the opinion that the company has become' sick. 
Where the ,Central Government or the Reserve Bank is satisfied that an 
industrial company has been sick, it may make a reference to the Board; 
likewise if any State Government, scheduled bank or pUblic financial 
institution having an interest in an industrial company is satisfied' that 
the industrial company has become sick, it may make a reference to 
the Board:. 
Clame 16 enables the Board on receipt of a reference under clause 15 
or otherwise to make or cause to be made an inquiry for the purpose of 
determ,ining whether the industrial company has become sick industrial 
company. 
Clause 17 empowers the Board to allow time to a sick industrial 
company to make its net worth positive within a specified period. If the 
Board decides that it is not practicable for the sick industrial company 
to make its net worth positive within a reasonable time, it may direct 
any public financial institution, designated as the operating agency, to 
prepare a scheme, for rehabilitatiOn of the company. 
Clause 18 provides for the operating agency, on being directed by 
the Board to prepare a scheme for reconstruction, revival, rehabilitation, 
change in or take over of management, amalgamation, sale or iease of a 
part' or the whole of any industrial undertaking of· the sick industrial 
company or any other prev~tive. ameliorative or revival measures. It 
also provides for eliciting objections and suggestions from the concerned 

companies on the draft schemes and for making mociift.cations, if any, 
and for sanctioning schemes. 
Clause 19 provides that where any rehabilitation schelIle involves 
provision of financial assistance or any other reliefs or concessions or 
sacrifies from the Central Government, a State Government, air bank or 
financial institution or State level institution or any other institution, 
authority or creditor, such scheme shall be referred to all concerned for 
consent. . 
Clause 20 provides that if the Board after making sufficient enquiry 
is of the opinion that it would be just and equitable to wind up the siele 
industrial company. it would forward its opinion to the concerned High 
Court for winding up of the company. The Board may, however, sell 
the assets of the company and forward the sale proceeds to the High 
Court for distribution in accordance with the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 1956. 
Clause 21 enables the Board, through an operating agency. to pre-
pare a complete inventory of all assets and liabilites, etc. 
Clause 22 provides for the suspension of legal proceedings, contracts, 
etc., with respect to certain sick industrial companies. 
Clause 23 lays down that an industrial company in which the accu-
mulated losses as at the end of any financial year have eroded fifty per 
cent. or more of the peak net worth during any of the preceding five 
financial years, shall report the fact of such erosion to the Board, within 
sixty days from the date of finalisation of th~ audited accounts.. Such 
indusrial company would also be required to hold a general meeting ot 
its shareholders for considering the erosion after forwarding a report of 
the causes of the erosion to every shareholder atIeast twenty one days 
before the date of the meeting. Change of any director other than a direc-
tor appOinted by the Central Government or a public financial institu-
tion, could be effected by an ordinary resolution passed at the meeting. 
Clause 24 provides f9r rectification of misfeasance, malfeasance, etc., 
and report of such matters to the Central Government. 
Clause 25 provides for a person aggrieved by an order made by the 
Board to appeal to the Appellate Authority. 
Clause 26 bars the jurisdiction of civil courts, except as provided in the 
Act against any matter falling within the purview of the Board or the 
Appellate AuthOrity. 
Cla.use 27 provides for delegation of certain powers of the Board. 
Cla.use ·28 provides for the Central Government to call for returns 
from the Board and for the Board to collect from or furnish to the Cen-
tral Government, Reserve Bank. any bank, public financial institution or 
State level institution, any information. 
Clause 29 prpvides for the Board or any operating agency to seek! 
tJv! assistance of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District 
Magistrate far taking possession of the property of a sick industrial 
company. 

-- ,. !Z6 
Clause 30 i~ the usual clause relating to the protection of action taken 
in good faith. 
Clause 31 lays down that if any receiver or official liquidator has 
been appointed in any winding up proceedings at the time of the com-
mencement of the legislation the proceedings shall continue' in the res-
pective High Courts. 
Clause 32 gives overriding effect to the provisions of the legislation 
ov~r all·other enactments except the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 
19'13 and the Urban -Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976. The 
pOwers of the Central Government under section 72A of the Incom~ tax 
Act, 1961 to give tax benefit to the transferee industrial company 
ill cases of amalgamation are coriferred on the Board. 
Clause 33 specifies the penalties for violation of the provisions of 
the legislation or sanctioned schemes or orders of the Board or Appellate 
Authority and for making Or giving false statement or evidence before 
the Board or Appellate Authority. 
Clause 34 provides that any offence comitted by a company and pun-
ishable under the legislation would cover the p~rsons in charge of 
company. 
Clause 35 is an enabling provision to remove diftlculties by the Cen-
tral Government up to a period of three years. 
C14u.se 36 confers on the Central Government the power to make 
eWes for carrying out the provisions of the legi$lation. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Board 
for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction with a Chairman and not 
less than two and not more than fourteen other Members to be appoin-
ted by the Central Government. ClaUse 5 provides for the constitu .. 
tion of the Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruc .. 
tion consisting of a Chairman and not more than three other Members 
to be appointed by the Central Government. Sub-clause (7) of clause 
6 provides #hat the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairman 
and other Members of .the Board anlt· the Appellate Authority shall 
be such as may be prescribed. As a person who is or has been a Judge 
of the Supreme Court is eligible to be appointed as the Chairman of the 
Appellate Authority and a person who is Or has been a Judge of a 
High Cdurt Or who is or has been an Officer not below the rank· of a 
Secretary to the Government of India, is eligible to be appointed as a 
Memb~r of the Appellate Authority, the pay and allowances of the 
Chairman and other Members of the Appellate Authority will require 
to be fixed commensurate with these eligibility criteria. It is expected 
that an expenditure of rupees eighty-four thousand would be iricurred, 
annually, towards the salary and allowances of the Chairman of the 
Appellate Authority at the maximum level of pay ·or rupees sevenly-
eight thousand, annually, at the minimum level of pay, An annual 
expenditure of rupees two lakhs and sixteen thousand is ~te~ to 
be incurred towards the salary and allowances of the Members of the 
Appellate Authority at the maximum levels of payor rupees one lakh 
and ninety-eight thousand at the minimum levels of pay. As persons 
who .are Or have been qualified to be High Court Judges may be ap-
pointed, among others, to be the Chairman or any other Member of 
the Board, the salary and allowances of the Chairman and other Mem-
ben; of the Board would have to be commensurate with the salary and 
allowances of the High Court Judges. Keeping in view these conside-
rations, it is expected that in the event of the Board consisting of one 
Chairman and fourtgen other Members,· an annual expenditure of rupees 
nine lakhs and ninety-six thousand would be incurred towards salary 
and allowances of the Chairman and the Members of the Board at the 
maximum levels of pay and rupees nine lakhs and six thousUmd at the 
minimum levels of pay. In the event of the Board consisting of the 
specified ~inimum number of one Chairman and two Members only .. the 
·annual expenditur'! towards salary and allowanceS of the Chairman and 
Members of the Board may be expected to: be rupees one lakh and thirty-
two thousand at the maximum levels of pay and rupees one lakh and 
twenty thousand at the minimum levels of pay. 
2. Under clause 8. the Central Government shall appoint a Secretar:v 
each to assist the Board and the Appellate Authority and the Board and 
the Appellate Authority may appoint such other officers and employees 
as may be necessary. The salary and allowances payable to the Sec-
'.27 

retary, other Officers and employees Of the Board or the Appellate 
Authority would be as prescribed. It is expected that on account of the 
f'alary and allowances of the Secretaries, 08icers and other employees 
of the Board and the Appellate Authority •. an annual expenditure of 
rupees twenty-six lakhs and twenty-one thousand would be in-
curred at the maximum levels of .pay and Rupees fifteen lakhs and fifty 
thousand at the minimum levels of pay. 
In terms of clause 8 of the Bill, the pension payable to the Officers 
and other employees of the Board and the Appellate Authority would 
need to be defrayed from the Consolidated Fund of India. The amount 
I)f pension payable would be dependent upon the number of Officers and 
the status of officen retiring each year. The amount payable as pension 
annually cannot be precisely quantified at this stage, although it may 
be estimated that on an average the amount payable may not exceed 
rupees twenty thousand annually. ., 
3. In terms of clause 9 of the Bill, the administrative expenses of. 
the Board and the Appellate AuthOrity would need to be defrayed from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is expected that the Board and the Ap-
pellate; Authority would incur an expenditure df rupees fifty lakhs as 
establishment and other administrative expenditure in the first year of 
their establishment and. would incur establishment and other adminis-
trative expenditure of rupees twenty-five lakhs, annually, in the ~ubse-
quent years, . 
4. Under clause 19(1h the Central Government may be called upon to 
provide loans, advances, guarantees, reliefs, concessions or other sacriftces 
of financial nature to certain sick industrial com~ies to rehabilitate 
them. It.is not possible at this stage, to quantify the extent of .. the 
financial involvement that may devolve on the Central Government 
under this clause. 
5. In terms of sub-clause (2) of clause 32 of the Bill in cases of 
amalgamation of a sick industrial company with a non-sick industrial 
c:lmpany, the Board shall exercise the powers of the Central Government 
within the meaning of section 72A of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for giving 
the beneftts of the carry forward of accumulated loss and unabaorbed 
depreCiation of the sick industrial company to the non-sick 
transferee industrial company. Exercise of these powers by the 
Board would have the effect of foregoing incolme-tax. The extent 
of Income-tax benefit that may be allowed to the transferee indus-
trial company 'Would depend upon the nUmber of schemes that may be 
approved and the extent of the accumulated loss and unabsorbed de--
preciation of the sick industrial company being amalgamated. Hence the 
extent of income-tax to be foregone under these provisions cannot be 
quantified at this stage. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 read with clause 18 empowers the Board fOr Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction to cause schemes to be prepared for the recon-
struction, revival' or rehabilitation of the sick industrial companies;' for 
the proper management of the sick industrial company by change in, or 
take over of, managem~nt of a sick industrial company; for the amalga-
mation of sick industrial company with any other company; for the sale or 
lease of a part or whole of the sick industrial company; for devising other 
preventive ameliorative and remedial measures, etc. If any difficulty 
arises in giving effect to the provisions of the scheme, the Board may, by 
order, do anything, not inconsistent with such provisions, which appears 
to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing thl: diffi-
culty [vide sub-clause (9) of clause 18]. Clause 35 empowers the Central 
Government to remove, by notification, any difficulty which may arise 
in giving effect to the provisions of the Act, with a safeguard that no 
<;uch notification may be issued after the expiry of a period of three years 
from the date of commencement of the Act. 
2. Clause 36 empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
the salaries and allowances payable "to, and other terms and conditions 
of service of, the Chairman imd other members of the Board and Appel-
late AuthOrity; the conditions and restrictions subject to which officers 
and employees may be appointed to the Board or the Appellate AuthOrity 
and· also their salaries and allowances and" other conditions of service 
and the powers which" may be exercised and the duties which may be 
performed by the Secretaries of the Board "or the" Appellate Authority, 
etc. 
3. The matter with respect to which the schemes or rules may be 
made are matters of administrative or procedural detail and are matters 
for which it is not practicable to make provisions in the Bill. The matters 
in respect of which orders may be made unde: c~ause 35 of the Bill are 
matters which cannot be visualised at this stage. The delegation of legis-
lative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

.LOK SABHA 
A 
Bn.L 
to make, in the public interest, special provisipns with a view to securing 
the timely detection of lick and potentially sick companies owning 
industrial undertakings, tlu; speedy determiDation by a Board (If 
experts of the preventive, ameliorative, remedial and otber measures 
·whieh need to be takea With _peet to such compa.uies anel tb.e expe-
ditious enforcement of the measures so determined and for matters 
connected thereMth. or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Vishw.nath P.r4t4P Singh, MiniBter of Finance) 