As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 165 of 2022
THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL  
SCIENCES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Shri M.K. RaGhaVan, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the All India Institute of  Medical Sciences  Act, 1956.
   Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—  
1. (1) This Act may be called the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 2022.
  (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 3 of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, the following 
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Insertion of new 
section 3A.
25 of 1956.

section shall be inserted, namely:—
“3A. (1) There shall be established an All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences at Kozhikode in the State of Kerala which shall be a body corporate, to 
be known as the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Kozhikode.
(2) The provision of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Kozhikode established under sub-section (1).”. 
Establishment 
of All India 
Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences at 
Kozhikode in 
the State of 
Kerala.
5
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Kerala has been demanding for establishment of an All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences at Kozhikode. The land has been identified and allocated for the purpose 
at Kinalur at Kozhikode district. Kerala is a State which has over the years invested heavily 
on health of its people. We have built one of the nation’s best health infrastructures in our 
State. However, in recent years the number of communicable and lifestyle diseases in the 
State are on the rise due to rapid transit of our population and heavy population density. 
Day-by-day our country is witnessing new disease. The State needs a central institute like 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences to combat emerging challenges in healthcare sector. 
This will enable the State to ensure that the health of its citizens are always protected. India 
must slowly and steadily increase its health expenditure as part of GDP to nearly 4 percent.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956 
with a view to establish an All India Institute of Medical Sciences at Kozhikode in the State 
of Kerala.
Hence this Bill.
     New Delhi;                  M.K. RAGHA V AN
1 July, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of an All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences at Kozhikode in the State of Kerala. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an expenditure of 
about rupees one hundred crore would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund 
of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand and five hundred crore is 
likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
Extracts from the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956
(25 of 1956)
* * * * * *
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act 
an institution to be called the All India Institute of Medical Sciences. 
Provided that the Central Government may, on and after the commencement 
of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, establish by  
notification in the Official Gazette, such other All India Institutes of Medical  
Sciences at such places as it may specify in the said notification in addition to the existing  
Institute and the corresponding Institutes.
(2) Every Institute shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
Establishment 
and 
incorporation 
of the Institute.
5

LOK SABHA
————
a
BILL
further to amend the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan,  M.P .)