THE HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME  BILL,  2014
By
SHRI M.K. R AGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive health insurance scheme for all citizens of the country
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Health Insurance Scheme Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “beneficiary” means every citizen who has been issued health insurance
card under section 4;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 165 of  2014
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) “person living below poverty line” includes a person whose income from all
sources does not exceed rupees ten thousands per month;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
(e) “scheme” means Health Insurance Scheme framed under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall formulate and implement a Comprehensive Health
Insurance Scheme for all citizens.
4. (1) The Central Government shall designate an Agency for issuing Health Insurance
Cards to all the citizens.
(2) Every citizen shall be issued a Health Insurance Card by the designated Agency.
(3) The card issued under sub-section (1) shall contain such particulars of the beneficiary
as may be prescribed.
5. Every beneficiary, other than persons living below poverty line, shall be required to
pay such amount of premium towards Health Insurance as may be determined by the Central
Government from time to time.
6. (1) Every beneficiary shall be entitled to health facilities free of cost from all
hospitals, including privately owned hospitals as may be specified by the appropriate
Government from time to time.
(2) The free health facilities shall include:—
(i) consultation;
(ii) outpatient treatment;
(iii) diagnostic and laboratory services;
(iv) indoor treatment; and
(v) medicines.
(3) No beneficiary shall be charged any amount for any health facility mentioned in
sub-section (2) availed of by him in any hospital including privately owned hospitals specified
under sub-section (1) by the appropriate Government.
(4) If any beneficiary intends to avail extra facilities at hospital which are not covered
under sub-section (2), he shall be required to pay for availing of such facilities.
7. (1) The Central Government shall enter into an agreement with all nationalized
Insurance Companies for implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The nationalized Insurance Companies shall enter into agreement with privately
owned hospitals to provide health services to the beneficiaries covered under the Health
Insurance Scheme.
(3) The nationalized Insurance Companies shall make payment to privately owned
hospitals for providing health services to the beneficiaries covered under Health Insurance
Scheme at such rates as may be agreed upon by both the parties.
8. The Central Government shall, by due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide in each financial year such sums of money to the State Governments and
nationalized Insurance Companies as it thinks necessary for implementation of the
provisions of this Act.
9. If any beneficiary intends to surrender his Health Insurance Card issued under
section 4, he shall inform in writing to such Authority as may be designated for the purpose
by the appropriate Government.
Formulation
and imple-
mentation of
comprehen-
sive Health
Insurance
Scheme.
Premium for
Health
Insurance.
Provision of
free health
facilities.
Agreement
with National-
ized Insurance
Companies
and private
hospitals.
Release of
funds.
Surrender of
Health Card.
Health
Insurance Card
to be issued to
all the
citizens.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. (1) Any nationalized Insurance Company which has entered into an agreement
with private hospital under section 7, may either itself or through an agency designated in
that behalf inspect privately owned hospitals from time to time to ensure that provisions of
this Act are complied with.
(2) If any private hospital does not comply with the provisions of this Act, the hospital
shall be liable to pay such compensation as may be prescribed in the agreement under
section 7.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Inspection of
hospitals.
Power to
make rules.
10
5
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Proper healthcare facilities at reasonable cost is not available to the majority of citizens
in our country. Poor people are not in a position to afford hefty cost of treatment particularly
at private hospitals. With scarce resources, the State Governments are also not able to
provide healthcare facilities free of cost or at reasonable cost to all the citizens. The cost of
medical treatment including medicines is not within the reach of common man. For treatment
of critical illness, a lot of money is required. Poor people are left to die for want of money to
meet their medical expenditure every year. Therefore, it is proposed to provide free health-
care facilities for all diseases to all citizens. Since Government hospitals are not adequately
equipped to provide healthcare facilities to all the citizens, private hospitals are also proposed
to be roped in to provide healthcare facilities to them.
Citizens who opt to meet the expenditure of medical treatment from their own resources
may be excluded from the purview of the Act, if they make such a request to the designated
Agency of appropriate Government under this Act.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; M. K. RAGHAV AN
November 12, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 provides for formulation and implementation of a Comprehensive Health
Insurance Scheme by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides for Health Insurance Card
to be issued to all the citizens. Clause 6 provides for certain health facilities free of cost.
Clause 8 provides for supply of funds to the State Governments and Nationalised Insurance
Companies by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty thousand crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive health insurance scheme for all citizens of the country and
for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2761LS(S3)—03-12-2014.