— '
in the Gazette of India, EXxtraordin
‘shed 1
[ishee
pub

ary, Pe
29" May, 2007 as

ad {he -

gate

Wel, Section 1,
Act No, 26 of 2007

Bin ANE IS Fo 2006 165.¢

of 2005

ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
THE E

MENT—
ASSED BY THE Houses oF Paruia
(AS P¥

LOK SABHA ON 7TH May, 2007 ,
RaJya SABHA ON 16TH May, 200 )



Bill No. 165-F of 2005
——______

THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
(As PasseD By THE Houses OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL

Surther to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.

Be j ‘ i
flys. 47०1 by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
1, (1) Th: Short ttle and
) This Act may be called the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2007. commencement

(2)It

sh i _

" 21५ &॥ come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
lal Gazette, appoint

rR —— ea



TT

2

ity Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the

the Electric
ubstituted, namely

hall be 8

: pri
sr section 6 of Neipay
2, For al

I non of 2 ५९: on |
Sub a for Act), the followin} ६९९1० hy,
new sects Act). - entral 6 y
=~ The concerned State Government and the Central Sovermment shay

७6. The ec 7 ctricity to all areas in

Joint ndeavour to provide access 10 cle frd sucture and reludin Village
responsibil’ jointly nee: through rural electricity infra fe Sctrification oO
01 State and hamlets f
coven households."
and Centia

Government की

rural
electrification

In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the proviso, the following
3. In sectic

proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“provided further that ni

Amendment of
ton ९

0 licence shall be required under this Act for Supply of

ty generated from a captive generating plant to any licensee in accordance
a Se visibts of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder anq to
eee met subject to the regulations made under sub-section (2) of section 42 »
any cons है

ment of 4. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (d),—
Amendment न है हा : .
section 38 (i) in the second proviso, the words “and eliminated” shall be omitted;
(ii) the third proviso shall be omitted.

1 Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (d),—

ion 39 of the principal
ment of 5. In section we " .
Amendment “and eliminated" shall be omitted;

section 39 (i) in the second proviso, the words
(ii) the third proviso shall be omitted.

Amendment of 6. In section 40 of the principal Act,—
section 40 (i) in the second proviso, the words "and eliminated" shall be omitted;

(ii) the third proviso shall be omitted.

Amendment of 7. In section 42 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—

ctyon 42 . .
=“ (i) in the first proviso, for the words "such open access may be allowed before

the cross-subsidies are eliminated on payment of a surcharge", the words "such open
access shall be allowed on payment of a surcharge" shall be substituted;

(ié) in the third proviso, the words "and eliminated” shall be omitted.
Amendment of 8. In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),—

section 43 i rovi
wy for the words "Every distribution", the words "Save as otherwise provided ia
this Act, every distribution" shall be substituted;

(ii) after the second proviso, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—

th 12 !anation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "application" means
» gpPutcation complete in all 1 espects in the appropriate form, as required by

the distribution li कु sary
distribution licensee, along with documents showing payment of necess*

charges and oth . 1
Substitution of Bs er compliances:',

9. For secti
ew section for Section 50 of the princi . . ted.
seu 3 Ramely:— Principal Act, the following section shall be 5४0४
The electricnt
y “ 7
Supply vode 50. The State Commissio ७ provide

for recovery of electricity लहर 1 specify an electricity supply cod? |!

disconneg!

enn of supply of electricity fe

ora yr measures for Preventing 1;

bali Ine or meter, entry of di

ay Iconnecting Supply and rey
ing electric lines or electric

i ae (8४ \
intervals for billing of electricity charg हैं |

for non-payment thereof, restoration ०
‘ampering, distress or damage to elect*!*2 ‘ hs
stribution licensee or any person actine og
‘Moving the meter, entry for replacing al

al plants or meter and such other matters: -

eee कै


3

0. in section 61 of the principal Act, for clause (y), the following clause shall ७

| " हु shall be
crituted. namely

. "(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of sup

ly
and also reduces cross-subsidies in the manner Specified byt ¥ of electricity

" the A p
Commission, - Propriate
In section 126 of the principal Act,
11. हे है
(0णि sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted namel
+ yi—

“(3) The person, on whom an order has been served under sub-sectic
(2), shall be entitled to file objections, if any, against the provisional assessment
before the assessing officer, who shall, after affording a reasonable opportunit,
of hearing to such person, pass a final order of assessment within thirty days
from the date of service of such order of provisional assessment, of the electricity

charges payable by such person.”;
(1) in sub-section (4), the proviso shall be omitted;
(vi) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion that unauthorised
use of electricity has taken place, the assessment shall be made for the entire
period during which such unauthorised use of electricity has taken Place and if,
however, the period during which such unauthorised use of electricity has taken
place cannot be ascertained, such period shall be limited to 4 period of twelve
, months immediately preceding the date of inspection.”;
(#) in sub-section (6), for the words “one-and-half times”, the word “twice”
shall be substituted;
0) in the Explanation occurring at the end, in clause (6), for sub-clause
(#), the following sub-clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(v) for the purpose other than for which the usage of electricity was
authorised; or
(v) for the premises or areas other than those for which the supply of
wv 2? P|
electricity was authorised.”.
न 12. In section 127 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “one-third of
‘ * sessed amount”, the words “half of the assessed amount” shall be substituted.

13. In section 135 of the principal Act,—
(A) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—

“() Whoever, dishonestly,—

(०) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection with overhead,

fe sereround or under water lines or cables, or service wires, or service
[1165 of a licensee or Supplier, as the case may be; or
reve mers a meter, installs or uses a tampered eaten
interferes with sumer, loop Connection or any other device or me hod ५ ns ,
Flectrig current na Or proper registration, calibration or metering 0
len of Wasted: otherwise results in a manner whereby electricity is
» Or

(c) da 7
vite or 20१४6 Or destroys an electric meter, apparatus, equipment, or
Metfere with rallows any of them to be so damaged or destroyed as to

tHe proper or accurate metering of electricity; or
Uses @ ee
6) use lectricity through a tampered meter; or
Cle Ss icity f हि

“ey wa: ५1 0 Or the purpose other than for which the usage of
Uthorised

(dy

Amendment of
section 61

Amendment of
Section 126

Amendment of
section 127.

Amendment of
secon 135


4

abstract or consume or use electricity shall be

yas 10
‘ a term which may extend to three years or

Punish,
ab
imprisonment for

With fine ७, With
both "Wi
Provided that ina case where the load abstracted, consume

> Ss i » Or
abstraction or atte mpted consumption or attempted ५५७९ ‘sed Or

attempted
(1) does not exc ced 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed On first ¢
a e fi ‘Ony
shall not be less than three times the financial gain on accoun iction
theft of electricity and in the event of second or Subsequent ८० of
a है, . in
the fine imposed shall not be less than six times the finance Viction

1 lal
account of such theft of electricity, Bain on

qi) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first Convictio,
not be less than three times the financial gain on account of such th
electricity and in the event of second or subsequent conviction «ot
sentence shall be imprisonment fora rer not less than six months =
which may extend to five years and with fine not less than six times te
financial gain on account of such theft of electricity: the

Provided further that in the event of second and subsequent cony
of a person where the load abstracted, consumed, or used or attempted
abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted use exceeds 10 kilowatt
such person shall also be debarred from getting any supply of electricity for ३
period which shall not be less than three months but may extend to two years
and shall also be debarred from getting supply of electricity for that Period
from any other source or generating station:

Provided also that if it is proved that any artificial means or means not
authorised by the Board or licensee or supplier, as the case may be, exist for the
abstraction, consumption or use of electricity by the consumer, it shall be
presumed, until the contrary is proved, that any abstraction, consumption or
use of electricity has been dishonestly caused by such consumer.

ICtion

(1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the licensee or
supplier, as the case may be, may, upon detection of such theft of electricity,
immediately disconnect the supply of electricity:

Provided that only such officer of the licensee or supplier, as authorised
for the purpose by the Appropriate Commission or any other officer of the
licensee or supplier, as the case may be, of the rank higher than the rank so
authorised shall disconnect the supply line of electricity:

Provided further that such officer of the licensee or supplier, as the case
may be. shall lodge a complaint in writing relating to the commission of such

offence in police station having jurisdiction within twenty-four hours from the
time of such disconnection:

Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, on deposit
the पता ला व amount or electricity charges in accordance with
complaint as referred ton shall, without prejudice to the obligation to lodge ihe
line of electricity wi he कल second proviso to this clause, restore the supply

y within forty-eight hours of such deposit or payment.”;

(B) in sub-secti fi
of the licensee Oru aul (2), for the words “Any officer authorised”, the words “Any officer
Amendment of 141 ह Plier as the case may be, authorised” shall be substituted.
section 15( " ॥ section 150 नि
on 150 inserted, namely. — of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following shall be
“(3) Notwithstand
Ing an . ag gibe
section (/) of section 136 thing contained im sub-section (/) of section 133. sub

» SCCti :
on 137 and section 138, the licence or certificate ९



a

nitor such other authorisation Issued und,
de

ey or perl
tency ( rthe
g ler this Act fo any person who © rules made or deemed

10 une ac

been mad acting as ai

abets the commission of an offence कि (ता
lable und.

N 137, 6
h abctment, may also be cancelled by the lic at
ensing a

com’

ave t
10 have
(४५1४९

जता worker al contractor,

35, sub-section (/) of section 136, sectio er sub-section
On 138. on his

uthority

tno order of such cancellation shall be made with,
€ without givin
2 such

ed tha
povided
Pl heard

an opportuntty of bemy

person
or the purposes of this sub- «
planation Fe Section, “licensing a
fs है 18 authority”
means

iy
slicer who for the time being in force 15 Issuing 01 renewin;
७ णीए हे
110 Ficate ol competency or permit or suc h other authorisation.’
certifi

Z such licence or

g insection 151 ofthe principal Act, the following provisos shall be inseted, namel.
1S. » Namely

“provided that the court may also take cognizance of an offence punishab|
न oe कि ig

inder this Act upon a report of a police officer filed under section 173 of the Cod ©

und रु leo

Criminal Procedure, 1973:
provided further that a special court constituted under section 153 shall be

competent £0 take cognizance of an offence without the accused being committed to it
e

for trial.”.

16. Afier section 151 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted.

namely:—
"151A. For the purposes of investigation of an offence punishable under this

Act, the police officer shall have all the powers as provided in Chapter XII of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

151B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973, an offence punishable under sections 135 to 140 or section 150 shall be cognizable

and non-bailable.”.
17.Insection 153 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words and figures "sections
1380 139", the words and figures "sections 135 to 140 and section 150" shall be substituted.

18. In section 154 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words and figures "sections 135 to 139" wherever they occur, the
words and figures "sections 135 to 140 and section 150” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (5), for the words "Special Court may", the words "Special
Court shall" shall be substitued.
vd 19, In Section 176 of the principal Act, in clause (2), in clause (4), for the brackets and
“e si (including the capital adequacy, credit worthiness or code of conduct)", the words
“neo the capital adequacy, credit worthiness or code of conduct" shall be substituted.

20. In section 178 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(0 in clause (A), the words “and elimination" shall be omitted;
(91 clause (my, the words “and elimination" shall be omitted;
“iii for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
of

section 64 the manner for reduction of cross-subsidies under clause (8)
on
2".

1.
Section
181 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2).—
N claus, .
(iy © (), the words “and elimination" shall be omitted;
M claus,
€ (m), the words “and elimination” shall be omitted.

(iy j
In Clay,
36 (0), the words “and elimination” shall be omitted;

Amendment of

section 151

Insertion of new
sections 151.4
and 1518

Power of police
to investigate

Certain offences:
10 be cognizable
and non-bailadie.

Amendment of
secuion 153

Amendment of
section 134

Amendment of
section 176

Amendment of
section 178

Amendment of
section 181



6

(iv) for clause (zc), the following clause shall be substituted, n
के jamely:—_

"(zc) the mann
section 61;".

er of reduction of cross-subsidies under (|
Clause
(3)
of