_of 1978. 
/ 
---------
THE METRO RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION Oli' WOm) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
til amend the Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of die Republic 
of India as 1011ows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Metro RailWays (COD.S~tion of 
Wb'rks) Amendment Act, 1981. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
imo'bgnout the Metro Railways (Construction of Wor~) .~ 1978 
(hed;tiiafter reteri'ed to as the pdnci'pal Act), for the word "arbi~tor", 
wl1ere~er it occurs, the words j'BQpellate authority" shall be substituted. 
Short title 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Substitu-
tion of_ 
"arbitra-
tor" by 
"appellate 
authori-
ty". 
10 3. Institl-8'ection (1) of section 2 01. the principal Act, for claUse (e), Amend-
the fOnoWi~k clat.i!le shan be substi'tuted, namely: - ment of 
lleetion 2. 
'(e) "competent authority" means the competmt authority 
appointed under section 16;'. 

AmeDQ-
ment ot 
.etion 9. 
ARlena-
ment of 
section 11. 
AmtlDU· 
ment of 
~tlon13. 
2 
·Co In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for the wlJrds, brackets and figures "date of publication 
of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 7", tbe words, 
hrackets anJ figures "date of publication under sub-section (3) 5 
of section 7 of the substance of the notification under su h-sectil J II 
(1) of that section" shall be substituted; 
(ii)' the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
",Explanc1rion.-For the purposes of this sub-seetion, 10 
where the substance of the notification under sub-section (1) 
of section 7 is published on different dates at di1!erent places. 
the last of such dates sha 11 be deemed to be the date on 
whicb substance of the notification bas been published."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "either in person or", the 15 
words "by an agent or" shall be inserted. 
5. In sub-section (1) of section 11 of the prinCipal Act, for tbe words, 
iigures and brackets "Subject to the provisions of section 14, where 
any land, building, street, road or passage has vested under sub-section 
(2) of section 10", the words, brackets and figures "Where any land, 20 
building, street, road or passage bas vested under sub-section (2) oe 
section 10 and the amount detennined by the competent authority under 
section 13 with resped to such land, building, street, road or passage has 
been deposited, under sub-section (1) of ~ection 14, with the competent 
authority by tht' Central Government" shall be substituted. ll5 
6. In section 1;) of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words '''by the competent 
authority", the words "by an order of the competent authority" shall 
~ substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be in- 30 
serted, namely:-
"(2A) Before proceeding to determine the amount undu 
s~sectiOn (1) or sub-section (2), the competent authority shall 
give a public notice published in the p~escribed manner inviting 
elaims f,rom all persons interested in the land, building street,· 35 , . 
road or passage, or the right of user or the right in thtt nature 
of easement therein 10 be acquired. 
(ZB) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land, 
building, street, road or passage acquired, or the right of user or 
the right in the nature of easement therein acquired and shall 40 
require all persons interested in such land, building, street, road 
or passage or right of user or right in the nature of easement 
ther'ein, to appear in person, or by an agent or by a legal practi-
tioner referred to in SUb-section (2) of section 9, before the com-
petent authority, at a time and "lace therein mentioned (such 45 
time not being earlier than fifteen days after the date of the 
publication of the notice) and to state the nature of their respec-
tive interests in such land, building, street, road or· passage or 
. 'right of user or right in the nature of easement therein."; 

, 
5 
'.;;. 1',1 t 
"'f >1 
(c) in suh-osection (3), for the words "on an application by either 
of the parties, to the arbitrator, be determined by the arbitrator", 
the words "on an appeal preferred by either of the parties to the 
appellate authority, within a period of sixty days from the date of 
the order appealed against, be determined by an order of the appel-
late authority" shall be substituted. 
7. In section 14 of the prinCipal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) the words "by the competent authority" shan be omitted; 
Amend-
mentot 
JeCtion 14. 
fO (ii) for the words "before taking possession 01 the land, 
RO 
30 
35 
,",0 
building. street, road or passage", the. words "within suchiime 
as may be fixed by that authority" shall be substituted: 
('b) to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that where an appeal has been or is likely to be 
preferred under section 13 against the order by which such 
amount was determined and the competent authority is satisfied 
for reasons to be recorded in writing that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, he may by order in writing-
(a) require the person claiming payment of such amount 
to furnish as a condition of receiving wch payment such 
security as may be specified in the order; or 
(b) if ,;uch person 'fails to furnish such security, with-
hold the payment of the whole or any part of such amount 
for such period as may be specified in the order.". 
8. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shan be 
inserted, namely:-
"15A. The competent authority may, with or without assistants 
Or workmen, enter into or upon any land, building, street, road or: 
passage; for the purpose of performing his functions under this Acf 
and make such el\quiry, inspection, measurement and take lIueh photo-
graphs and preplll"e "ucb memorandum thereof alii he may cOnsIder 
necessary: 
Provided that-
(i) DO such entry shall be made except between the hour. 
"f sunrise and sunset and without giving reasonable notice to.-
(a) the owner of, or the person interested in. the land. 
build~ng, street. road or passage; or 
(b) the person whose right of user in or ~ght in the 
nature of easement on th(> lllnrJ. building, street. road OT 
passage is acquired: or 
(c) tl-)e person who sustains any IOfls or damage to the 
land, bufHfng, street. road or passage in consequence of any 
direction given hy the Central Government or any power 
exercised by the metro railw~:v admlnfstration under thJsAct: 
Insertion 
ot new 
section 
15A. 
Power to 
In.spect 
property 
under 
acqul.si-
tion. 

SUbatitu-
tJon of 
aection 16. 
C0mpe-
tent 
authority 
and ap-
pellate 
autbori-
t)r. 
IDIertiOn 
of new 
.eetions 
18A, 16B 
and 16C. 
Powers 
rJl.tba 
appellate 
authority. 
4 
(ii) suftlcient op'portunity shall in every instance be given 
to enable women, if any, to withdraw from such land, b~d1ng, 
street, road or passage; 
(iiijdue regard shall always be had, so far as may be 
compatible with the exigencies of the purpose for: which the 5 
entry is made, to the social and religious usage of the ~n to 
whom notice as aforesaid is given; 
(w) the competent authority making the entry shall cause • 
as little damage or injury as possible, to the land, buUding, street, 
road or passage. 10 
t. For section 16 of the principal Act, the following section sball be 
substituted; namely:-
'16. (1) For every metro railway, tbe Centr'" Gov~t shall, 
for the purposes of this Act. by notification in the OfReial GMetfe, 
. appeiJat- •. . I 5 
(i) a competent authority; altd 
(ii) au appellate authority, 
for IlUCh area as may be specified in the notifiteation. 
(~ A person shall not be qualifted for appointment as a compe-
'tent authority unless he is holding, or has held, a judicial om~e, not !lO 
lower in rank than tha.t of a subordinate judge. 
(3), A person shall not be qualifted 'for appointment as an appel-
late authority unless he is holding, or has held, a judicial office, not 
low-er in. rank tha;n that of a district judge. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this section,-
(a) "district judge" includes an additional district judge; 
(b) "subordinate judge" means subordinate judge in the 
judicial service of West Bengal, and includes any judifltal oIlcer 
(Iby whatlever name called) of an equivalent rank in the- judicial 
sel'Vioe of any other State.'. 30 
10. After section 16 of the principal Act, the following sectiQT1S shall 
be inserted, namely:-
16", (1.) The appeUate au.thority may admit an appeal flIed after 
the expiJy of the period referred to in secti,on 13 o~ section 22 or 
section 25, as the case may be, if he is satisfied that there was sufft- 35 
clent caUSe for not presenting it within that period. 
(2~ Par 1Ibe dispaaal. of an appeal und6l" thi~ Act, the appellate 
-*h~ shalt Uvct· the ... powers (includ.lng. the. powers under 
i88tiana \& and lbA), ami shall, subject. to the p~isiQQS Of thil 

r 'loo 
5 of 1908. 
,. 
;. .. -
5 
se.c:UQn. pedprm, as JM!ad~ a.s may be tl;le sa~~ dutj~ as. are cO.Qf~red 
OJ' iI;nposed by th~ Act on the competent autho~ity in respect of [he 
matters tmder Chapter III and Chapter IV. . 
(3) The appellate authority may, if he tl1inks jt expedient so 
to do, call in his aid one or more aS8e9Sors and hear the appeal wholly 
or par.tly. with the aid of such a(iS.essor.s, , 
(4) For the purpose of determining the amount u~der IlJlY appeal 
before him, the appellate authority may, after making such further 
enquiry or after taking such additional ~vid~. aJ ·m~y be ~essary, 
10 pass such order as he thinks fit, determiJling t~ aDlPunt, by con-
ftrmjngj' modifying or annulling the order appealed again •. 
110 
35 
(5) An or.der of the appellate, authority determJnil)g the. amount 
under this Act shall be. final. 
16B. The competent authority and the appellate authority tllay 
exercise the powers of the nature referred to in section 151 ilf the 
Code of. Civil Procedure, 1903 to the same. extent and for the same 
Rllrposes a8 such pOWft!tl are exercisable by civil CO\lJ'ts, 
l6C. (1) Anv order made by the compe~nt authority. ~ the 
appellate authority determining any amount payable under this Act 
may be enforced in the same mAnner as if such order were 8 decree 
made by a civil court in a suit pendinl!: therein. and! it shall be lawful 
for such authority to send. in the case of his inability to execute 
such order. to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within 
the local lim1ts of whoge jurisdiction the order was made. 
(2) Where any order under sub-section (1) is re,qutred to 
be enforced by the principal civil court of original jurisdiction, a 
certified copy of the order shall be produced to the proper officer of 
the court requIred to enforce the order. 
(S~. The production of· suoh certified copy shalt. be sufficient 
evidence of the order. 
(4) Upon the production of such certified copy, the principal 
civil court of original jurisdiction shall take the requ'isfte steps for 
enforcing the order, in the same manner as if it had been a decree 
:r:na~ by its,elf.". 
U, It:!. section 19 ~. the principal Act, il1- sub-s~ion (1) ,-
(a) In the opening portion, f-or the words "constructing. any 
metro railway or any other work connected therewith", the words 
and figures "performing its functions under section 18" shRll be 
subatitufled; 
(b) in clause (e), for the words "to open or divert", the words 
"to open, divert or temporarilY' close" sb21ll be substituted 
(,':1 «, .: 
- 7' ~" ,) 
Compe,-
tent. 
Autho-
rity, etc., 
to have 
certain 
inherent 
powel'll. 
Enforce-
ment of 
the 
orderlor 
the COM-
petent 
authority , 
and 
appellate 
authority. 
Amend-
ment of 
section It. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 21. 
Amend-
ment uf 
section 22. 
Amend-
ment of 
Ic::tion 25. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 36. 
Amend-
ment of 
t.be 
Schedule. 
6 
12. In section 21 of the principal 'Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), 
for the words "ten metres", the words "twenty metres" shall be substi-
tuted. 
13. In section 22 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "by the competent 5 
authority", the words "by an order' of the competent authority" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) in su~tion (2), fO! the \vords "on an appUcation by 
either of the parties to the arbitrator, be determined by the arbi-
trator", the words "on an appeal nrefe~!"ed by either of the parties, IO 
within sixty days from the date of the order of the competent 
authority, to the appellate authority, be determJned by an order of 
the appellate authority" shall be substituted. 
14. In section 25 of .the principal Act,-
(a) in sub .. section (2), for tl-te words "on application by either r 5 
of the partfes to the arbitrator, be determined by the arbitrator", the 
words "on an appeal preferred by either Of the parti~s, within sixty 
days from the date of the order of ~he competent . authority, to the 
appellate authority, be determinE'd by an order of the appellate 
authOrity" shall be substituted; 20 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4) The procedure and the manner of deposit and payment 
of the amount payable for acquiring any land, building, street, 
road or passage or any right of user in or any right in ~he 115 
nature of easement on any land, building, street, road or passage 
shall be followed in the case of the procedure and the manner 
of deposit and payment Of the amount determined by the com-
petent authority or the appellate authority under this section .... 
15. In section 36 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2) the follow- 30 
ing sub-sectipn shall be inserted, namely:-
C'(2A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), if 
any person fails to vacate temporarily any building together with any 
movable property or animal that may be in his custody, control or 
possession in pursuance of any direction contaIned in any notification 35 
issued under section 21 within the period specified in the notification, 
the competent authori'ty may enforce the direction of temporary 
evacuation physically by taking suc:J't police help,. as may be con-
sidered by him necessary, and for this purpose the provisions of 
sub-section (2) of '3ection 11 shall, as far as may be, apply," 40 
18. In the Schedule to the principal Act, the word and figures 
"SCALE:-l:50000" shall be omitted 

't 
17. Every application under sub-section (3) o~ section 13 of the 
principal Act as it stood immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, which is pending before an arbitrator referred to therein shall, on 
such commencement, stand transferred to the appellate authority to 
.') \' hom an appeal could have been preferre:l under the principal Act as 
amended by this Act if the amount to which such application relates had. 
been determined by the competent authority under sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2) of the said section' after the commencement of this Act, 
and such appellate authority may deal with such application from the 
10 stage at which it stood transferred to it as if it were r~ 1 appeal pending 
with him: 
Provided that either of the parties to the case may demand that before 
proceeding further, the previous proceeding or any part theJ:eof be re-
opened or that he be re-heard, 
'fran.ter 
ot appll. 
cationa 
pending 
before 
Arbitrator 
under the 
principal 
Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The 'Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 was enacted 
to provide for construction of a network of a mass rapid tr~nsit system. 
"}Sop'iI1arIy known as metro railway, in metropolitan cities, and for enabling 
powerS for acquisitioil of property and taking other measures for execu-
tion of such projects speedily. Keeping in view the experience gained 
in the working of the Act during the last few years, it is co1'iSidered 
necessary. to amend the Act so :1'8 to better achie1Je the pln1;>oses tliereof. 
2. The more important amendments which are proposed to be made 
are the following:-
(a) The jurisdiction vested by the Act in the arbitrator appoint-
ed under section 16 of the Act is in substance jurisdiction of an 
appellate nature. It is therefore proposed to provide for an appellate 
authority in place of the arbitrator and make the necessary inciden-
tal and consequential changes. 
(b) It is also p!'oposed to specify that only persons who are 
holding or who have held a judicial office not lower in rank than 
that of a subordinate judge may be appointed as competent authori-
ties under the Act. Likewise it is also proposed to specify that only 
persons who are holding or who have held a judicial office not lower 
in rank than that of a district judge can be considered for appoint-
ment as the appellate authority. 
(c) The existing procedure of acquisition of property is being 
modified to make it more speedy' and fair by permitting a person 
interested to appear before the competent, authority through an 
agent also and to file his objections within a period of twenty-one 
days of the publication of the substance of notice under section 7; by 
requiring the competent authority to invite claims of persons interest-
ed by public notice and to take possession of the property acquired 
only after the amount payable therefor is deposited by the Central 
Government, within the time fixed by the competent authority; and 
by making the orders of the competent authority Or the appellate 
authority determining any amount under the Act, enforceable as a 
decree of a Civil Court. 
(d) Section 19 of the Act relating to powen. of the metro rail-
way administration is being amended to spell out expressly.that the 
powers under the section can be exercised by the administration for 
discharging its function~ mider section 18 of the Act. The section 
is also being amended to confer on the administration the power to 
temporarily close any Etreet, road, cable, etc. 
(e) For ensuring the safety of any metro railway or for facili-
tating the construction thereof, the Central Government has powers 
under section 21 ,of the Act to prohibit or regulate construction of 
8. 

builrlings or any work of development up to a distance of ten metres 
on either side of the metro alignment. This limit of ten metres is 
being increased to twenty metres. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
, . 
NEW DELliI; KEDAR PAN DAY. 
rite 11th December, 1981. 

... FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 11 of 
the Metro Railways (Construction o(Works) Act, 1978 to require tht 
Central Government to deposit with the competent authority the amount 
payable for the acq'Uisition of property or any interest therein before 
obtaining possession thereof. Clause 6 seeks to amend section 13 of the 
Act to require the competent authority to invite by public notice publish-
ed in the prescribed manner claims from all persons interested in the 
property to be acquired hefore determining the nmount payable for its 
acquisition. ClauseS seeks to insert a new section 15A to empower the 
competent authority to enter upon any land etc. for the purpose of 
performing his functions under the Act and to make such enquiry, 
inspection, measurement and take such photographs as he may consider 
necessary. The liability d the Central Government to incur the expen-
diture required to make t.he deposit of the amount payable for acquisition 
of pruperty etc., for publication of public notice and for performing the 
functions as stated above will depend upon the nature or the property 
which may be acquired and other connected circumstances. It is not, 
therefore, possible to give g precise estimate of the amount involved in 
such acquisition. It may, however, be added that s? far as the metro 
railway for Calcutta is concerned, it will form part of the expenditure 
of Rs. 250 crores already sanctioned for that project. 
2 Clause· 9 of the Bill seeks to substitute for section 16 of the Act a 
new section. The new sedion provides for the appointment of a compe-
tent authority and fl!1 appellate authority for each metro railway. Even 
now the Act contains provisions for such competent authority. The 
provision for appellate authoritv is being made in place of the existing 
provisions for an arbitrator. The expenditure on the pay and allowances 
of a competent authority and an appellate a'Uthority would be of the 
order of R'3. 40,000 and Rs. 60,000 per annum respectively. This expen-
<iitufe which is of a recurring riature will in the case of metro railway 
"Jroject for Calcutta form part of the expenditure Already sanction'd 
for thnt project. 
3. The Bill does not in"olve any other recurrtna or non-recurrln, 
.~ndtture. . ... 

, , ,. ; ! 
MEMORANDUM RF.GARDIN'G DELEGAT~n LEGISLATtON 
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (2A) in section 
13 of the principal Act to require the competent authority to invite, by 
public notice, claims from all persons interested in the property to be 
aCq".Jired. The manner of publication of such notice ilO left to be pres- . 
cribed by rules. This pertains to procedure or \ detail and as such the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

Defini-
tions. 
Hearini of 
objection. 
Power 
to .k. 
possessian 
of acquir-
ed land, 
etc. 
Determi-
nation of 
amount 
payable 
for 
&cquili-
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE METRo RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS) 
ACT, 1978 
(33 OF 1978) 
• • • • • 
2. (1) In this Act, unle9S the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(e) "competent authority" means any person or authority autho-
rised by the Central Government, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, to perform the functions of the competent authority under 
this Act for such area as may be specified in the notification; 
• • ... • • 
9. (1) Any person interested in the land, bu:lding, street, road or· 
passage may, within twenty-one days from the date of publication of the 
notification under sub-section (1) of section 7 object to the construction 
'of the metro railway or .any other work connected therewith upon or 
under the land, building, street, road or passage, as the case may be. 
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the com-
petent authority in writing and shall set out the grounds thereof and the 
competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity Of being heard, 
either in person Or by a legal practitioner, and may, after hearing all 
such objections and after making such further enquiry, if any, as the 
competent authority thinks necessary, by order, either allow or disallow 
the objections. \ 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section "legal practitioner" 
has the same 'meaning as in clause (i) of sub-se(!tion (1). of section 2 of the 
Advocates Act, 1961. 
• • • • • 
11. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 14, where any land, build-
ing, itreet, road or passage has veosted under sub-section (2) of section 
10, the competent authority may by notice in writing direct the owner 
as well as any other person who may be in possession of such land, build-
ing, street, road or passage to surrender or deliver poosession thereof to 
the competent authority or any person duly authorised by it in this be-
half within sixty days of the" service of the notice. 
• * • • • 
13. (1) Where any iand, building, street, road or passage is acquired 
under this Act, there shall be paid an amount· which shall be determined 
by the competent authority. 
• • • • • 
tioD. 
1,,< :-.. ~'~l' ... ~II1lIId"''' __ *r __ ""'~·'1!;'l"":':"-"£::';~l!I~~Calhi:;(,~~.·.,;.u:..ulL~'-I"_z"'l"_",,- u ... J,; ..................... ,n;.". _ .• ~ • 

10 of 1940. 
.' I , - 13 
~3) l! the amount determined by the competent authority wider sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) is not acceptable to either of the parties 
the: amount shall, on an application by either of the parties, to the arbi-
trator, be determined by the arbitrator . 
• .. • .. • 
14. (1) The amount determined by the compet.ent authority under 
section 13 shall be deposited by the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed with the competent authority before takini posses-
sion of the land, building, street, road or passage. 
(2) As soon as may be after the amount has been deposited under 
sub-section (1), the competent authority shall on behalf of the Ct>ntral 
Government pay the amount to the person 'or persons entitled thereto . 
•• • • • 
Deposit 
and pay-
ment of 
amount. 
16. (1) For every metro railway the Central Government shall, for Atbitrator. 
the purposes of this Act, appoint &3 arbitrator a person who is, or has 
been, or is qualified for appointment as, a Judge of a High Court. 
(2) The arbitrator may, if he thinks it expedient so to do, call in 
his aid one or more assessors and hear the references wholly or par-
tially with the aid of such assessors. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this section the provisions of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940, .shall apply to every arbitration under this Act. 
• • • • • 
19. (1) The metro railway administration shall, for the purpose of 
constructing any metro railway or any other work connected therewith, 
have power-
• • • • • 
(c) to open or diver~, as the case may be, any street, road, cable, 
trench, drain (including a sewer), channel, ditch, culvert or any 
other device (whether fox carrying of sullage, sewage, offensive 
matter, polluted water, trade effluent, rain water, sub-soil water or 
any other object), electric or gas supply line or tele-communication 
line, or telegraph installation, over, across or under any land, build. 
ing, street, road, railway or tramway; 
-. • • • • 
21. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do for facilitating the construction of any metro railway or 
for ensuring the safety of any metro railway, it may, by notification in the 
OtRcial Gazette,-
• (a) direct that no building or any such development as may be 
specified in the notification shall be constructed or made above the 
metro alignment or on any land within such distance, not exceeding 
ten metres on either side of the metro alignment, as may be specified 
in the notification and where there i's any building on such land also 
direct the owner of, or the person having control over, such building 
to demolish such building. or to make such additions or alterations to 
Powers ot 
metro 
railway 
adminis-
tratlon . 
Power to 
prohibit 
or 
regulate 
construc-
tion at 
build in,. 
and 
excava-
tion. 

, l ,1"- , \ ' , 
.... "1, :. \ .. " 
Payment 
of 
amount 
tor 
pl'ohibi-
tion of 
construc-
tion, etc. 
Amount 
payable 
for 
damqe, 
1" ... 
........... 
or in-
jury. 
t~ 
~Uch building as may be specified in the notification or to desist froM 
making any such development and within such period a8 may be 
specified in the notification; 
• • • • • 
ZZ. (1) If in consequence of any direction contained in any notification 
issued under sub-section (1) of section 21 any person sustains any loss or 
damage, such person shall be paid an amount which shall be determined 
by the -competent authority in the first instance.' 
(2) If the amount determined by the competent authority is not ac-
ceptable to either of the parties, the amount shall, on an application by 
either of the parties to the arbitrator, be determined by the arbitrator. 
• • • • • i 
!5. (1) • • • • • • 
(2) If the amount determined by the competent authority under eu. 
section (1) is not acceptable to either of the parties, the amount paya.le 
shall, on application by either of the parties to the arbintor, be .eter-
mined by the arbitrator. 
• • 
~. • .I -- --
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(h) and sub-section (1) of section 321 " 
• Metropolitan City of Calcutta ... ~ 
I_ • 
• 't METRO ALIGNMENT 
-----------
i_SC~:-l: ~ • • • 

,_ .. , 
t I .:: 
LOK SABHA 
,.~~ . 
. ~. 
~ ... '"',. 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act. 1976. 
[i ~: 
J ..... 
-.r- .'~ .. 
.. ...-.... ;J 
(~hri Kf~r P~1l-dq~f Mint.,fer 91 Rai,J.wa1,lB) 
, ,I • 