THE ANGLO-INDIANS WELFARE BILL, 2016
By
PROF. RICHARD HAY, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Guiding Principles.
CHAPTER II
RIGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS
4. Equality and non-discrimination.
5. Right to life and personal liberty.
6. Right to live in a community.
7. Protection from torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of punishment.
8. Protection from abuse, violence and exploitation.
9. Freedom of speech and expression.
10. Right to Integrity.
11. Access to justice.
12. Right to work.
CHAPTER III
E
DUCATION
13. Duty of educational institutions  to provide inclusive education to Anglo-Indian
students.
14. Adult education for Anglo-Indians.
15. Establishment of University for Anglo-Indians.
CHAPTER IV
SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
16. V ocational training, self-employment, skill development and talent enhancement.
17. Nomination of Anglo-Indians to Minorities Commission, etc.
18. Non-discrimination in employment.
CHAPTER V
SOCIAL SECURITY, HEALTH REHABILITATION AND RECREATION
19. Social security.
20. Healthcare facilities.
21. Rehabilitation of Anglo-Indians.
22. Leisure, Culture and Recreation.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT
23. Awareness Raising.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
24. Central Government to provide fund.
25. Act not in derogation of any other laws.
26. No suit prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie.
27. Act to have overriding effect.
28. Power to remove difficulty.
29. Power to make rules.
(ii)

1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 166 of  2016
THE ANGLO-INDIANS WELFARE BILL, 2016
By
PROF. RICHARD HAY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the certain measures to be undertaken by the Central Government for the
welfare of Anglo-Indians and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anglo-Indians Welfare Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'abuse' includes verbal and physical abuse;
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) 'Anglo-Indian' means a person whose father or any of whose other male
progenitors in the male line is or was of European descent but who is domiciled within
the territory of India and is or was born within such territory or parents habitually
resident therein and not established there for temporary purposes only.
(c) 'appropriate Government' means—
(i) in relation to an establishment of the Central Government or an
establishment, wholly or substantially owned or financed by that Government
or a Cantonment Board constituted under the Cantonments Act, 1924, or a Union
Territory without legislature, or the provider of a service which pertains to List I
in Schedule VII of the Constitution, the Central Government; and
(ii) in all other case, the State Government or, as the case may be, the
Government of a Union territory with legislature;
(d) 'discrimination' means any distinction, exclusion or restriction on the basis of
gender identity and expression which has the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying
the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis with others, of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any
other field and includes all forms of discrimination, including denial of reasonable
accommodation;
(e) 'establishment' means and includes—
(i) Departments and Ministries of Government of India;
(ii) local authorities and authorities or bodies owned, controlled or aided
by the Central and State Government;
(iii) any statutory or non-statutory body created, owned, financially or
administratively controlled or aided by the Central or State Government or any
such body performing public or civil function and includes Government
companies as defined under sub-section (45) of Section 2 of the Companies
Act, 2013; and
(iv) any company, firm cooperative or other society, association, trust,
agency, institution, organization, union, industry, supplier of goods or services,
factory or other non-statutory body which is not covered under sub-clauses (i)
to (iii) of this clause;
(f) 'exploitation' means using an Anglo-Indian to one's own advantage to which
one is not otherwise entitled, or to the latter advantage, to which such latter person is
not otherwise liable.
(g) 'local authority' means a municipality, a Cantonment Board, a Panchayat or
any other authority, established under an Act of Parliament, or a State Legislature to
administer the civic affairs of any habitation as defined in or under such Act;
(h) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(i) 'services' means services provided by members of any profession or trade, or
provided by any Government, local authority or establishment and includes services
relating to banking and finance, education, health, insurance, rehabilitation,
entertainment, recreation and hospitality, transport or travel and telecommunications.
3. The appropriate Government and local authorities shall, subject to provisions of
this Act and any other law for the time being in force, take the following necessary steps to
secure for Anglo-Indians—
(a) respect for inherent dignity, individual autonomy including the freedom to
make one's own choices and independence of persons;
(b) non-discrimination;
Guiding
Principles.
2 of 1924.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) full and effective participation and inclusion in society;
(d) equality of opportunity;
(e) accessibility; and
(f) inclusive approach.
CHAPTER II
RIGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary steps to ensure that Anglo-
Indians enjoy the right of equality guaranteed under article 15 of the Constitution on an
equal basis with others.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary steps to ensure reasonable
accommodation for the Anglo-Indians.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures to ensure that every
Anglo-Indian child enjoy human rights on an equal basis with other children and also ensure
that every such child has right to freely express his views on all matters affecting him on
equal basis with other children.
5. The appropriate Government shall take necessary steps to ensure that every Anglo-
Indian person enjoys the right to life with dignity and personal liberty guaranteed under
article 21 of the Constitution on an equal basis with others.
6. (1) Every Anglo-Indian shall have the right to live in the community with choices
equal to others.
(2) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take appropriate measures
to ensure full enjoyment of the right mentioned in sub-section (1) by—
(a) not obliging Anglo-Indians to live in any particular living arrangement;
(b) ensuring that Anglo-Indian who are old, infirm and disabled persons have
access to a range of in-house, residential and other community support services;
and;
(c) providing a two bedroom housing unit to every Anglo-Indian who is deserted
orphan or widow or senior citizen who need geriatric care;
(d) making available community services and facilities available for the general
population on an equal basis to Anglo-Indians; and
(e) establishing Anglo-Indian township in selected places where there is a
substantial concentration population of Anglo-Indians.
7. The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take all appropriate
administrative and other measures to protect every person belonging to Anglo-Indian
community from being subjected to torture, or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment.
8. (1) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take appropriate
administrative, social, educational and other measures to protect every Anglo-Indian, both
within and outside the home, from all forms of abuse, violence and exploitation.
(2) Any person, or registered organization who or which has reason to believe that an
act of abuse, violence or exploitation has been, or is being, or is likely to be committed
against any Anglo-Indian, may give information about it to the Executive Magistrate in
whose jurisdiction such incident occurs or is likely to occur, who, on receipt of such
information, shall take immediate steps to stop it or prevent its occurrence as the case may
be, or pass such order as he deems fit for the protection of Anglo-Indian.
Equality and
non-
discrimination.
Right to life
and personal
liberty.
Right to live in
a community.
Protection
from torture or
cruel, inhuman
or degrading
treatment or
punishment.
Protection
from abuse,
violence and
exploitation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) Any police officer who receives a complaint or otherwise comes to know of abuse,
violence or exploitation towards any Anglo-Indian shall inform the aggrieved person of,—
(a) the right to apply for protection under sub-section (2);
(b) the particulars of the nearest organization or institution working for the
rehabilitation of Anglo-Indian who have been subject to abuse, violence or
exploitation; and
(c) the particulars of the Executive Magistrate having jurisdiction to provide
assistance to aggrieved persons.
(4) The appropriate Government shall take all appropriate measures to prevent abuse,
violence and exploitation against Anglo-Indians by, inter alia, providing information and
raising awareness on:—
(a) taking cognizance of incidents of abuse, violence and exploitation;
(b) the legal remedies available against such incidents;
(c) steps to be taken for avoiding such incidents;
(d) procedure for reporting such incidents; and
(e) steps required for the rescue, protection and rehabilitation of Anglo-Indians
who have been victims of such incidents.
9. The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take necessary steps to
ensure that every Anglo-Indian enjoys freedom of speech and expressions guaranteed under
article 19 of the Constitution, on an equal basis with others.
10. Every Anglo-Indian shall have a right to respect for his or her physical, mental,
social and cultural integrity on an equal basis with others.
11. (1) Every Anglo-Indian shall, in their individual or representative capacity, as the
case may be, have the right to move any court, tribunal, authority, commission or any other
body having judicial or quasi-judicial or investigative powers on an equal basis with
others.
(2) The authorities in sub-section (1) shall ensure that every Anglo-Indian is able to
exercise the right to approach their authorities without discrimination on the basis of being
a member of minority community.
(3) All the authorities mentioned in sub-section ( 1) shall evaluate the testimony,
opinion or argument given by a Anglo-Indian on an equal basis with others and ensure
that there is no discrimination whether directly or indirectly on the basis of being a number
of minority community.
(4) The National and State Legal Services Authority shall ensure that Anglo-Indians
have access to any scheme, program, facility or service offered by them on an equal basis
with others.
12. The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take all appropriate
administrative and other measure to provide employment opportunities and reservations in
favour of persons belonging to Anglo-Indians.
CHAPTER III
E
DUCATION
13. The appropriate Government and local authorities shall ensure that all educational
institutions funded or recognised by them, provide inclusive education, and inter alia,—
(a) admit Anglo-Indian students without discrimination and provide them
education as also opportunities for sports, recreation and leisure activities on an
equal basis with others;
Freedom of
speech and
expression.
Right to
Integrity.
Access to
justice.
Right to work.
Duty of
educational
institutions to
provide
inclusive
education to
Anglo-Indian
students.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(b) provide reasonable accommodation to every student belonging to
Anglo-Indian;
(c) provide necessary support in environment that maximise academic and social
development, consistent with the goal of full inclusion;
(d) monitor participation, progress in terms of attainment levels, and completion
of education, by every Anglo-Indian student;
(e) provide scholarship on merit-cum-need basis and also other facilities such
as fee-waiver, free textbooks, free hostel accommodation to every student belonging
to Anglo-Indian community; and
(f) establish an anti-discrimination cell in every educational institutions to
monitor any form of discrimination against the students belonging to the Anglo-
Indian community.
14. (1) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall ensure participation
of Anglo-Indians in adult education and continuing education programs on an equal basis
with others.
(2) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall establish professional
educational institutions for the educational advancement of the Anglo-Indian community.
15. The appropriate Government shall establish an University for Anglo-Indians to
take care of the higher educational needs of Anglo-Indian student and to impart an integrated,
holistic, value-oriented modern education using modern digital tools and advanced
methodologies of teaching and latest curriculum to meet the demands of a fast changing
world.
CHAPTER IV
S
KILL DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
16. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate schemes and programs to
facilitate and support employment of persons belonging to the Anglo-Indian community
especially for their vocational training and self-employment.
(2) The appropriate Government shall institute mechanisms for provision of loans at
concessional rates, subsidies and grants to Anglo-Indians for self-employment ventures
and for marketing of their products.
(3) The appropriate Government shall provide state of art skill development facilities
for the persons belonging to the Anglo-Indian community.
(4) The appropriate Government shall support the community of Anglo-Indians in the
area of micro, small and medium enterprise projects to generate employment opportunities.
(5) The appropriate Government shall take measures for the talent enhancement and
enrichment of the youth belonging to the Anglo-Indian community.
(6) The appropriate Government shall promote indigenous crafts and handiworks of
the Anglo-Indian community.
(7) The appropriate Government shall establish a helpline for carrier guidance and
online placement of the Anglo-Indians.
17. The appropriate Government shall nominate members from the Anglo-Indian
community in the Minorities Commission of India, Board of Education, Cantonment Boards,
Corporations and other Government bodies.
18. No establishment shall discriminate against any Anglo-Indian person in any matter
relating to employment including but not limited to recruitment, promotion and other related
issues.
Adult education
for Anglo-
Indian person.
Establishment
of Anglo-Indian
University.
Vocational
training, self-
employment,
skill
development
and talent
enhancement.
Nomination of
Anglo-Indians
to Minorities
Commission,
etc.
Non-
discrimination
in employment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
CHAPTER V
SOCIAL SECURITY, HEALTH REHABILITATION AND RECREATION
19. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate necessary schemes and programs
for empowerment of the persons belonging to the Anglo-Indian community and to enable
them to live independently in the community.
(2) The schemes formulated under sub-section (1) shall inter-alia include:—
(a) payment of pension to eligible Anglo-Indians in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(b) financial assistance to the parents of Anglo-Indian children;
(c) assistance for skill development training to Anglo-Indians;
(d) facilities for Anglo-Indian children who have no families or are homeless or
have been abandoned, or are without shelter or livelihood;
(e) access to safe drinking water;
(f) access to appropriate and accessible sanitation facilities especially in urban
slums and rural areas; and
(g) establishment of safe and hygienic community centers with decent living
conditions in terms of nutritious food, sanitation healthcare and counselling.
20. (1) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take necessary measures
to provide Anglo-Indians,—
(a) separate Health Surveillance Centres;
(b) primary healthcare for mothers during pregnancy at free of cost; and
(c) barrier-free access in the hospitals and other healthcare institutions and
centres.
(2) To fulfil its obligation under this section, the appropriate Governments shall make
schemes and programs with participation and involvement of Anglo-Indians including
provision for coverage of medical expenses and therapeutic intervention.
21. (1) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall undertake or cause to
be undertaken services and programs of rehabilitation, particularly in the areas of health,
education and employment for all Anglo-Indians who are in need of such rehabilitation.
(2) The service and programs shall be designed in such a way that it begins at the
earliest possible stage and to be based on a comprehensive assessment of issues faced by
the individual belonging to the Anglo-Indian community.
(3) For purposes of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government and local authorities
shall, subject to fulfillment of financial and other norms, and availability of budgetary
allocation, grant financial assistance to non-governmental organizations working for the
welfare of the Anglo-Indians.
(4) The appropriate Government and local authorities, while formulating rehabilitation
policies, shall consult the non-governmental organisations working for the cause of Anglo-
Indian community.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government
shall, by notification, formulate schemes to provide aid to Anglo-Indians.
22. (1) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take suitable measures
to promote and protect the right of all persons belonging to Anglo-Indian community to have
a cultural life and to participate in leisure and recreational activities on an equal basis with
others.
(2) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take suitable measures to
organize jamborees for assimilation and synthesis of Anglo-Indian culture with the Indian
Social security.
Healthcare
facilities.
Rehabilitation
of Anglo-
Indians.
Leisure, Culture
and Recreation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
culture, and preserving the unique cultural identity of Anglo-Indian community can be
showcased.
(3) The appropriate Government shall establish cultural and convention centres in
mega cities such as Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Chennai and Cochin so as to
perpetuate the rich cultural diversities and values of Anglo-Indian community.
(4) The appropriate Government shall take steps to declare Anglo-Indian homes and
buildings, including schools as heritage structures so as to  preserve in their original
form.
(5) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take measures to preserve
the Anglo-Indian literature, texts, books and other literary works of renowned Anglo-
Indian writers and authors.
(6) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take measures to preserve
Anglo-Indian cuisines and recipes.
(7) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take measures to organize
festivals to project the uniqueness of Anglo-Indian food, music bands, handicrafts, folklores,
stories and memories of the community.
(8) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall promote research studies
based on the Anglo-Indian culture, Anglo-Indian planters, Anglo-Indian entrepreneurship,
Anglo-Indian expatriates and Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) status and many other areas
pertaining to the Anglo-Indian community.
CHAPTER VI
D
UTIES OF APPROPRIA TE GOVERNMENT
23. (1) The appropriate Government shall conduct, sponsor, encourage, support or
promote on a regular and continuous basis information campaigns and sensitization
programs to ensure that the rights recognized in this legislation are respected, protected
and promoted.
(2) The Campaigns shall aim at enabling both State and civil society to comprehend
Anglo-Indian community as an integral part of the Indian society, and to recognize the
capabilities and contributions of Anglo-Indians, and to combat the stereotypes, prejudices
and harmful practices which impede the participation of Anglo-Indians on an equal basis
with others.
(3) Without prejudice to the general awareness raising obligation in sub-section (1),
such programs, campaigns and workshops shall inter alia,—
(a) promote values of inclusion, tolerance, empathy and respect for diversity of
being Anglo-Indian;
(b) advance recognition of the skills, merits and abilities of Anglo-Indians and
of their contributions to the workforce, labour market and professional fee;
(c) fostering respect for the decisions made by the persons belonging to Anglo-
Indian community on all matters related to their lifestyle, culture, family life,
relationships, bearing and raising children.
(d) providing orientation and sensitization at the school, college, university and
professional training level on the history and ancestry of Anglo-Indian people and
their rights; and
(e) provide orientation and sensitization on Anglo-Indian people to employers,
administrators and co-workers.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
24. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
Awareness
Raising.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

8
25. No suit prosecution or other legal proceedings shall be laid against any person for
anything which is done in good faith or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made
thereunder.
26. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in derogation of any other
laws, rules, orders or instructions for the time being in force which deals with the subject
matter of this Act.
27. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
28. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
29. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be so; however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity if anything previously done under that rule.
No suit
prosecution or
other legal
proceedings
shall lie.
Act not in
derogation of
any other
laws.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

9
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Anglo-Indian community is a distinct minority community of mixed ancestry, whose
native language is English. It has almost 400 years of history to boast off since the advent of
Portuguese in 1498 at Kappad in the district of Kozhikode, Kerala. With the expansion of
colonial territory and the encouragement of inter-marriages with the natives, the Anglo-
Indian community formed a small but significant portion of Indian population. In the early
periods, this community enjoyed a special status in the society as the members were able to
get the best of education. Since then, this minuscule community have played a pivotal role in
the development of our nation from railways to armed forces, from customs to trades, and
from various professions to academics. However, the British who ruled India in the latter
stages of governance discriminated against the Anglo-Indian community as they wanted the
English alone to be honoured with high positions and feared of the Anglo-Indians being a
hybrid blood. Although there was prejudice and contempt, they represented in administrative
roles and service cadres like that of mines, shipping, aviation, forestry, post and telegraph,
etc. Eventually, Anglo-Indian population dwindled from roughly eight lakhs at the time of
independence to fewer than four lakhs at present making it a minority community, undoubtedly.
Post independence, due to economic deprivation, political ignominy and social ostracism,
many have migrated to foreign countries in search of greener pastures. Despite some recent
progressive measures by the Government, Anglo-Indian community continues to face a
plethora of problems. They are not only sidelined, denied social justice, forced to undergo
racial prejudice, made victims of intolerance and unfair treatment, but also suffer from poor
access to education, healthcare, legal aid, employment and lack of social acceptance. In the
contemporary scenario, the Anglo-Indian minority faces exclusion, socio-economic
backwardness and alienation.
Measures towards sensitization are lacking; steps against discrimination are absent
and schemes and policies for the welfare of this minority community are never a priority of
anyone. There is a need for establishing the first of its kind, an Anglo-Indian university for
holistic and value-oriented education; a dire requirement of preserving the unique cultural
heritage and legacy of the Anglo-Indian community. This moment desiderates the assertion
of their suppressed voice and upholding the promises laid down in the Constitution of India
to protect their rights. More than any financial crises, the Anglo-Indian community is
endangered, facing a severe indentity crises, and is on the verge of a slow death.
With amble constitutional and legal safeguards to protect the interest of the Anglo-
Indians, their position has not altered much and is even now pathetic, helpless and hapless.
As a salvageable step, we need to have proactive participation of Anglo-Indian persons in
all democratic spaces and systems; need their involvement in policies framed for their own
welfare. For undoing decades of discrimination that the Anglo-Indian community has faced,
it will require categorical targeted interventions on a phased manner by the State. Invariably,
this Bill would be a statutory saviour.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RICHARD HAY
April 28, 2016.

10
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the establishment of in-house, residential and other
community support services for the old, infirm and disabled persons belonging to Anglo-
Indian community. It also provides for construction of two bedroom houses to the Anglo-
Indian deserted women, orphans, widows, senior citizens who need geriatric care and
establishment of Anglo-Indian township in the selected places where there is a substantial
population of the Anglo-Indian persons.
Clause 12 makes it obligatory on the part of the appropriate Government and local
authorities to take measures to provide employment opportunities and work related openings
and reservations to Anglo-Indian persons.
Clause 13 provides for scholarship on merit-cum-need basis and other entitlements
like fee-waiver, free textbooks, free hostel accommodation and other facilities at subsidized
rates for students belonging to Anglo-Indian community.
Clause 14 provides for establishment of an anti-discrimination cell in the educational
institutions/universities to monitor any form of discrimination against the students belonging
to the Anglo-Indian community.
Clause 15 provides for establishment of an Anglo-Indian University.
Clause 16 provides formulation of schemes and programmes to facilitate and support
employment of persons belonging to the Anglo-Indian community especially for their
vocational training and self-employment. It also provides for the appropriate Government to
institute mechanisms for provision of loans at concessional rates, subsidies and grants to
Anglo-Indian persons for self-employment ventures, and for marketing of their products,
etc.
 Clause 19 provides for formulating necessary schemes and programmes for
empowerment of the persons belonging to the Anglo-Indian community.
Clause 21 provides for undertaking services and programs of rehabilitation, particularly
in the areas of health, education and employment for all Anglo-Indian persons who are in
need of such rehabilitation including financial assistance to non-Governmental organisations.
Clause 22 provides for organizing jamborees, establishing cultural and convention
centres at Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Chennai and Cochin for Anglo-Indian
community, etc.
Clause 23 provides for conducting and sponsoring campaign and programmes to
respect, protect and promote rights of Anglo-Indian persons.
Clause 24 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds, from time
to time, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crores may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees six hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.

11
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the certain measures to be undertaken by the Central Government for the
welfare of Anglo-Indian and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Prof. Richard Hay, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1386LS(S3)—14-07-2016.