5
Short title and 
commencement.
Insertion of new 
section 3A.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
  Bill No. 166 of  2022
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT  
BILL, 2022
By
Shri M.K. Ragha v an, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2.  After section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, following section shall 
be inserted, namely:—
“3A (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State 
Government of Kerala, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such area as 
the Eco-sensitive Zones as it deems fit.
Declaration of 
Eco-Sensitive 
Zones in the 
State of Kerala.10
29 of 1986.

2
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall 
constitute a Committee hereafter referred to as the State of Kerala Eco-Sensitive 
Zone Identification Committee consisting of,—
(a) Chief Minister, State of  
Kerala.
Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) five Members of Parliament of 
the House of the People to be 
nominated by the Speaker.
Members, ex officio;
(c) Secretary, Union Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and  
Climate Change.
Member;
(d) Chief Secretary, State of  
Kerala.
Member, Secretary;
(e) ten Members of State Legis -
lative Assembly of the State 
of Kerala, to be nominated 
by the State Government of  
Kerala.
Members, ex-officio; 
(f) Such number of repre -
sentatives of Local self-  
Government to be nominated by 
the State Government of Kerala.
Member, ex-officio; 
(g) Chief Wildlife warden. Member, ex-officio;
(h) three experts from the 
fields of environment to be  
nominated by the  
Central Government in such  
manner as may be  
prescribed.
Members.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff to the Committee as it deem fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
services of the members other than ex-officio and officers and staff of the Committee 
shall be such as may be prescribed.”.
 
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recently Honorable Supreme Court of lndia has fixed up one kilometer Eco-Sensitive 
Zone mandatory for all protected areas of India. In the same verdict the Hon’ble Court 
has put the onus on the Union Government saying that this ruling shall not be uniformly 
applicable across India. Forests, being a subject where State has equal  role as centre, 
different States have different set of norms regarding its regulations. In the State of Kerala 
which is gifted with a large forest cover the population density is quite high when compared 
to other State. Kerala has no history of destroying its natural forest. It is also a State which 
respects the forest cover. Environmental activism in the State of Kerala has even lead to 
situations where even Government projects which destroys the nature has to be discarded. 
Under this recent verdict of Honorable Supreme Court it has been estimated that  
2.5 lakh hectares of land will be under Eco-Sensitive Zone. This will put the livelihoods 
of over one lakh families in danger. Hence respecting the verdict of Honorable Supreme 
Court of India a special committee called Eco-Sensitive Zone Identification Committee 
is required to be constituted under the chairpersonship of the Chief Minister of the State 
of Kerala to decide upon the Eco-Sensitive zones taking in views of inhabitant population. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 with a view 
to constitute a State of Kerala Eco-Sensitive Zone Identification Committee to identify and 
declare Eco-Sensitive Zones in the State.
Hence this Bill.
    New Delhi;            M.K.  RAGHA V AN 
1 July, 2022. 

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 3A provides for the constitution of a State of 
Kerala Eco-Sensitive Zone Identification Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an expenditure 
of about rupees twenty lakh would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of 
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh is also likely to be involved.

LOK SABHA
  A
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
   
     (Shri M.K. Raghavan,  M.P .)