1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2018
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘21B. (1) The State shall provide health protection to all citizens in such manner
as the State may, by law, determine.
(2) The right to health protection under sub-section (1) shall include—
(a) prevention, treatment and control of diseases;
(b) access to essential medicines;
Bill  No. 166 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to
Health.
5
10

2
(c) maternal, child and reproductive health;
(d) access to basic health services;
(e) access to emergency medical treatment; and
(f) access to mental healthcare:
Provided that the State shall earmark not less than eight per cent. of its annual estimated
receipts for healthcare.’’.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 47 of the Constitution makes it a duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition
and the standard of living and to improve public health. However, the current status of
healthcare in India reflects that further measures are required to be taken by the State to
assure health to all citizens of the State.
The Government expenditure on health is only 1.4 per cent. of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) and the public health infrastructure is inadequate and unequally distributed. The
Draft National Health Policy, 2015 takes note of the fact that over 63 million persons are faced
with poverty every year due to healthcare costs alone as there is no financial protection for
the vast majority of healthcare needs. According to Sample Registration System (SRS) 2013,
1.26 million children under the age of five are estimated to die in our country every year due
to preventable diseases.
Thus, due to lack of enforceability of Directive Principles, right to health remains
unenforceable for citizens. However, the Supreme Court in Paschim Banga Khet mazdoor
Samity & ors V . State of West Bengal & ors, while widening the scope of article 21 held that
providing adequate medical facilities for the citizens is an obligation of the Government in a
welfare State. The right to health is also internationally recognised as a fundamental human
right. In 1946, the World Health Organisation stated in its Constitution that "the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of health is one of the fundamental rights of every human
being without distinction of race, religion, political belief, economic or social condition".
This right is also included in the Universal Declaration of Human rights and in the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural rights, to which India is a signatory.
The initial Draft of National Health Policy, 2017 declared that Right to Health shall be
guaranteed as an enforceable fundamental right under the Constitution in order to empower
the citizens to hold the State accountable for it. The National Health Policy, 2017 requires the
States to spend at least 8 per cent. of their Annual Budget on Healthcare.
Therefore, it is essential to amend the constitution with a view to make right to health
a fundamental right of the citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
January 23, 2018.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right to health protection a fundamental
right. It also provides that the State shall earmark not less than eight per cent. of its annual
budget on healthcare. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure both recurring and
non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible to assess the
actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2016LS(S3)—06-11-2018.