1
THE USE OF MOBILE ELECTRONIC DEVICES BY PEDESTRIANS
ON ROAD (REGULATION) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB,  M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the use of mobile electronic devices by pedestrians on road and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth  year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Use of Mobile Electronic Devices by Pedestrians on
Road (Regulation) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 166 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “mobile electronic device” means a mobile phone, digital audio or video
player or any other hand-held electronic device excluding hearing aids and other
medical assistive devices as specified by the appropriate Government by rules or
notification, to be considered as mobile electronic devices for the purpose of this Act;
and
(c) “pedestrian” means a person travelling on foot, whether walking or running.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
use of mobile electronic devices by pedestrians while walking on roads is hereby prohibited.
4. Whoever uses mobile electronic devices while walking on roads shall be punishable—
(a) for the first offence, with a fine which may extend upto five thousand rupees;
and
(b) for each subsequent offence, with a fine which may extend upto ten  thousand
rupees:
Provided that where a person convicted of an offence punishable under this
section fails to pay the fine under clauses ( a) or (b), as the case may be, he shall be
punishable with simple imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month for the first
offence and two months for each subsequent offence, respectively.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
6. The provision of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
7.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
8. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previsouly
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Prohibition on
use of mobile
electronic
devices.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As per an estimate, on an average four hundred persons die in road accidents in India
every day. This comes to a whooping seventeen deaths every hour. Among the most vulnerable
on roads are the pedestrians. While rashly driven vehicles are believed to be a primary cause
of road accidents, there is clear evidence that negligent behaviour on the part of pedestrians
have often been among major causes of such accidents. Use of mobile phones and other
electronic devices by pedestrians is prominent example of such baheviour.
There is no dearth of incidents where pedestrians can be seen talking over mobile
phone, texting or watching a video while walking or even crossing a road. Many countries
have framed strict laws which contain penal provisions for using mobile electronic devices
while walking on roads. With strict laws and impeccable implementation, they have been able
to contain such incidents to a large extent.
In India, however, while there are express penal provisions for drivers using mobile
electronic devices, there is an urgent need to have equally stringent provisions for pedestrians
who use mobile electronic devices while walking on roads.
Towards this end, the Bill seeks to make use of mobile electronic devices while walking
on roads an offence punishable with fine of five thousand rupees for the first offence and ten
thousand rupees for subsequent offences. The Bill also provides that in case the guilty
individual fails to pay the fine, he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment up to one
month or two months for first offence and subsequent offence, respectively.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
June 17, 2019.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 2(1)(b) of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to specify, by rules or
notification, the devices which shall be considered mobile electronic devices for the purposes
of the Bill. As the rules or notification will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, of a normal character.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the use of mobile electronic devices by pedestrians on road and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1286LS(S3)—10.07.2019.