1
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
Commencement.
Bill No. 167 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2. After section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"135A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board of every
company shall ensure that the company spends, in every financial year, at least twenty
per cent. of the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility in Bundelkhand
region of the country.".
Insertion of
new section
135A.
Provision of
spending
specific
amount of
Corporate
Social
Responsibility
earmarked in
every financial
year in
Bundelkhand
region.
5
18 of 2013.
2

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Bundelkhand region is one of the most backward regions in the country. The
unemployment in the Bundelkhand region is at its zenith. The person residing there are
bound to migrate. Due to scarcity of irrigation system, the farmers are unable to have sufficient
income and are committing suicide. The region has no industry at all. For the purposes of
development of the Bundelkhand region and completion of social welfare schemes, the
amendment in the Companies Act, 2013 is necessary.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Companies Act, 2013 with a view to make
mandatory provision in the Act that Companies/Public Sector Undertakings should spend at
least twenty per cent. of their Corporate Social Responsibility Funds in the Bundelkhand
region so that the region does not lag behind in infrastructure and social development.
N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA
August  1, 2018.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013
* * * * *
135. (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more, or
turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees five crore or more
during any financial year shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the
Board consisting of three or more directors, out of which at least one director shall be an
independent director.
(2) The Board's report under sub-section ( 3) of section 134 shall disclose the
composition of the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee.
(3) The Corporate Social Responsibility Committee shall,—
(a) formulate and recommend to the Board, a Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy which shall indicate the activities to be undertaken by the company as specified
in Schedule VII;
(b) recommend the amount of expenditure to be incurred on the activities referred
to in clause (a); and
(c) monitor the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy of the company from time
to time.
(4) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) after taking into account the recommendations made by the Corporate Social
Responsibility Committee, approve the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy for the
company and disclose contents of such Policy in its report and also place it on the
company's website, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) ensure that the activities as are included in Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy of the company are undertaken by the company.
(5) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall ensure that the
company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent of the average net profit of the
company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of its
Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:
Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and areas around it
where it operates, for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility
activities:
Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the Board shall, in its
report made under clause (o) of sub-section (3) of section 134, specify the reasons for not
spending the amount.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section — average net profit shall be calculated
in accordance with the provisions of section 198.
* * * * *
Corporate
Social
Responsibility.

GMGIPMRND—1748LS(S3)—28-11-2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
————
(Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra,  M.P.)