· . 
to 
,., . 
. J. ..• ~ =r. ',-D ~'H.!~, 3?C: itI Q {:iG J.tJ.i.TlO ~~ 3 (AI",.c., aL .l!H T) blLJ.., 1') ,j 1 
(To b:./ J~!3 intm Juccci in Lok Sabilel.) 
2. P:l6E! 4, lintls 27 nnci 28,-
lor Il~ st1 tu te '1 II read "Sol bsti tu ted II 
3. Page 1O, line 2,-
f'J£ "Co !'po ratio nil read It('.o rpo rations II 
!.t. Page 14-, line 2,-
( 1) ,lor "EXTAACTIJ read "E){TRh.C 1'8 II 
( 11) for IQ) l1?0 J.i.h.'l'l.O N " read 'IQ) .£IlO .rl.;..:l.·IO N S 11 
NE\-I DH..hl; 
~!u~~1 :'~~~b3': (~~ a) 

, '. 
i 
Shf 1950. 
'.~L<J 
--",_.-- To BE INTaODt7CED IN Lox SAIJ!IA 
i'l fJg' . . , \ 
, ,f .. 
Bm No. 187 of ll8J. 
.... 'AI' 
THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
1981 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be ca.lled the Road Transport Corporations Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1981. title and 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
10 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
2. In sub-section (2) of section 1 of the Road T.raaape.rt C.-poratioDI 
Ad, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Ad), after the proviso, 
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
I 
"Provided further that on and from the commencement of the 
Road Transport Corporations (Amendment) Ad, 1981, thfs Act, .. 
amended by the said Act, shall. extend to the . Union territory of 
Mizoram.". 
3. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
15 rubstituted, namely:-
com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 1. 
SubaUtu-
tion of 
new 
8eetion fo 
netion. 
5. 

Manage.. 
ment of 
Corpora-
\ion and 
Board of 
DIrectors. 
Amend-
mentof 
aection 6. 
2 
"5. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management 
of the affairs and business of a Corporation shall vest in a Board of 
Directors which, with the assistance of its committees and ·Managing 
Director; may exercise all such powers and do all 8uch acta and 
things as may be exercised or done by the Corporation. 5 
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such other 
Directors, being not less than five and not more than seventeen, as 
the State Government may think fit to appoint. 
I 
(3) The State Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one 
of the other Directors as the Vice-Chairman of the Board. 10 
(4) Rules made under this Act shall provide for the repreaen-
tation, both of the Central Government and cd. the State Govern-
ment coneerned, on the Board in such proportion as may be agreed 
to by both the Governments and of appointment by each Govern-
ment of its own representatives thereto and where the capital of a I~ 
Corporation is raised by the issue of shares to other parties under 
sub-section (3) of section 23, provision shall also be made for the 
representation of such shareholders on the Board and the manner in 
which the representatives shall be elected by such shareholders. 
(5) The term of office of and the manner of ftlling cuual 110 
vacancies among the Directors shall be such as may be prescribed". 
4. In section 6 01 the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in the opening portion, for the words 
umember of a Corporation", the words "Director of· a Corporation" 
shall be substituted; 115 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "Chief Executive Officer or 
~neral Manager", the words "Managing Director" shall be substi-
tuted and for the word "member", the word "Director'" shall be 
substituted; 
(c) after sub-sectioll (2), the following sub-section ahall be 30 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) Nothing in clause (e) bf sub-section (1) shall be deemed 
to disqualify;-
(a) any oftlcer or other employee of the Government 
'tor being chosen as, or for being, a Director of a Corporation; 31 
(b) any officer or other employee of a Corporation for 
being chosen as, or for being, a Director ot ~oth .. 
Corporation.PI. 

5 
3 
I. Section 8 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section AmeDd-
(1) thereof, and- ment of 
aeetion 8. 
(ia) in sub-section (1), as so re- numbered,-
(i) in the opening portion, for the word "member", tlie 
word "Director" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (b), for the w;rd "Corporation", the word 
"Board'" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in the proviso, for the words "member nominated", the 
words "Director appointed" shall be substituted; 
10 (b) after sub-section (1), as so re-nwnbered, the following mb-
15 
litO 
35 
sections shall be inserted, namely:-
II (2) The State Government may remove trom offtce the 
Chairman or any other Director of the Corporation who Is 
guilty of misconduct (including abuse of power or corruption): 
Provided that no person shall be removed under this sub-
section except after an inquiry in which he has been informed 
of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard in respect of those charges: 
Provided further that the preceding proviso shall not apply-
(i) where such person is removed on the ground of 
conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; 
or 
(ii) where the State Government is satisfied for lOme 
reasons to be recorded by that Government in writing that 
it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or 
(iii) where the State Government is satisfied that in the 
interests of the security of the State it is not expedieJl,t, to 
hold such inquiry. 
Explanation.-H in respect of any S'llch person aforesaid a 
question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold sueh 
inquiry as is referred to in this sub.section, the decision thereon 
of the State Governm~nt shall be final: 
Provided also that no Director appointed by the Central 
Government shall be removed from office under this sub-section 
without the concurrence of that Government. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall apply in relation to ~y 
Director who is also the Managing Director, or an offtcer or em-
ployee of the Government or of any Corporation.". 
6. Section 12 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as 8ub-6eetion Ammd-
<CD (I) thereof, and- ment of 
.action 12 
(a.) in sub-section (1), as so re-numbere(J;-

, 
/)'{ . 
.... !\ ~ 
4 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section for 
section 13. 
Authenti-
cation of-
orderaand 
other 
instru-
ments. 
Amend-
mentof 
MICtion 16. 
(i) in the opening portion, for the word "Corporation", the 
-word "Board" shall De substituted; 
(ii) in clause (a), for the words "of its memoers", the 
words "consisting of Directors" shall be S'U!bstituted; 
(iii) in c1au~e (e), for the words "Chief Executive Officer or 5 
General Manager", the words "Managing Director" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1), as so re.;numbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
10 
"(2) The Chairman, Vke-Chairman or Managing Director 
may delegate anv of his powers and duties [lncludin~ powers 
and dutiec; delpgated to him under sub-section (i) 1 to any 
offie'er of the Corporation, and the officer to whom such powers 
and duties are delegated, shall exercise and perform Buch powers 
and duties under the control and supervision of the Managing IS 
Director.". 
7. For section 13 of the principal Act, the- following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"13. All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated 
by the signature at the Secretary' or by any such other offtcer of the QO 
Corporation as may be authorised in this behalf by the Board or 
under the regulations made under section 45 and all other instruments 
issued by a Board shall be authenticated by the signature df the 
Managing Director or any other officer of the Corporation authorised 
in like manner in this behalf.". ' 25 
1. In section 14 of the principal Act,-
(4) for sub-section(l), the folloWing S'UlHection shall be sustl-
tuted, namely:-
Ie (1) Every Corporation shaU have a Managing Director, a 
Chief Accounts Officer and a Financial Adviser, appointed by the 30 
State Govemment: 
Provided that the same person may be appointed &3 the Chief 
Accounts Officer and the Financial Adviser."; 
'(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "such other officers and '" 
servants", the words "a Secretary and such other officers and em- 35 
ployees" shall be substituted; 
(c) . for sub-section (3), the following sUb-seetion shall be substi-
tuted, nunely:- -
"(3) 'nle condition$ of appointment and service' and the 
scales of pay of the officers and employees of a Corporation 40 
.haJl-
(a) as respects the Managing Director, the Chief Ac-
counts Officer and the Financial Adviser, or, as the ease may 
be, the Chief AC!eounte Ofticer-cum-:rtmmcial Ad't1serbe such, 4J 
as may be prescrilted'. and 

(b) as respects the other officers and employees, be such. 
as may, subject to the provisions of section 34, be detenninecl 
by regulations made under this Act.". 
t. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
5 IUhstituted, namely:-
10 
"16. (1) The Mall"clging Director shall be the executive head of 
the Corporation and all other officers and employees of the Corpora-
tion shall be subordinate to him. 
(2) The Managing Director shall obtain tlie views of the Chief 
Accounts Officer and the Financial Adviser or, as the case may be, 
the Chief Accounts Officer-cum-Financial Adviser, on every proposal 
involving revenues, or expenditure from the fund, of the Corporr>tion 
and shall cause such views to be placed before the Board prior to the 
consideration of such propolS1 by the Board.". 
15 10. In the principal Act, after Chapter II, the following Chapter shall 
be inserted, namely:- ' 
20 
35 
"CHAPTER IIA 
SUBSIDIAJIY CORPOBATIONS 
17 A. (1) Where a Corporation (hereafter in this section referred 
to as the parent Corporation) is satisfied that it is expediettf or neees-
suy so to do for the more efficient discharge of its functions under 
this Act, it may, with the concurrence of the State Govemment aud 
the Central Government; frame by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette 
a IIcheme or schemes providing for tbe establishment of ODe or more 
subsidiary corporations. 
(2) A scheme framed under sub-section (1) shall specify the 
subsidiary corporation Or corporations which shaD become establish-
ed thereunder, the date or dates with effect from which they shall 
,be so established, the powers and funetions of the parent Corporation 
which such subsidiary corporation or corporations may exercise and 
discharge, the conditions and limitations subject to which such powers 
may be exercised, the management of the aftairs of each such subsl-
cJjllry corporation by a Board of Directors, the capital of ~h neb 
subsidiary corporation and an other matters relating to such subsi-
diary corporations corresponding to the various matters for which 
provisions have beett made in this Act with respect to the parent 
Corpo1'lltion: 
Provided that-
(a) .no subsidiary corporation shall start operation Ott any 
IieW route without the previous approval of the p~ Corpora-
tiOl1; 
OOtheftPrtllehta1ivts of the Central Government on the 
Board of Directors of a subslcUary corporation shah be In propor. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section 
fOr 
section 15. 
Managing 
Director, 
Chief 
Accounts 
Officer 
and Fin-
ancial 
Adviser. 
Insertion 
of new 
Chapter 
IIA, 
Establish-
ment of 
subsi-
diary 
corpora-
tions. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 19. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 23. 
6 
don to its contribution to the capital of the pareDt Corporation; 
(c) the liability of the Central Government to provide 
contribution to the capital of the subsidiary corporation or to 
.. the parent Corporation shall not be increased without the approval 
of the Central Government; 5 
(d) a subsidiary corporation shall have a Managing Director, 
a Chief Accounts Ot1icer and a Financial Adviser or a Chief 
Accounts Officer-cum-Financial Adviser, and such officers shall 
be appointed by the State Government; 
(e) , the State Government and the parent Corporation shall ,10 
have power to give directions to a subsidiary corporation in respect 
of any matter, including directions r~lating to recruitment, condi-
tions of servi~ and training of the employees of the subsidiary 
corporation, wages to be paid to such employees, reserves to be 
maintained by the subsidiary corporation; 15 
(f) the capital budget. the revenue budget and the annual 
development plans of a subsidiary corporation shall be submitted 
for approval to the parent Corporation and where such budget or 
plan involves any deficit, also to the State Government. 
(3) Every subsidiary corporation cstabl~ed under a scheme ~o 
framed under sub-section (1) shall be a body corporate, by the name 
specified in the scheme having perpetual succession and a common 
seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued." .. 
11. In section 19 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (e) of sub-section (2), for the words "or any other 25 
stores of scrap value", the words "any other stores of scrap value, 
or S'Uch other stores as may be declared to be obsolete in the pres-
cribed manner" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (5), for the words "officers and servants", the 
words "officers and other employees" shall be substituted. 30 
12. In section 23 of the principal Act- . 
<a> for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shan Ite sublti-
tuted, namely:-
"(2) The Corporation may, whether or not any capita) is 
provided to it under sub-section (1), raise by the issue of sh~ 35 
such . capital . (bereafter in . this . section . referred . tou . the 
"authorised share capital") as may be authorised in this behalf 
'tty the State Government: 
Provided that where any capital is provided to the Corpo-
ration under 8ub~section (1), no capital may be railed under this 40 
sub-sedion without the prcviott~ approval of the Centnl Govern-
ment~ ~, 
I 

.. 
;) of 1970. 
40 of 1980. 
sa of 18111. 
111 of INS. 
18 of 196 •. 
~l of 1956 
5 
10 
'T 
(ZA) Any capital raised under suD-section (2) with the pre-
vious approval of the Central Government may be,-
(e) in addition to the capital provided to the Corporation 
UDder sub-section (1); 
(b) subscribed to by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, by convertin, the whole 
or any part of the capital provided [whether before or after 
the . commencement of the Road Transport CorporatiODl 
(Am~ndment) Act, L981] to the Corporation by that Govem-
ment under sub-section (1).";. 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words llauthorised capital", the 
words "authorised share capital" shall be substituted. 
13. For section 26 of the principal A<:t, the follOWing section shall be Sub8titu-
substituted, 'namely:- tiOn of new 
20 
25 
So 
"26. A Corporation may, with the previoUs approval of the State 
Government, borrow money for the purpose of -raising its working 
capital or meeting any expenditure of a capital nature in the open 
market or from a corresponding new bank constituted under section 
3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970, or section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisi-
tion and 'l.'ransfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, a State Finance 
Corporation, established under section 3 of the State Financial 
Corporat,ons Act, 1951, the Industrial Finance Corporation of India, 
established under section 3 of Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 
1948, the Industrial Development Bank of India, established under 
section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964, the 
Life Insurance Corporation of India, established under section 3 of 
the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, or any other financial 
institution providing credit which is subject to the control of the 
Reserve Bank of India.". 
14. In sub-section (2) of section 27 of the principal Act, after the words 
"or with the agents of the Reserve Bank of India,", the words, figures 
. ·and brackets "or with the corresponding new banks constituted under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
section for 
section 26. 
Borrow-
ing 
powers. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 21 . 
II 1970 takings) Act, 1970, or section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
40 ~f 1980 35 and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980," shall be inserted. 
15. Every person holding office immediately before the commencement 
of this Act as the Chairmat:l, Vice-Chairman or other member of a Road 
Transport Corporation, established under section 3 of the p:incipal Act 
40 shall, on such commencement, be deemed to have been 3ppomted as the 
Chairman Vice.Chairman or other Director (as the case may be) of the 
Board of 'Directors of the said Corporation under the principal Act, as 
amended by this Act, for the remainder of the term for which suc.h person 
would have continued to hold office as the Chairman, Vice-Chamnan or 
45 other member of such Corporation, if this Act had not been enacted. 
1 •. The amendments directed in the Schedule (being of consequential 
nature) shall be made in the principal Act. 
Conti-
nuance of 
existing 
members 
of Corpo-
rations. 
Conse-
quential 
amend-
menta. 

8 
THE scm:J)lll.E 
(See section 16) 
CONSEQUENTIAL AMBNDMBMTS 
.Section 2.-(a) After clause (a), insert the following:-
'(<14) "Board" means the Board of Directors of a Cerp,oration;'; 5 
(b) after clause (b), insert the following:-
'(bb) "Director" means a member of the Board;'. 
Sectio1f. 7.-For "member", substitute "Director". 
Section 9.-For "Corporation"', substitute "Corporation or its Board" 
and for "amongst its members", substitute "in its Board". to 
Section IO.-For "Corporation", wherever it occurs, substitute "Board". 
Section ll.-(a) For "CprporatioD", wherever it occW's, substitute 
"Board"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for "such member as may be chosen by the 
members present", substitute "such Director as may be chosen by the 15 
Directors present". 
SectiOn I6.-For "officer or servant", substitute "officer or other 
employee". 
Section 24.-After "(2),", insert "(2A)". 
Section 28.-(a) In sub-section (1), for "the capital of a Corporation", 20 
substitute "the whole or part of the capital of a Corporation"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for "raises its capital", substitute "raises the 
Whole or any part of its capital". 
Section 37.-In sub-section (1), for "ofticers or servants", substitute 
"officers or other employees". 
Section 38.-In clause (a) of sub-section (2), for "members", wherever 
it occurs substitute "Directors". 
Section 4a-Y"r "officer or servant'\ substitute "officer or otber 
employee". 
Section 43.-For "members", substitute "Directors" and fOr "officers 30 
and .rvants", substitute "officers and other employees". 
Section 44.-In BUb-Section (2) ,-
(a) tor clause (a), substitute the following:-
"(a) the conditions and manner of appointment of Directors 
of a Corporation, the representation in the Board of the Central 35 
and State Governments, and where shares are issued to other 
parties under sub-sectiO'n (3) of se<:tion 23 of such shareholders 
and generally all matters relating to the constitution of the 
Board."; 

" 9 
(b) for clause (b), substitute the following:-
"(b) remuneration, allowance:; or fees paid to the Directors 
Of the Corporation or other persons associated with the Board 
under section 10;"; 
5 (c) in clause (c), for "members", substitute "Directors"; 
IO 
(d) in clause (d), for "members", substitute "Directors" and for 
"Corporation", substitute "Board"; 
(e) hI clause (e), for "Chief Execu~ive Officer or General 
Manager and the Chief Accounts Officer", substitute "Managing 
Director, the Chief Accounts Officer, the Financial Adviser or, as the 
case may be, the Chief Accounts Officer-cum-Financial Adviser"; 
(f) after clause (f), insert the following:-
"<ff> the procedure in accordance with which any stores 
may be declared obsolete under sub-section (2), of sectiun 19;", 
15 Section 45.-In sub-section (2) ,-
(a) in clauses (a) and (b), for "Corporation", substitute "Board"; 
(b) in clause (c), 'for "servants of "the Corporation, other than 
the Chief Executive Officer or General Manager and the Chief 
Accounts Officer", substitute "other employees of the Corporation 
20 other than the Managing Director, the Chief Accounts Officer and 
the Financial Adviser or, as the case may be, the Chief Accounts 
Officer-cum-Financial Adviser", 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Road Transport Corporation Act, 19150 was enacted to enable 
State Governments to set up Transport Corporations with the object of 
providing efficient, adequate, economical and properly coordinated system 
of road transport services. In the light of the changed circumstances. 
the suggestions which have been received from the State Governments, 
different Ministries. of the Central Government 'and other agencies con-
cerned, it is proposed to make certain amendments in the said Act with 
a view primarily to secure the better functioning of the Road Transport 
Corpor-ations under the Act. 
2. The more important amendments propos~d in the Bill are the 
following: -
tnr 
(a) Section 1 of the Act is being amended to provide for the 
extension of the Act to the Union territory of Mizoram (vide clause 
2). 
(b) The organizational set up of the Road Tl'an.>port Corpora-
tions under the Act is being modified to provide for each corporation 
a Board of Directors consisting of a Chairman and other Directors in 
place of the Chairman and members of the Corporation. This ap-
proach would help in keeping the agency through which a Corpo-
ration has to function distinct from the Corporation itself. It 
is also proposed to provide that in addition to the Chairman, each 
Board may consist of not less than five and not more than seventeen 
other Directors (l,ide cl&use 3). 
(c) Section 8 of the principal Act is being' amended, inter aHa, for 
including therein provisions for removal of the Chairman or any other 
Director on grounds of misconduct (including abuse of power and 
corruption) [vide clause 5 (b) ]. 
(d) l'n the context of the growing 'Bctivities of the Corporations. 
it is felt that certain activities of a Corporation could be better attend-
ed to by subsidiary corporations. To facilitate this process, provision 
is being included to enable each Road Transport Corporation to frame, 
with the concurrence of the State Government concerned 'Bnd the 
Central Governme-nt, scheme or schemes providing for the establish· 
ment of one or more subsidiary corporations (11idc clause 10). 
(e) At present. a Road Transport Corporation cannot raise any 
share capital where loan capital has been provided to it by the Central 
Government and the State Government. With a view to augmenting 
the resources of the Corporation and to enable the Corporations to 
undertake developmental schemes, section 23 df the principal Act is 
being amended to enable a Corpor'Btion which has received a loan 
capital from the Central Government and the State Govern-
ment to raise, share capital. Opportunity is also' being taken to 
enable the Central Government or the State Government to convert 
10 
srrwn' , ( rn '7':" 

II 
the whole or any part of the loan capital provided by it under the 
said section 23 into share capital (vide clause 12). 
(f) Section 26 of the principal Act relating to borrowing powers 
of Road Transport Corporations is being SUbstituted by a new section 
to enable a Corporation, with the approval of the State Government, 
to borrow money not only in the open market, but also from the 
nationalised banks, State Fi'nancial Corporations, the Industrial 
Finance Corporation of India, the Industrial Development Bank ot 
India, the Life Insurance Corporation of India, or any other financial 
institution providing credit which is subject to the Control of the 
Reserve Bank of India. Such borrowing may be either for the purpose 
of raising working capital or for meeting any expenditure of a capitd 
nature (vide chmse 13). 
3. The Bill seeks to achiev~ the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 16th December, 1981. VEERENDRA pAm.., 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a proviso in 8ub·section (2) of 
section 1 of the principal Act for the purpose of providing for the ex-
tension of the Act to the Union Territory of Mizoram. When a. Road 
Transport Corporation is established in the Union Territory of Mizoram, 
the Central Government may have to L'ontribute to the capital of the 
Corporation. At this stage, it is difficult to make any estimate of the 
expenditure which may be involved. 
2. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 14 of the principal Act 
to provide for a Financial Adviser and a Secretary for each of the Cor· 
poration", The expenses with respect to salary etc. Of persons who may 
be appointed to these posts will be met out of the fu'nds of the Corpora-
tions concerned. It does not involve any expenditure from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India, • 
3. Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter IIA in the prin-
cipal Act to authorise each Road Transport Corporation to establish one 
01' more subsidiary corporations. When a Road Transport CorporatiO'n 
establishes sul?sidiary corporations, the Central Government may have to 
(though it is not obligatory so to do) incur expenditure by way of 
providing additional capital to the Road Transport Corporation or by way 
of contributing to the capital Of the subsidiary corporations. It is not 
possible to give ~ny estimate of the expenditure which may be involved 
as that will depend upon the number of Road Transport Corporations 
which may set up subsidiary corporations, the number of subsidiary 
corporations which would be set up, the extent to which such Road Trans· 
port Corporations and the subSIdiary corporations require ass'stance from 
the Central Government. and other cO'ntingencies. 
4. Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to amend section 23 of the principal Act 
to provide, inter alia, for the issue of share capital by a Corporation even 
when such Corporation has been provided loan capital by the Central 
Government and the State Government. To the extent the Central 
Government may choose to contribute to any such share capital of a 
Corporation, expenditure will be involved from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. The amendment" proposed by the clause in section 23 of the 
principal Act a1::;0 enable the Central Government to convert the whole 
or any part of the loan capital provided by it to any Corporation into 
share capital. This by itself does not involve any expenditure. But 
there would be some loss if the dividend income from the capLtal con-
verted into share capital turns out to be less in any year than the income 
which would have been earned by way of interest if the loan capital had 
not been so converted. Conversely, there would be a gain if the dividend 
income turns out to be more than what would have been earned by way 
of interest. It is not possible to make any estimate of such loss or gain 
at this stage as the same will depend upon how the Corporations would 
function. 
5. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or 
non-recurring nature. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 seeks to .amend section 13 of the Act to make provision as to 
t?e persons who may authenticate the orders and decisions of a Corpora-
tIon. The amendment provides that in addition to the Secretary to the 
Board of Directors of a Corporation, such other persons as may be autho-
rised in this behalf by regulations may also authenticate the orders and 
decisions of the Corporation. Clause 11 seeks to amend section 19 of the 
Act to provide, inter aLia, that the disposal of the obsolete stores may be in 
accordance with special· procedure as may be specified by rules made by 
the State Government. Thus while the· delegation of power under the 
amendment to section 13 Of the Act pertains to a matter of detail, the 
delegation of, power under the amendment to section 19 of the Act per-
tains to' a matter of procedure. The delegation involved is, theref,ore, of 
a normal character. 
2. Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter IIA containing a 
single section, namely, section 17A to enable a Road Transport Corpora-
tion to frame a scheme or schemes fur the establishment of one or more 
subsidi'ary corporations. Such a scheme can be framed only with the 
concurrence of the State Government concerned and also of the Central 
Government. In SUb-section (2) of the said section 17A, it has been 
provided that the powers and functions which a subsidiary corporation 
may exercise and discharge would be only such of the pOWers and 
functions of the Road Transport Corporation establishing such subsi-
diary corporations as may be specified in the scheme. Further, though 
more important matters which &hould be provided for in such a scheme 
have been listed in the said sub-section (2), it has also been made clear 
that the otber matters for which provisions may be made in such a 
scheme would be those corresponding to the various matters for which 
provisions have been made in the Act with respect to Road 
Transport. Corporations. The prov'so to the said sub-section (2) 
specifies suitable safeguardf'; and guidelines with respect to the powers 
Of the subsidiary corporations, composition of the subsidiary corporations, 
liabilitv of Central Government to provide contribution to the capital of 
1'1 subsidiary corporation and the composition of the executive agenov 
through which a subsidiary corporation may function. Further, provi-
sions have also been made· in the proviso with' regard to the control by 
the State Government and 'also the Road Transport Corporation estab-
lishing the subsidiary corporatio-n over the subsidiary corporation. In 
view of the afore-mentioned circumstances and considerations. the dele-
gation of legislative power under clause 10 is also of a normal character. 