5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 167 of 2024
THE BREAST CANCER (AWARENESS) BILL, 2024
By
Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P.
A
BILL
to create mass awareness among the people of all walks of life to prevent breast cancer 
among females, provide access to free screening and mammography for the women  
across the country and provide the advanced state-of-the-art treatment for those  
diagnosed with breast cancer and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Breast Cancer (Awareness) Act, 2024. 
(2) It extends to the Union territories only. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) “breast cancer” means a disease in which cells in the breast begin to grow out 
of control to form a lump; 
(c) “events” includes seminars, workshops and awareness campaigns; 
(d) ‘‘free medical treatment’’ includes supply of medicines, laboratory tests, 
medical therapy and other medical procedure free of cost to breast cancer patients; 
(e) “notification” means notification as published by the Official Gazette; 
(f) “screening” means the mammography or X-ray of the breast to diagnose breast 
cancer; and 
(g) “prescribed” means as prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall take such steps, as may be necessary, for creating 
awareness among the masses about the symptoms and treatment of breast cancer 
through the means of mass media and by organizing such events as it deem fit.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide for free medical screening in both 
urban and rural areas with the aid of local authorities to diagnose cases of breast 
cancer.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide free medical treatment to  
every breast cancer patient in Government hospitals, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a National Level Committee to monitor the progress regarding awareness 
amongst the masses about the symptoms and treatment of breast cancer.
(2) The National Level Committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of,–
(a) the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare as Chairperson– ex-officio;
(b) such number of oncologists, surgical oncologists, medical professionals 
and representatives from non-Governmental Organisations involved in breast 
cancer awareness programme to be nominated by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed- members; and 
(c) the Secretary, Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, – member- 
secretary– ex-officio.
(3) The National Level Committee shall meet at least once in six months and submit a 
report regarding the progress in creating awareness about the symptoms and treatment of 
breast cancer to the Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government on receipt of report under sub-section (3) shall cause such 
report before each House of Parliament.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services 
of members of the National Level Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf provide adequate funds, from time to time, to the State Governments 
for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
5
10
15
20
Definitions.
Central 
Government 
to create 
awareness.
Appropriate 
Government 
to provide 
free medical 
screening.
Appropriate 
Government 
to provide 
free medical 
treatment.
Constitution 
of National 
and State Level 
Committees.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Act to have 
override effect.
2
25
30
35
40
45

9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, 
before the House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modifications in the rule of both the houses agree that the 
rules should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Act not in 
derogation of 
other law.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
3

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Breast cancer among females has been on a rapid rise in the last decade and according 
to Indian Council of Medical Research 1.5 lakh new cases of breast cancer were reported 
in the year 2016. Moreover, the National Cancer Registry and Indian Council of Medical 
Research put breast cancer as the most common cancer in women in India. Breast cancer 
accounts for 29 per cent. of all cancers in women in India, with the incidence rising in the 
early thirties and peaking at ages 50-65 years. It is estimated that one in 28 women is likely 
develop breast cancer during her lifetime. 
Due to unawareness among masses about the rapid rise and severity of breast cancer, 
it is usually diagnosed in an advanced stage, where the treatment becomes ineffective and 
expensive. Recent trends also show that in India younger women are also exposed to the 
risk of breast cancer. 
The Centre and State Governments should work together to provide free diagnosis and 
medical treatment to women affected with breast cancer and help combat this grave disease.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   T.   S U M AT H Y  ( A )    T H A M I Z H A C H I     T H A N G A PA N D I A N 
November 13, 2024

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall create awareness amongst 
masses about the symptoms and treatment of breast cancer. Clause 4 provides for free medical 
screening of women to diagnose breast cancer. Clause 5 provides for free medical treatment 
of breast cancer patients. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of National Level Committee 
to monitor the progress regarding awareness amongst the masses about the symptoms and 
treatment of breast cancer. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide 
adequate funds to the State Government for the purpose of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
a sum of rupees two thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum. 
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
 to create mass awareness among the people of all walks of life to prevent breast cancer 
among females, provide access to free screening and mammography for the women  
across the country and provide the advanced state-of-the-art treatment for those  
diagnosed with breast cancer and for matters connected therewith.
(Dr. T. Sumathy(A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P .) 