1
Bill No. 167 of  2015
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In article 58 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (a), for the word "citizen",
the words "natural born citizen" shall be substituted.
3. In article 66 of the Constitution, in clause ( 3), in sub-clause ( a), for  the word
"citizen", the words "natural born citizen" shall be substituted.
4. In article 75 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—
"Provided that no person shall be eligible to hold the office of the Prime Minister
unless he is a natural born citizen of India."
Short title.
Amendment
of article 58.
Amendment
of article 66.
Amendment
of article 75.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The ongoing process of globalisation of the country's economy has enabled the
global multinational corporations to establish a powerful presence in India. Some of these
corporations have annual turnover which is almost one half of India's Gross National Product
(GNP). Given the enormous role that money has come to play in the political life of the
country, there will be temptations for these corporations to use the power of their money to
influence political developments in India.
At the same time foreign print media has begun to make inroads into our country.
Alongwith western electronic media, it has launched a cultural offensive with a view to
influence the thinking of Indian people.
These developments are fraught with grave consequences for India's sovereignty.
Sooner or later, these foreign economic and cultural interests can be expected to make efforts
to influence India's decision makers to formulate policies which may not be in national
interest.
India's citizenship laws enable foreign born persons to acquire Indian citizenship. The
Constitution of India enables any Indian citizen to be the President, the Vice-President or  the
Prime Minister, unless he is otherwise debarred. In the changing global scenario, it will not be
beyond the capacity of foreign interests to manipulate a situation to project a person who is
not a natural born citizen of the country and whose patriotism may be in doubt.
The posts of the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister are not merely
sensitive posts, they hold in their hands decision-making powers which can take the country
to wars or make compromises on the nation's security. Any person whose patriotism is
untested should not be trusted with the fate of one sixth of humanity. That is why, in the
United States for instance, only a natural born citizen is eligible to be elected as the President.
This Bill seeks to amend the Constitution to make only natural born citizens of India
eligible to be the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;  BHOLA  SINGH
July 2, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
58. (1) No Person shall be eligible for election as President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India;
* * * * *
66. (1) * * * * *
(2) * * * * *
(3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India;
* * * * *
75. (1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
* * * * *
Qualifications
for election
as President.
Election of
Vice- President.
Other
provisions as
to Ministers.
3

MGIPMRND—141 1LS(S3)—15-07-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P.)