Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 167 of 2022
THE AGRICULTURAL AND OTHER RURAL WORKERS 
(PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Rൺඇඃൾൾඍඌංඇඁൺ Hංඇൽඎඋൺඈ Nൺං඄ Nංආൻൺඅ඄ൺඋ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for protective measures  for the agricultural and other rural workers against 
exploitation and for ensuring minimum wages, pension, provident fund facilities 
and financial compensation with paid leave in case of accidents, medical, 
maternity and creche facilities to women workers, education and 
nutrition for the children and such other welfare measures to be 
ensured by the State and for the establishment of a Welfare 
Authority and Welfare Fund for such workers of the 
rural areas and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
 Bൾ it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of  the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural and Other Rural Workers (Protection and 
Welfare) Act, 2022. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.

  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
  ( a) “agricultural worker” means a person who works as a labourer on being hired or 
works in exchange, whether in cash or kind or partly in cash and partly in kind, in any of the 
agricultural or related operations of an  employer, farmer or other person, as the case may 
be;
  ( b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government:
  ( c) “Authority” means the National Agricultural  and other Rural Workers Welfare 
Authority established under section 3;
  ( d) “employer” means any person who employs directly or through any other person 
or agent or contractor, whether on his own behalf or on behalf of any other person, one or 
more agricultural or other rural worker, for any work or work connected with the agricultural 
or horticulture operations or for any other work connected with village industries;
  ( e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
  ( f) ‘‘rural worker’’ means a worker who works as artisan, weaver, potter, blacksmith, 
etc. in rural areas on hire or contract or in exchange whether in cash or kind or partly in cash 
and partly in kind for any other person or employer;
  ( g) “Welfare Fund” means the Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare Fund 
constituted under section 5.
 3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish the National Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare 
Authority for carrying out the purposes of  this Act.
  ( 2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue 
and be sued. 
  ( 3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Phaltan in Satna district in the 
State of Maharashtra and the Authority may establish regional and branch offices at other 
conspicuous places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act.
  ( 4) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
    ( a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having 
  adequate experience, qualifications and knowledge  of  labour laws and  issues  
  related  to working class or of agricultural operations or of the higher Judiciary 
  at least of sessions level;
    ( b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central   Government having 
  such education qualifications and experience as may be prescribed; 
Deﬁnitions.
2
Establishment 
of the National 
Agricultural 
and other Rural 
Workers Welfare 
Authority.

    ( c) five members to be appointed by the Central Government each to represent 
  the Union Ministries of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Finance, Labour and 
  Employment, Rural Development and Social Justice and Empowerment;
    ( d) five Members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the House of the 
  People and two from the Council of States to be nominated by the respective Presiding 
  officers of both the Houses;
    ( e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst 
  the agricultural and other rural workers:
      Provided that one such member shall be a woman. 
 ( f) four members from amongst the agricultural and other rural workers to 
  be nominated by the Government of the States which shall be rotated amongst the 
  States in alphabetical order:
  ( 5) The term of office, remuneration, honorarium and other perks of the Chairperson, 
Deputy Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed, from 
time to time.
  ( 6) The Authority in discharging of its functions and procedure to be followed during 
the meetings shall be such, as may be prescribed.
  ( 7) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and other staff 
with such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed from time to time.
 4.  (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of this Act, promote and undertake by such 
measures as it thinks fit or deem necessary and expedient, welfare measures so as to provide 
protection to agricultural and rural workers from exploitation.
  ( 2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of  sub-section (1) the 
measures referred to therein may provide for:—
    ( a) maintaining district and village-wise register of all the agricultural and 
  other rural workers, gender-wise, with such particulars, and in such manner as may 
  be prescribed;
    ( b) maintaining land records and micro and small industrial units at homes or 
  other places from village to district level in such manner and with such details as 
  may be prescribed;
    ( c) maintaining district and village-wise register of employers of agricultural 
  and other rural workers, as the case may be, with such particulars and in such 
  manner as may be prescribed;
    ( d) maintaining village and district-wise list of doctors, dispensaries, clinics, 
  health centres and hospitals providing medicare facilities, both indoor and outdoor, 
  with medicines to the agricultural and other rural workers;
    ( e) long term action plan for making work available throughout the year to the 
  agricultural and other rural workers; 
Functions of the 
Authority.
3

    ( f) payment of minimum wages fixed by the appropriate Government by each 
  employer by setting up grievances redressal committees at conspicuous places;
    ( g) maternity and creche facilities with paid maternity leave and for making 
  available necessary medicines, iron and multi-vitamin capsules for the female 
  agricultural and other rural workers covered under this Act; 
    ( h) financial compensation with paid leave in case of accidents of agricultural 
  and other rural workers in such manner as may be prescribed; 
    ( i) grant of old age pension to the agricultural and other rural workers covered 
  under this Act; 
    ( j) provident fund facility to the agricultural and other rural workers;
    ( k) educational and vocational training facilities to the children of agricultural 
  and other rural workers free of cost; 
    ( l) insurance cover for the agricultural and other rural workers covered 
  under this Act for such works and in such manner as may be prescribed;
    ( m) regular supply of meals and nutrition for the children, old and incapacitated 
  agricultural and other rural workers; and
    ( n) such other provisions as the Authority may deem necessary for carrying out 
  the purposes of this Act.
 5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish the Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare Fund 
with an initial corpus of rupees ten thousand crore to be provided by the Central 
Government by due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf and 
Governments of the States shall contribute to the Welfare Fund to such extent and in 
such manner as may be prescribed.
  ( 2) The Welfare Fund may also receive moneys from body corporates, financial 
institutions, both domestic and international ones, firms, partnerships, individuals and 
other bodies in the form of contributions or donations, as the case may be.
  ( 3) The Welfare Fund shall be utilized for the welfare of agricultural and other 
rural workers covered under this Act in such manner and for such purposes as may be 
prescribed.
 6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time   being in force, 
it shall be the duty of every employer to:—
    ( a) engage only such workers who have registered themselves with the Authority;
    ( b) pay minimum wages to the workers engaged by him or such wages in cash or 
  kind as may be voluntarily agreed to by such workers;
    ( c) not to deduct the wages in case of accident or illness or maternity stage of his 
  workers;
    ( d) give rest and leave to his workers from time to time. 
4
Establishment of 
the Agricultural 
and other Rural 
Workers Welfare 
Fund.
Miscellaneous 
provisions.

  ( 2) The appropriate Government shall provide necessary assistance to the Authority in 
carrying out the provisions of this Act within the territorial Jurisdiction of such Government.
 7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law made in this behalf, provide, from time to time the requisite funds to the States and 
Union territories and for expenditure of the Secretariat and other purposes of this Act.
8. The Authority shall prepare and submit an Annual Report in such manner and in such 
form as may be prescribed, of its activities, achievements and shortfalls, if any, pertaining 
to the welfare and protection of agricultural and other rural workers covered under this Act 
to the President of India, who shall cause the Report to be laid in both Houses of Parliament 
along with action taken by the Central Government thereon after its receipt, as soon as may 
be, but within three months of the receipt thereof.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act shall be guilty of an offence and shall 
be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months and also with fine 
which may extend to four lakh rupees.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but 
save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
any other law for the time being applicable to any matter dealt with by this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
Central 
Government to 
provide fund.
Annual Report.
Penalty.
Power to make 
rules.
5
Act to have 
overriding 
effect and to 
supplement 
other laws.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Ours is an agiculture-based country and economy as around eighty per cent. of our 
population lives in rural areas and are involved in agriculture activity in one way or the 
other. The agriculture sector generates maximum employment opportunities in comparison 
to other sectors of economy. As a result, crores of agricultural workers in the country 
including women constitute a major chunk of this workforce. Similarly, there are village 
industries which also provide substantial employment opportunities in rural India. However, 
the agricultural and rural workers are still unorganised and, as a result, they remain exploited 
throughout their lives. It has been observed that in the organised sectors there are trade unions 
and associations to take care and protect the interests of their workers who get their genuine 
demands fulfilled by their employers and also get the welfare measures implemented but the 
unorganised agricultural and rural workers do not even get their reasonable and just demands 
fulfilled by their employers. They are denied minimum wages, provident fund, pension, 
maternity benefits, creche facility, medical care, accident insurance, rest, leave, etc. There is 
no guarantee of work round the year or for majority of days during the year. Policy of hire 
and fire is applied at the whims and fancy of the employers. As a result the agricultural and 
other rural workers remain exploited, poverty-stricken and indebted throughout their lives. 
When there is natural calamity, their living condition goes from bad to worse and they do 
not even get two square meals a day. It is a matter of serious concern that their condition is 
going from bad to worse and there is no legal protection for these hapless workers. Though 
the centre has initiated a legislation for unorganized workers but it does not cover most of 
the issues of the agricultural and other rural workers.
 Ours is a welfare state and it is the sacred duty of the state to protect the poor agricultural 
and other rural workers by extending protective umbrella to them and initiating welfare 
measures for them so that they too get their share of the development of the nation.
 Hence this Bill. 
       
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                  RANJEETSINHA HINDURAO NAIK NIMBALKAR
4 July, 2022.
 
6

 FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Agricultural and other 
Rural Workers Welfare Authority. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson, a Deputy 
Chairperson and other member to the Authority. Clause 4 provides for the maintenance of 
district-wise register, etc. by the Authority. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of the 
Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of ten thousand 
crore rupees to be provided by the Central Government and thereafter, the Central and 
State Governments will contribute to the Welfare Fund. Clause 7 makes it obligatory for 
the Central Government to provide funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure 
per annum. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be  
involved. 
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules   for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
8

 
LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
 
to provide for protective measures  for the agricultural and other rural workers against 
exploitation and for ensuring minimum wages, pension, provident fund facilities 
and financial compensation with paid leave in case of accidents, medical, 
maternity and creche facilities to women workers, education and 
nutrition for the children and such other welfare measures to be 
ensured by the State and for the establishment of a Welfare 
Authority and Welfare Fund for such workers of the 
rural areas and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik Nimbalkar, M.P .) 