Short title and 
commencement. 
5
             As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
Bill No. 167 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Dr. Bachha v Shobha Dinesh, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. 
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2.  In article 243G of the Constitution for the words, “economic development 
and social justice”, the words, “economic development, spatial planning and social 
justice”, shall be substituted. 
 3. In the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) in entry (2), for the words, “and soil conservation”, the words, “soil 
Amendment of 
article 243G.
Amendment 
of the 
Eleventh 
Schedule.
10

5
2
conservation, regulation of land use and construction of buildings”, shall be 
substituted;
(b) in entry 23, for the words, “primary health centres and dispensaries”, the 
words, “primary health centres, dispensaries and solid waste management”, shall be 
substituted; and
(c) after entry 29, the following entry(s) shall be inserted, namely:—
       “30. Rural planning.
         31. Planning for economic and social development.
         32. Fire services.”. 
           

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India had more than 6,49,481 villages with a population of 83 per cent. of the 
total India’s population in 2011. In fact, the Census of India 2011 enumerated a total 
of 3894 Census towns, which are villages but had all the characteristics of urban 
area. Researchers projected this Census Towns will grow upto 17.93 million with an 
additional 2231 Census Towns in 2021.
The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992, mentions about the 
responsibility of Gram Panchayats, to prepare the social, economic and resource 
plans for rural areas, but not preparation of spatial plans. Spatial plans are prepared 
for urban areas popularly known as Master or Development Plans and notified 
under the respective State Town and Country Planning Acts. These Acts in their 
title include Country Planning, but in reality, there is rarely provision for preparing 
Development Plans for village. Many of the States do not even mention about the 
rural spatial planning in the respective Town and Country Planning Act.
Therefore, the rural areas are devoid of planned spatial development. The 
absence of planned spatial development in rural areas, especially in peri-urban areas, 
and in major highway corridors, has major impact on regional development and 
within the Metropolitan areas as well. Lack of access to basic infrastructure (social, 
economic and physical) without spatial planning leads to high cost of urbanization 
and retrofitting for provision of services at a later stage. 
Some States have come out with rules and regulations to bring about planned 
spatial development supported under RURBAN Mission, MANCHITRA and 
SV AMITV A schemes. It is imperative to provide statutory backing to planned 
spatial development of rural areas.
Well-designed rural communities & areas are places where people want to live 
and invest in the future. The proposed Bill would enable, holistic and cohesive 
planned spatial development in the rural areas which house over two-thirds of the 
country.
Hence this Bill.
 New Delhi;                                                           BACHHA V SHOBHA DINESH
July 4, 2025.

4
ANNEXURE
 [Extracts from the Constitution of India]
*        *             *                   *                    *  
               
243G. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State 
may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be 
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such 
law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon 
Panchayats, at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may be specified 
therein, with respect to— 
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; 
(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social 
justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters 
listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
 
        *  * * * * 
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
                                                    (Article 243G) 
 23. Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and 
dispensaries. 
 *                         *                            *                              *                          *                         
 29. Maintenance of community assets.
       *                       *                            *                              *                          *                                               
Powers, 
authority and 
responsibilities 
of Panchayats.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
(Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh, M.P .) 