10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 167 of 2014
THE  TOURISM  PROMOTION  AUTHORITY  BILL,  2014
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
 2. Definitions.
 3. Declaration of areas having tourism potential as tourist destination.
 4. Constitution of the Tourism Promotion Authority.
 5. Appointment of Secretary, Chief Accounts Officer and other staff of the Authority.
 6. Headquarters and other offices of the Authority.
 7. Meetings and procedure of the Authority.
 8. Vacancies not to invalidate proceedings of the Authority.
 9. Constitution of the Tourism Promotion Authority Fund.
10. Objects of the Authority.
11. Master Plan for the development of tourist destinations.
12. Functions of the Authority.
13. Acquisition of land for development of tourist destination.
14. Prior intimation of any development work by any local authority to the Authority.
15. Central Government to issue directions.
16. Accounts and audits.
17. Annual Report.
18. Returns and inspections.
19. Authentication of orders and documents of Authority.
20. Power to delegate.
21. Members and officers to be public servants.
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.
23. Power to delegate.
24. Power to remove difficulty.
25. Power to make rules.

1
THE TOURISM PROMOTION AUTHORITY BILL, 2014
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of Tourism Promotion Authority for the promotion of
tourism in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tourism Promotion Authority Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Tourism Promotion Authority constituted under
section 4; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No. 167 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
3. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that an area has tourism
potential in view of its location, ancient or historical importance or natural beauty, it may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that area to be a tourist destination.
(2) An area declared under sub-section (1) as tourist destination shall be developed by
the Authority as per international standards.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in official Gazette, constitute an
Authority to be known as the Tourism Promotion Authority for promotion of tourism and
development tourist destinations.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, having perpetual succession and a common
seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to
contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) Minister-in-charge of the Union — Chairperson, ex-officio;
Ministry of Tourism
(b) one person, whole-time member, to — Vice-Chairperson;
be appointed by the Central
Government, having proven
experience and expertise in the field
of archaeology, country and town
planning, architecture, heritage,
conservation or law
(c) Secretary, Union Ministry of Tourism — member, ex-officio;
(d) Secretary, Union Ministry of Culture — member, ex-officio;
(e) Secretary, Union Ministry of Home — member, ex-officio;
Affairs
(f) Director General, Archaeological — member, ex-officio;
Survey of India
(g) Secretaries, Department of Tourism of — members, ex-officio;
the State Governments
(h) Member of the House of People whose — member, ex-officio;
constituencies include any part of the
tourist destination
(i) Municipal Commissioner of the — member, ex-officio;
Municipality concerned
(j) Divisional Commissioner of the — member, ex-officio;
Division concerned
(k) not more than three persons to be — members.
nominated by the Central Government.
(4) The Vice-Chairperson and the nominated members shall hold office for a period of
three years.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
Vice-Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall appoint the Secretary and the Chief Accounts
Officer, respectively, of the Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
(
2) The Secretary and the Chief Accounts Officer shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties as may be specified by the Central Government.
Declaration
of areas
having
tourism
potential as
tourist
destination.
Constitution
of the
Tourism
Promotion
Authority.
Appointment
of Secretary,
Chief
Accounts
Officer and
other staff of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of other officers and staff to
the Authority as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(2) The Authority shall have its offices in every state capital or at such other places
as it may deem fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of its business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
(2) When any member referred to in sub-clause (c) or (d) or (e) of section 3 is unable to
attend a meeting of the Authority for any reason, he may depute an officer, not below the
rank of Joint Secretary, from his Department to attend the meeting and such member shall
have the right to vote.
8. No Act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid by reason of any vacancy in
the Authority.
9. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in Official Gazette, constitute a
Fund to be known as the Tourism Promotion Authority Fund.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The objects of the Authority shall be—
(a) to promote and develop tourism;
(b) to improve and strengthen the existing infrastructure in and around ancient
monuments, heritage sites and tourist destinations.
(c) to develop new tourist destinations with all basic amenities;
(d) to co-ordinate, support and interact with other departments and agencies for
streamlining services and amenities in and around tourist destinations;
(e) to provide safety and security to tourists; and
(f) to facilitate and enhance the experience of the tourists.
11. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, prepare a separate Master Plan for the
development of each tourist destination.
(2) The Master Plan shall include—
(a) vision for the development of tourist destination;
(b) measures both short term, and long term to promote and develop tourism;
and
(c) measures to strengthen the existing infrastructure in and around tourist
destination.
(3) The Master Plan of a tourist destination shall be published in at least one local
newspaper having circulation in that area for inviting objections and suggestions from
general public before such date as may be specified in the publication.
(4) The Authority shall, before finalizing a Master Plan, take into consideration all
objections and suggestions made under sub-section ( 3).
Headquarter
and other
offices of the
Authority.
Meetings and
procedure of
the Authority.
Vacancies not
to invalidate
proceedings
of the
Authority.
Master Plan
for the
development
of tourist
destinations.
Objects of the
Authority.
Constitution
of the
Tourism
Promotion
Authority
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
12. The Authority shall—
(i) prepare a calendar of activities including annual festival, melas, haats to be
organised in the each forthcoming financial year for the promotion of tourism at different
tourist destinations;
(ii) advertise such activities as it considers necessary to promote tourism at
different tourist destinations;
(iii) interact once in three months with the stakeholders including representatives
of the hoteliers, local authorities, police, Archaeological Survey of India and the Tourism
Department of the State Government concerned for proper co-ordination to develop
and strengthen tourism infrastructure in and around tourist destinations in the area;
(iv) provide amenities at such rate and in such manner to the visitors as may be
notified by the Central Government in this regard;
(v) provide such other amenities as it may deem fit for the development of
tourist destination;
(vi) recommend to the Central Government the measures to be taken for the
development of tourist destinations;
(vii) coordinate with the local authorities functioning in the area regarding any
developmental work undertaken or to be undertaken in or around a tourist destination;
(viii) maintain a website containing all essential information regarding the
tourist destination including hotels, monuments and heritage sites, tourist maps,
help desk, district administration and tour operators with a view to provide necessary
information and help to the tourists; and
(ix) levy and collect entry fee at such rate and in such manner, as may be
prescribed, from visitors at tourist destinations; and
(x) issue such directions as it may deem necessary or expedient to meet the
purposes of the Act.
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Authority and in consultation
with State Government concerned, acquire any land required for the purposes of development
of a new tourist destination under this Act.
14. (1) Whenever any development work is to be carried out in or around any the
tourist destination by any local authority, such local authority shall inform the Authority in
writing at least fifteen days before carrying out any development work along with the estimates
of expenditure likely to be incurred on development work.
(2) The Authority shall maintain a Register containing details of development works
to be undertaken by the local authorities.
(3) Any person, who intends to inspect the Register maintained under sub-section (2),
shall apply to the Authority, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(4) If, in the opinion of the Authority, any proposed development work shall adversely
affect the tourism potential of a tourist destination, the Authority may, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the agency concerned, restrain such agency from carrying out
any such development work.
15. The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue such directions to the
Authority, as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
16. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance-sheet in such form as may be
prescribed.
Acquisition of
land for
development of
tourist
destination.
Prior
intimation of
any
development
work by any
local
authority to
the Authority.
Central
Government to
issue directions.
Functions of
the Authority.
Accounts and
audits.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited at such intervals as may be specified
by the Central Government.
17. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year an annual report in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, giving a full account of its activities
during the previous year, and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central
Government.
(2) A copy of the report forwarded under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
18. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such
form and manner, as may be prescribed, such returns, statements and other particulars in
regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and development of tourism,
as the Central Government may, from time to time require.
(2) The Authority or any other officer authorized on its behalf, may call for reports and
other information from the State Government or any other agency, as may be required by it
for the efficient administration of this Act and it shall be incumbent for the State Government
or other agency concerned to furnish the information so required.
19. All permissions, orders, decisions, notices and other documents of the Authority
shall be authenticated by the signature of the Secretary to the Authority or any other officer
authorized by the Authority in that behalf.
20. The Authority may, by general or special order, direct that any power exercisable
by it under this Act may be exercised by such officer or local Authority in such cases and
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein.
21. The Vice-Chairperson, every member, officer and other employees of the Authority
shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of
this Act, to be public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
22. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Authority or any
member, officer or other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done
or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
23. The Authority may, be general or special order in writing, delegate to the
Vice-Chairperson or any member, officer of the Authority or any other person subject to such
conditions, if any as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under
this Act, as it may deem necessary.
24. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official  Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in the making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual
Report.
Returns and
inspections.
Power to
delegate.
Authentication
of orders and
documents of
Authority.
45 of 1860.
Members and
officers to be
public
servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
delegate.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Tourism in India has shown a phenomenal growth in recent times. There are still a large
number of places in India which have got immense tourist potential, but unfortunately due to
various reasons the potential could not be best utilized. The meager number of inbound
foreign tourists in comparison to other countries clearly established the lack of proactive
actions on our part. We have grossly failed to market our tourist destinations, heritage
monuments and sites aggressively whether nationally or internationally. Our existing tourist
destinations lack facilities and amenities for the tourists and therefore, they do not experience
a comfortable stay during their visits.
The Directorates of Tourism, both of the Central and the State Governments, could not
also achieve the purpose of promoting tourism and developing the destinations as model
tourist destinations. Undoubtedly, the promotion of tourism would enhance our prosperity
besides increasing the avenues of employment. We, therefore, urgently need the statutory
bodies, which can have the full focus and powers to work in this sphere of tourism.
The present Bill, keeping in view promotion and development of tourism in the country,
provides for—
(i) establishment of Tourism Promotion Authority for promotion and development
of tourism;
(ii) to improve and strengthen the existing infrastructure in and around tourist
places, ancient monuments and heritage sites;
(iii) to create and construct new permanent tourist destinations with all basic
amenities;
(iv) to motivate other departments and agencies for framing requisite schemes;
(v) to take steps to promote tourist friendly activities; and
(vi) to facilitate and enhance the experience of the tourists.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
November 12, 2014.

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Tourism Promotion  Authority
by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for appointment of Secretary, Chief Account
Officer and other staff of the Authority. Clause 6 provides for headquarter and other offices
of the Authority. Clause 7 provides for meetings and procedure of the Authority. Clause 9
provides for constitution of a Tourism Promotion Authority Fund. Clause 12 provides for the
promotion of tourism through advertisement, maintaining of website and providing amenities
for development of tourist destinations. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be incurred. However, it is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about three hundred crore will be involved per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

8
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matters will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of Tourism Promotion Authorities for the promotion of
tourism in the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2778LS(S3)—04-12-2014.