1
THE  REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(AMENDMENT) BILL,  2017
By
SHRI NINONG ERING, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted  by Parliament in the Sixty- eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After section 75A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“75B. (1) Every member of either House of Parliament shall, within ninety days
from the date on which he ceases to be member of that House, furnish the information
relating to—
(i) movable and immovable property of which he, his spouse and his
dependant children are jointly or severally owners or beneficiaries;
Bill No. 167 of  2017
Short title
and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
75B.
Declaration
of assets and
liabilities by
members of
Parliament on
cessation of
membership.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) his liabilities to any public financial institution; and
(iii) his liabilities to the Central Government or the State Government,
to the Chairman of the Council of  States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as
the case may be.
(2) The provisions of sub-sections ( 2) to ( 5) of section 75A including those
relating to furnishing of information and making and laying of rules shall also apply,
mutatis mutandis,  to this section.”.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 provides for the conduct of elections to
the Houses of Parliament and the House or Houses of the Legislature of each State, the
qualifications and disqualifications for membership of those Houses, the corrupt practices
and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the decision of doubts and
disputes arising out of or in connection with such elections.
Already, there are provisions for declaration of assets and liabilities by every elected
candidate of either House of Parliament within a period of ninety days from the date on which
he takes his seat. This helps in winning the trusts of voters and strengthen the roots of
democracy. However, there is no such provision for declaration of assets and liabilities after
the expiry of the term of membership of elected members of either House of Parliament. The
proposed amendment seeks to disclose the income and assets even after the completion of
the term of House by each Member of Parliament.
The proposed amendment in the parent Act will help in maintaining transparency and
accountability of people’s representative at the apex level. It will also help in creating a
positive atmosphere of corruption free status for Members of Parliament.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NINONG  ERING
July 11, 2017.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLES ACT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
******
75A. (1) Every elected candidate for a House of Parliament shall, within ninety days
from the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation, according to the form
set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule to the Constitution, for taking his seat in either
House of Parliament, furnish the information, relating to—
(i) the movable and immovable property of which he, his spouse and his
dependant children are jointly or severally owners or beneficiaries;
(ii) his liabilities to any public financial institution; and
(iii) his liabilities to the Central Government or the State Government,
to the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the
case may be.
(2) The information under sub-section (1) shall be furnished in such form and in such
manner as may be prescribed in the rules made under sub-section (3).
(3) The Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as
the case may be, may make rules for the purposes of sub-section (2).
(4) The rules made by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the
House of the People, under sub-section ( 3) shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are
made, before the Council of States or the House of the People, as the case may be, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions and shall take effect upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days unless they are
sooner approved with or without modifications or disapproved by the Council of States or
the House of the People and where they are so approved, they shall take effect on such
approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be, and
where they are so disapproved, they shall be of no effect.
(5) The Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as
the case may be, may direct that any wilful contravention of the rules made under sub-
section (3) by an elected candidate for a House of Parliament referred to in sub-section (1)
may be dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the Council of States or the
House of the People, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “immovable property” means the land and includes any building or other
structure attached to the land or permanently fastened to anything which is attached
to the land;
(ii) “movable property” means any other property which is not the immovable
property and includes corporeal and incorporeal property of every description;
(iii) “public financial institution” means a public financial institution within the
meaning of section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), and includes bank;
(iv) “bank” referred to in clause (iii) means—
(a) State Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of
India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955);
(b) subsidiary bank having the meaning assigned to it in clause ( k) of
section 2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);
Declaration of
assets and
liabilities.

5
(c) Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural
Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976);
(d) corresponding new bank having the meaning assigned to it in clause
(da) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949); and
(e) co-operative bank having the meaning assigned to it in clause (cci) of
section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) as modified by sub-
clause (i) of clause (c) of section 56 of that Act; and
(v) “dependant children” means sons and daughters who have no separate
means of earning and are wholly dependant on the elected candidate referred to in
sub-section (1) for their livelihood.]
*****

GMGIPMRND—2167LS(S3)—13.10.2017.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
—————
(Shri Ninong Ering, M.P .)