As INTRODUCED IN LOit SABRA ON 
,'\ ;1'<" ",.'.\.'''. 
" . 
1110 Nq., 1.., of._ 
THE NATIONAL AIRPORTS AUTHORITY BILL, 1985 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINAlIY 
CLAUSES'!" 
1. Short title, commencement and application. 
2, Definitions. 
CHAPTER'II 
NATIONAL AIllPORTS AIITHORITv 
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Authority. 
,4. Disqualification for office of member. 
5. Term of office and conditions of service of members. 
6. Vacation of office of member. 
7. Eligibility of member for fe-appointment. 
8. Meetings. 
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate pl'OCeJ!Clings of the Authority.' 
10. Appointment of officers and other employees' of the Authority. 
11. Authority to act on business principles. 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY 
12. Functions of the Authority. 
CHAPTER IV 
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT 
13. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Central Gov~ent to 
the Authority. 
14. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Authori,ty. 
15. Gontracts by the Authority. 
16. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority. 

(ii) 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
CLA:USES 
17. Power of the Authority to . charge fees, rent, etc. 
is. Additional capital and grant to the Authority by the Central 
Government. 
19. Fund of the Authority. 
20. Allocation of surplus funds. 
21. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates. 
22. Investment of funds. 
23. Borrowing powers of the Authority . 
. 24. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
25. Annual ·report. 
26. Delegation. 
27. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority. 
28. Officers and employees of the Authority to be pubhc servants. 
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
30. Custody and disposal of lost property. 
31. Provisions relating to income-tax. 
32. Power of the Authority to undertake certain works. 
33. Power to issue directions. 
34. Power of the Central Government to temporarily divest the 
Authority. 
35. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Authority. 
36. Power of 'he Central Government to issue directions. 
37. Power to make rules. 
38. Power to make regulations. 
39. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
40. Supplementary provisions respecting regulations. 
41. Power to remove d1ftlculties·. 
42. Amendment of Act 22 of 1934. 

001 1971. 
Bill No. 187 of 1985 
T~E NATIONAL AIRPORTS AUTHORITY BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of an Authority for the management of 
aerodrome;> Ilnd civil enclaves whereat domestic air transport service.t 
are operaJted aT are intended to be operated and of all commut'lication 
stations and fM matter. connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as fOllows: - . 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may ·be caUed the National Airports Authority' Ad, Short 
10 
1985. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by I1j1iiW0ri in the Official Gazette! appoint. 
(3) It applies' to-
(a) all aerodromes whereat domestic air transport services are 
operated or are intended to be operated, other than-
(i) aerodromes to which the Int~maticm.al Airports Aut:hq~ 
rity Act, 197t applies; and 
title. 
c~­
cement 
and 
,,,pllea-
b. 

emsli· I' 
tUlj!o?P 
ai:,j!"" or ~~ ,. 
poradon 
of ~. 
"~lf. 
2 
(ii) aerodrome and airfields belonging to, or subject to the 
control of, any anned force of the Union; 
(b) all civil enclaves; 
(c) all aeronautical communication stations; 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(4) "air traffic service" includes flight 
alerting service, air traffic' advisory service, air 
area control service, approach contr~l service 
'service; 
information service, 
traffic control service. 
and aerodrome control 
5 
(b) "air transport service" means any, service, for any kind of 1(, 
remuneration, whatsoever. for the Thansport by air ofpcrsoDS, mail 
or any other thing, animate or inanimate, whether such service 
relates to a single flight or series of flights; . ' 
(e) "Authority" means the National Airports Authority cons-
tituted UDder section 3;' 15 
(d) "civil enclave" means the arefl, if any, allotted at an aero-
drome belonging to any armed force of the Union, for use by persons 
availing of any air transport services from such aerodrome or for the 
handling of baggage or cargo by such service. and includes land com-
prising of any building and structure on, such area. 20 
(e) "heliport" means an area, either at ground level or elevated 
on a structur~,' used Df intended to be used for the landing and take off 
of 'helicopters and includes any "area for parking helicopters and' all 
'bundings 8nc:t strw:tQ.res theswn or N)pertaining tQenlto; 
(f) "member" means a 1IleI1)ber Qf the Au.thority and includes the Chair _ 25 
man, blJL does not include, for tbe purposes of sections 4,5,6 and 7. an 
e:r officio member referred to in cla}lSe (b) of sub-section (3) of sec-
'tion 3; , 
(g) "pregcribed'" means prescribed by ru1cs made under thi!; Act: 
(h) "regulations" meln regulations made under this Act; and 30 
(;) words a~d expressi0R5' used herein and not defined bu1 defined 
in the Aircraft Act 1934, shal,1 have the meanm., respeetively assig-
ned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTf~ II 
~E NATIOlf.AL AI.PORT AV'I'HORI'l'Y 
3. (1) With efteet hom the commencement of this Ad, the ce.tral 
Go?emmen~ shall, e~DIUtute a~ authority to'~ ~-aJ'" Uae National 
~ Authority.," ", 
t' 
35 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by t~ name ~re8aid 
having perpetual succession and a, comm~n seal, with power, subject to 40 
,tae piovtsions of t~ls A,ct, to aequire, ho~d and di~pose of property both 
movable and immovable, ,'and to, contract and shall bv ~O 'said'name sue 
.. .4 -t>e'~. . (. -ft,,.,. " , 
22 or 
1934. 

3 
(3) The Authority shall consist of-. ,. -' . " .. ,. ~ . .~ ~ . .. 
(a) a ClJoair~n to be """pointed by the <;:eDtr.a1 ,~~Dt; 
(b) the Director-General of Civil Aviation, er ot!it*J:: Ill\d 
, , (c) not Jess than eight and Dot more than fourteen 'membe.rs to be 
5'~' .' 'dIpI)oioted by theCentral·(Jovemment; 
, ' (4-) 1be. Oiamnari shan be a whOle-time member and other l niembers re-
ferred to in c1au-se (e) of sub-section (3) may be appointed as whdle-time 
or part-time members as the ·Central.Government may think :fit, 
(So) The Chairman and the members ,referred to in 'c1auae (.c) of sub-
10 section (3) shall'be chosen from among persons who 'have speciai bow-
le.·and e;xperien~_ in air tr,lDsport or o~r .transport _rvi~ industry, 
.c.mmerdJll OF ·iDanciaJ ~aiter~ or administration and;from amoog per-
sons who are capable of representing organisations -of .workers aDd. con-
sumers .. ......... 
" " 
15 •• A ,per«On shaU!be' disqunlihed for tNmtg appointed .$ a·lnetnibM'~f he-
20 
(a) has been con.victed and se·ntenced to imprisonmertt' for an';Oftence. 
.. : .wbic.~, jl\..t~ .. \QPin.i~ ,at the ,<?~ral Qo,VOfllQlellt, ;in.voiVe5 ~ ~t"'c; or 
(b) is an uRdis.r~ insolvent; or" " . .. ,'," 
(d is of unsound' mind and stands so declared by a com.petent court; or 
. (d) ~s ~en rcmove~ ~r dis1Oissed .. frQIU the service of the Gqvem-
ment or a body corpo~ate owned or controlled by .tl)e Government~ or 
'. .'.... . ..... ', 
.. (,..{e). ,h~o; in the. opinion .of t&le Central Gov.ern~e,nt such .fiD.a,l\CiaJor 
other jntere~t in the Authority as is likely to a.fIcqprejudici!llly ,the dis-
cbarge bv him of his functions as a member. . 
,. • ',1 • <I '.', • • •• " 
25. .;» • .(l).Subject ~ the pl"ovisions -of section '6, every memPez' ·('tther 
than the ex officio meD;l.ber). aQal~ kokto1Jiee for a peliod.,0f thr. Ye.fs 
f.~oll) the (i.~te on which be, ass~es office: • I " 
. Pmvidtd 'fhat the Ct!utrel Govcramentmay-' 
,. .. -, ' .. , 
, (a) terminate t~ a.ppointment of any ~holclime ltlCl1)Qcr. who is not 
3° . it servant' of lh~ Government, after giv}ng hill) Dl~tjce' for. a periOd O! .~ot 
less than three months or in lieu thereof, on payment of .an. amOunt equal 
:1O.his sitJ,aty aQd allowance:.;, if ally, fur' a puiod of· throe months; • 
.,. ',' ,,' 
(b) terminate the appointment of'any p~time member who is 
-not a servant of the Government after giviltg him' DOUce for such 
period as may be prescribed; and'· ., ... 
.~ . (el termintie· at any time' the appoiiitr.ent of' any '1IJe*r who is 
a servant of the Government. .' 
(2) The other cenditions C'A service or the members' shaN be sUch as may 
be prescribed. '. .' . '. 
40 lJ)' Ally iDeriIbet may feSiga his 'CIffii:c by giving notice in writin; fili such 
'period" as' JD3V bepreiscribed; 10 '!he' C.ennl :~errrmenc enet. On sUdtlresigwa-
'tibni1DeiAg . ndtifiecf ' in' the OfBIcial G~artte 'by that Government; Such' 
member shall be deemed to have .. vacatedhis office. 
(4) A ca'\ual vacancy caused by the resignation' of' a:' ~r uinde~ sub.. 
45~c~ {,3),or Ittherwise ~ay. hi tilled by, fteahappobumeDt .a~ tb~pper­
.pcln ~·.appojn,~,sbalI hold,~f.OI' ·the~~in~ •. ~d :(W" ~~~ 
member in whose plaq.he .is~~ w.eukl h4aye. ~d. eftke ... , ,'.; 
Disquali· 
fication 
for office 
of "" .. 
JIIIIIIDIIcr,: ; 
.i 
: ·1"1',' 
Term of 
office 
and 00ft-
dibaof 
service of 
members. 
t .. 'I •• ~ 
. .' . " ' .• ~. 
. ''.. "I 7,", 
'l,;t:~ I ,\ 
,.:.'1 ~ .4-
-: "'/". ~. ~ 
. ,,' . '. ~ .. ~. 
, " ~ .. I:; 
.. .. .~~ .... ~ 
~ ... ." 

Vacation 
ofoftlce 
of 
member. 
PJiJibility 
of member 
for re-
appoiJlt-
meat. 
V.canci •• 
etc., not 
to iIm· 
lidate pro. 
ceeclialS 
otthe 
Autho. 
rity, 
Appoint-
mentor 
oIIlc:ers 
aadather 
employees 
or the 
Author!ty. 
4 
I. The Central. Government . shall remove a member if he-
(4) becames lubject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 
'~m4:' . 
Provided that no member shall be removed on the ground that 
he has become subject to the disqualification mentioned f.n, clause (e) .5 
of that section, 'unleh he has- been given a rea.onable opportunity' of 
beil'lg heard in the matter; or 
('b) reifW1e6 to act or becomes incapable of acting; or 
: (c) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority, 
. absent from three consecutive meetings of the Authority; or 10 
(d> in the opinion of' the Central Government. has so . abused his 
, po,sition . as to render his· continuance 'in oRiCe detrimental to the 
publie interest: . 
. Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause un-
less 'he has ~n given a reasonable opportunity of bein~ heard in J 5 
tltte matter. . 
7. Any penron cealling flo be a member shall, unless' disqualited 
under section 4, be eligible for reappointment as such. 
. 8, (l)T):le Authority shall meet. at such times and places, and shall 
o~serve such l'u1es of procedure in regard to the transaction. of the 20 
business at its meeting!! (including the quorum at such meetinJfS) as may 
be provided by regulations. 
(2) The Chairman, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend ;;W 
. ineetilig' of the Authority. any "other member. chosen by the membe~ 
" present at "the meeting shall pretfde at the me6ting. . -
(3) All 'questions which come up before any meeting of the 
Authority shall be decided by' a majority of the votes of the members 
present and voting, and, in the eventot an equality of votes. the Chair-
man, or in his absence, the penon' presiding, shall have and exercise a 
. second or casting vote. . 
t. No act' or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by 
reason of-
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
Authority; or 
25 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting. • 35 
member of the Authority; or 
(e) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority 110t 
affecting the merits of the case. 
~O. (1) For the purpose of enabling it eftlciently to diM!harge its func- . 
tions under this Act, the Authority shall, subject to the provisions of 40 
aeetion 13 and to such rules as' may be made in this behalf. appOint 
(whether on deputation or otherwise) such number tel' _~rs and other 
employees as it may consider necessary: ~ 
Provided, that the appointment of such categot'v 0( officers, as may be 
. ~ after consultation with the Chairman in suc:h rules, .hall bfJ 4~ 
,object lo the .pproval Of the Central aovemrnent; . 

~ 
(2) Subject to ·the. proviaiaa. ot .:ti&n 13, 'every ~~ '. or otheJi 
employee appointed by the Authority shall be subject to such conditions 
of service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be deter-
mined by regulations. 
5 11. In the discharge of its functions· under this Act, the. Autllerity 
shall act, so far as may be, on business principlei-. . 
CHAPTER III 
FuNCTIONS OF THE A UTHORlTY 
. 12. (1) Subject to the rules, if oy, made by the ,Central Government 
1 () in this behalf, it shall be the function of the Authority to manaae the 
aerodromes, the. civil enclave$ and the . aeronautical . eommunicatiOD 
statio,ns etftclently. ' 
(2) It shall be the duty of the AuthOrity to provide air tramc ser-
. vice and air, transport service at ·any aerodrome and civil enclaves. 
15 (3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained 
in sub-sections (1) and (2), the Authority may-
(a) plan, develop, construct· and maintain runway" taxiway., 
aprons and t~rminals and aneillal'Y buildings at the aerodromes and 
civil enclaves; 
~o (b) plant, procure, instal and maintain navtpUonal aids, com-
munication equipment, beacons and ground 81ds.~t the . aero~ 
and at such locations as may be considered necessary., foraafe 
navigation and operation of aircraft; , 
(c) provide air safety services and search and 1"eIICue facilities 
~5 in co-ordination with other agenci~s; 
35 
(d) establish schools or ~titutions or centres for the traininl of 
its officers and employees in regard to any matter cennected with 
the purpose" of this Act; 
(e) construct resid~nti!'il buildings for its employees; 
?W 
(f) establish and maintain hotels, restaurants and restroomll at 
or near the aerodromes; 
(g) establish warehouses and cargo· complexes at the aetodrOmei 
for, the storage or preceaaing of goods; 
(h) arrange for postal, mOney exchange, insurance and tele-
phone faciiities for the' use of passengers and other persons at tM 
aerodromes alid civil· ·enclaves; 
(i) make appropriate arrangements for watch and ward at the 
aerodromes and ciVil enclaves;. 
(;) regwate and control the plying of yeh1clet, arid the entry 
40 'and exit of pauengers and visitors,'in th, : ··ae~om.M . and ~ 
Authority 
10 actOll 
bUIiD.M 
priacipla. 
~ 
oldie 
Audaonty. 

I'" - ....... '_ 
f· ; •••••• 
) •••• #1, .. 
to. .... 
Transfer' 
of uset8 
and liabi· 
lities of 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
tbcAutho-
rity. 
{) 
_~ ::;~ves';.w:l'th Cil.'reg.td't&ttlle security'ed'protocol' ftmetious of'the 
Government of India: " 
(k) develop and provide consultancy servlces, in India and 
abl'oad in relation to planning and develQPment or airports, air-
" ~vigation services, groWl.d aids and, safety services Or any, faci- 5 
'Htles thereat; , • , . 
(1) establish and manage heliports; 
(m) provid;e such transport facility as are in the opinion of the 
Authority, necessary to the passengers travelling by air; 
(n) form one or more companies under the Companies Act, 1958 10 1 of 19'6 
· I,":W ~ ~y otbw'law relating-to eompanie8'to further the'eftident 
~' ,;. cii~ge of .the functions imposed OD' i·t· by thts' Act~ , 
.. , , (0')' take all sud1 steps as may be ne<lessary or eon~ent fot, 
or may be incidental to, the exercise of any power or the dis~ 
.... " ch.lu-g~of . any. .fur,c~on col',lferred _ or imposed QD. it. by this Act; and 15 
(p)' perform any other function corutidered neoeasary:O'l" desi-
rable by the Central Government for ensuring the safe and effie!-
· '·'f!ri.t'\opet8tlen ··of' aireraft to, trbm and acrOss'the air spliCe of India. 
" '-
(4) In the discharge of its functions under this section, the Authority 
~l<.,bawe due'l'egard to,the development of air transport 'service and to 20 
tbe:eftlcie~y, economy and. safety of such ~ee. 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as-
." ." . '(11,) ~4~g;'an' obU~t1on on' the Authorlty to discharge any, 
'~"'~On or duty 'lindft-'this seetion'withre!ipecl to any aerodrome to 
.whtch th1S" Act does 'not apply; . . 25 
, . . . 
(b) authoriSing the disregard by the AuthOrity of any law for 
tl2e, time being in force; or . 
(c) authoriSing any person to institute any proceeding in respect 
,ofAuty or, liability to. which the Authority or its .omeers or other 
f. :~Rloy:et!l. would ~ot otherwise be subject. 
CHAPTER IV 
PJtOPERTY' AND' co~' . 
. 13. (1) As from: "SUCh date as' the Cent~al Government'may appoint 
by notification in the Official Gazette-
(0)' aU'properttes and-otMr assets ine!Udiligthe equipment and 35 
navigational and ground aids relating :to Air Ti'afIlc' SerVices and 
. ves!-ed in the Central Government for the p~rposes of any aerodrome, 
.'" "civii :enc1ave4hd aeronautical C!ornhlunication station and adminis-
· . tered by the DirectOr-General df' Civil' Aviation ~~niedi~tely before 
such date shall vest in the Authority; , 
(b)" an' properties and other assets vested in the CentralGov-
ernment for the purposes of Civil AViation Trainirig Centre. Allaha-
. bad ~d, the Fire Servjces Training School, Calcutta and administered 
:.~ ~ DireciOr~~rletal of "c~vii Aviatiop .'immediately before such 
... dat'S!alt vest in the Authority; , .. 45 
• 

7 
(c) all residential buildings owned ~y the Director-General of 
Civil Aviation ir~mf'diately before such .... .lte shall vest in the Autho-
rity; 
5 
(d) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred. all contracts 
entered into, and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with, 
or for the Central Government immediately before such date for or 
in connection with the purposes of any aerodrome, civil enclave, 
aeronautical communication station, the Civil Aviation Training 
Centre and the Fire Services Training School shall be deemed to have 
10 been incurred, entered into.and engaged to be done by, with, or for 
20 
the Authority; . 
(e) all non-recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Gov-
emment fer 011' m oonnectlon with the purposes of any aerodrome, 
mvtl enclave; aeronautical communleatton station, Civil Aviation 
Training Centre, FIre Services TraIning Schodl up to such date and 
deelared to be capital" elitpellllitare by the Central Government shaU, 
subject to such terms and ecndlUons as may be determined by the 
Central Government, be treated as capital provided by the Central 
Government to the Authority; 
(f) all sums of money due to the Central Government In relation 
to any aerodrome, civil enclave, aeronautical COIDlDUDicatioD lltation, 
Civil Aviation Training Centre and Fire Services Training School 
immediately before such date shall be deemed to be due to the 
Authority; ~ 
(g) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could 
have been instituted by or against the Central Government imme-
diately before such date for any matter in relation to any aerodrome, 
civil encJ.Qve, aeronautical communication station, Civil Aviation 
Training Centre and Fire Services Training School may be continued 
or instituted by or against the AuthOrity. 
(2) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of the properties, rights 
or liabilities of the Central Government have been transferred to the 
Authority or as to which of the employees serving under the Director-. 
General of Civil Aviation are t'o be treated as on deputation with the 
35 Authority under this section, such dispute or doubt shall be decided by 
the Central Government in consultation with the Authority and the 
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
(3) Every employee holding any office under the Director-General 
of Civil Aviation immediately before the commencement of this Act 
40 solely or mainly for or in connection with such affairs of the Directorate-
General of Civil .Aviation ~s are relevant to the funetions of the Autho-
rity under this Act as may be detennined by the Central Government 
shall be treated as On deputation with the Authority but shall hold his 
office in the Authority by the same tenure and upon the same terms and 
45 conditions of sernce as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, 
retirement Or other terminal benefits as he would have held s.uch office, 
if the Authority had not been consti.tuted and shall continue to do so 
until the Authority duly absorbs such employee in its regular service: 
Provided that during thEl.periQd of deputation of any s~ch employee 
50 with the Authority. the Authorit ... sha:ll pay the Central Government in 
respect of every such employee, such contribution towardg his leave 
salary, pension and gratuity as the Central Government may, by order, 
determine: 

Compul-
lory 
Bal,Uisi-
tioDo1' 
land for 
the Autho_ 
rity. 
Contracts 
by the 
Authority. 
Mode of 
executing 
contracts 
on behalf 
of the 
Authority. 
Power of 
tile Autho-
lIty to 
charge 
fees, rent. 
etc. 
8 
Provided further that any such employee, who hu, in respect of the 
proposal of the Authority to absorb him in his regular service, 'intimated 
within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Authority hill 
intention of not becoming a regular employee of the Authority, shall not 
be absorbed by the Authority. 5 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the absorption 
of any employee by the Authority in its regular service under this section 
shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or 
other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal 10 
or other authority. . 
14 of 1947. 
14. Any land required by the Authority for discharging its fWlC-
tions under this Act shall be. deemed to be needed for a public purpose 
and such land may be .acquired for the Authority under the provisions 
of the Land Acquisition Act 1894 or of any other oorresponding law for 15 1 of 1894. 
the time being. in llorce. .' 
15. Subject to. the provisiOllS ·of section 16, the Authority shall be com-
petent to enter into ann perform any contract uecessary for the didarge d. 
its functions under this Act: . 
16. (1) Every contract sbalt, on behalf of the Authority, be imide by the. 20 
Chairman or such' other member or such officer of the· Authorilty as may. be 
generally or specially empowered in this behalf by the Authority ana such: con-
tracts or class of contracts as may be specified in the regulations shall be 
sealed with the common seal of the Authority. 
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the Central 25 
Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf shall be 
made unless it has been previously approved by the Authority. .. 
Provided further that no contract for the acquisitiOll1 or sale of immovab1e 
p.roperty or k'T Itb:e lease of any such property for a term exceeOi.ng: thirty years 
and no other contract exceeding such vaiue or amount as ·the Central Govem- 30 
nient may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behailf shall be made unless 
it has been previously ap!ll'oved by the Central Government. . 
(;1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) the form and manner 
in which any contract shall be made. under this Act shall be such as may 
be specified 1;>y regulati~ns. 35 
(3) No contrac·t which is not in accordance. with the provisions of· this Act 
and the regulationc; shall be hinding on the Authority. 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT. 
17. The Authority may,- 40 
(i) with the previous approval of the Central Government, charge 
~ees or rent,-
(4) for the Janding, housinp: or packing of aircraft. or for any 
moor service. or facility off~red in connedion with aircra:llt operations 
,t any aerodrome or heliport. 
Explanation.-In this sub-cla\ll;e 'aircraft" does not include 45 
an aircraft be10nging to any armed force of the Union and 
"aircraft operations" do not include operatiotW; C)f ap~~ aircraft 
belonging to the said forct'. 

2 of 1934. 
9 
(b) for providing air trafti~ services, ground safety services 
. aeronautical communications and navigational aids and meteoro-
logical services at any aerodrome and at any aeronautical com-
munication station; 
5 (.c) for the amenities given to the passengers and visitors at 
any aerodromE, civil enclave or heliport; 
(d) for the uSe and enjoyment by persons of facilities and 
~ther servioees provided by the Authority at any aerodrome, 
civil enclave or heliport; 
)0 (i~) with. due regard to the instructions that the Gentral Gov-
ernment may give to the Authority, from time to time, charge fees 
or rent from persons who are given by the A.uthority any facility 
for carrying on any trade or business at any aerodrome or heliport. 
18. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
15 Parliament by law in this behalf,-
20 
(a) provide any capital, over and above the capitall provided 
UDder elause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 13 that n.ay ~ be requi-
red by the Authority fOl' the discharge of its fwactions under this 
Act or for any purpose connected therewith on such terms and 
conditions as that Governmeat may determine; 
(b) pay to the Authority on sueh terms and conditions as the Cen-
tral Government may determine, by way of loans or grants' such 
8U.II1S of money as tbat Govwnmen.t Dlay consider neeetlll&r'y for the 
eftlcient discharge by tbe Authority of its functions WIder this Act. 
25 19. (1) The Authority shall have its own fund and all receipts of 
the Authority shall be credited' thereto and all payments of the Autho-
rity shall be made therefrom. 
(2) The Authority shall have power, subject to the prOVISions of 
this Act, to spend such sums as it thinks fit to cover all administrative 
expenses of the Authority and on objects or for purposes authorised by 
30 this Act lmd. such sums shall be treated as expenditure out of the fun c] 
of the Authority. 
(3) All moneys standing at the credit of the Authority which cannot 
immediately be applied as provided in sub-section (2), shall be deposited 
35 in the Stllte Bank. ~f India or in such scheduled. bank or ba~ks and sub-
ject to such conditions as may, from time to time, beSpeclfted by the 
Central Government. 
ExplaM.'tion..-In this sub-secti'Oll, "scheduled bank" has the same 
meaning as in clause (e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934 . 40 . 
20. (1) The Authority may, from time to time, set apart such 
amounts as it thinks fit as a reserve fund or funds for the purpose of 
expanding existing facilities or services or creating new facilities or 
services ~_, aerodrome or for the purpose of providing against any 
4" temporary decrease of revenue or increase of eXpenditure from transient 
:> causes c:k for purposes of replacement or for meeting expenditure aris-
ing from loss 'or damage from fire, cycl~ne. air-crash or other accident 
or for meeting any liability arising out of any act or omission in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act: 
Additional 
Capital 
andgrKnt 
10 the 
Authority 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment .. 
Fund 
Oftbe 
Authority. 
Alloca-
tion of 
lurpJus 
funds. 

Submiuion 
of pro-
grammeof 
activities 
and finltn~ 
cialelli-
mates. 
Invest-
mentof 
funds. 
Berrowing 
powers 
of the 
Authority. 
&couat'l 
and 
audit. 
10 
Provided. that without prejudice to the right of the Authority to 
establish specific reserves for one or more specific purposes, the Authority 
shall also have the power to establish a genenJ reserve: 
Provided further that the sums set apart annually in respect of each 
or 'any of the specific and general reserves ,and the aggregate at ,any 5 
time of such sums shall not exceed such limits as may, from time to time, 
be fixed in that behalf by the Central Govemplent. 
(2) After making provision for suchreservetund or funds and for 
bad and doubtful debts. depreciation in assets and all other matters 
which are usually provided for by companies registered and incorP9ra- 10 
ted under the Companies Act, 1956· the Authority shall pay the balance 
of its annual net profits to the Central Government. 
21. (1) The Authority shall, before the commencement of each finan-
cial year, prepare a statement of the programme of its activities during 
the forthcoming financial year as well as a financial estimate in respect 15 
thereof. 
(2) The statement prepared 1l,Ilder sub-sectian (1) shall not less than 
three months before the commencement of each financial year, be sub-
mitted for approval to the Central Go~ernment. 
(3) The statement and the financial estimates of the Authority may, 20 
with the approval of the Central Government, be revised by the Autho-
rity. 
22. The Authority may invest its funds (including any reserve fund) 
in the securities of the Central Government or in such other manner as may 
be prescribed. 25 
23. (1) The Authority may, with the consent of the Central Govern-
ment or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority 
given "to it by the Central Government borrow money from any source 
by the issue of bonds, debentures or such other instruments as it may 
deem fit for discharging all or any of its function. under this Act. 30 
(2) The Central Government may guarantee In sueb manner as It thinks 
At, the repa)'Dlellt of the principal and the payment of linterest thereon 
with respect to the loans borrowed by the Authority under sub-section 
(1). 
(J) Subject to such limits as the Central Government may, from time 35 
to time, lay down, the Authority may borrow temporarily by way of 
overdraft or otherwise such amounts as it may require for discharging its 
functions under this Act. 
24. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other rele-
vant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the 40 
profit and loss account and the balance-sheet in such form as may be 
prescribed by the CeQtral. Government in consultation with the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India', 
(2) The accounts of the Authority' shall be audited annually by 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure in- 45 
curred by him in conn'ecti:n with such audit shall 'be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. ' 
(J) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any pel"8On 
appoInted by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of th~ 
Authority shall have the same rights' and' privileges and authority In 51> 
I of 19S6. 

11 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and, Auditor-GenetaJ. has 
in connect jon with the audit 'of Government _ accounts and, in particular, 
shall have the right to ,demand the production of books, accounts, con-
nected vouchers, documents and papers and inspect any of the offices 
5 of the Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him 
in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause 
10 the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
CHAPTER VI 
MIscE:l.IJANEOus . 
25. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be after the end of each 
financu.I year, prepare and submit to, the Central Government in such 
15 form as may be prescribed a report giving an account of its activities 
during that financial year and the report shan also give an account of 
the activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Authority dur-
ing the next financial year. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid 
20 before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after it is submitted. 
26. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing. dele-
gate to the ChairInan or any other member' or to any officer of the 
Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be 
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act 
25 (except the powers under section 38) as it may deem neCessary. 
27. All orders and decisions of the Authonty shall be authenticated 
by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by 
the Authority in this behalf and all other instruments executed by, the 
Authority ,shall be authenticated by the s~gnature of an officer of the 
30 Authority authorised by it in this behalf. 
28. All officers and' employees of the Authority shall, when acting or 
,purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any 
rule or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants 
45 of 1880. within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
35 29. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie' against the 
.Authority or Clny member or any officer or other employee of the Autho-
rity fo!' anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder or 
for any damage sustained by any aircraft or vehicle in consequence of 
40 any defect in any of the aerodromes, civil enclaves, aeronautical commu-
nication stations or other things belongi,ng to or under the control of the 
Authority. 
30. Subject to such regulations as th~ Authority may make in this 
• behalf, the Authority shall provide for securing the safe custody and 
restoration of any property which, while not. in proper custody, js found 
45 0:.1 any premises belonging to th~ Authority or under its overall. control 
o!' in any aircraft on any such premises. 
Submis· 
8ionof 
&DDual 
report. 
Delegation. 
Autheati-
cation 
of orden 
and other 
iutna-
meats 
oftbe 
Authority. 
Oftkers 
and emp-
loyees 
of the 
Authority 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Protection 
of action 
taken 
inlood 
faith. 
Custod)' 
&Del 
dlspoul 
oflOlt 
property. 

Provisions 
rc\atinJ 
to incornc-
tax. 
Powcrof 
the Autho-
rity to 
undertake 
certain 
worb. 
Power 
to issue 
direc-
tions. 
Power of 
the 
Ct'aIIr~ 
Oovem-
meDlW 
tempora-
rily 
divest 
tbeAUlilo-
rity of 
thelDlUla-
FlDCIlt 
of any. 
aero-
drome 
31. For. the purpqses of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other enact-
ment for the time·being in force relating to income-tax or any other tax 
on income, profits or gains, the Auth~rity shall be deemed to be a com-
pany within the meaning of the Incom~tax Act, 19'61 and shall be liable 
to tax accordingly. on its inr.ome, profits and gains. 5 
32. The Authority may undertake to carry out on behalf of any person 
any works or services or any class of works or services on such tenns and 
conditions as may be agreed upon between the Authority. and the person 
concerned. 
33. (1) The Authority or any officer specially authorised by it in this 
10 
bahalf mRy. from time to time, by order, issue directions. consistent with 
provisions of the Aircraft Act, 1934, and the rules made theteunder, 
with respect to any of the matters specified in clauses (f), (h), (i), (j), 
(k), (m), (p), (qq), and (r) of sub-section (2) of section 5 of ~hat Act, 
to any person or persons engaged in aircraft operations or using any Itl 
aerodrome or civil enclave, in any case where the Authority or the 
officer is satisfied that in the ,interests of the security of India Or for 
securing the security of the aircraft it is necessary to do so. 
(2) Every direction issued under sub-section (1) shall be complied 
with by the person or persons to whom such direction is issued. 20 
(.~) If any person wilfUlly fails to comply with any direction issued 
under this section, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to si" months or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
34. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of opinion that in 25 
the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may by order, 
direct the Authority to entrust the management of any aerodrome civil 
enclave or aeronautical communication station 'with effect from. such 
date and to such pe~on as may be specified in the order and the Autho-
rity shall be bound to comply with such direction. 30 
Provided that before an order is made under this sub-section the 
Authority shall be given a rea'sonable opportunity of being heard in the 
matter. 
(2) Where the management of any aerodrome civil enclave or aerO-
nautical communication station is entrusted to any person specified under 35 
sub-section (1) (thereafter in this section referred to as the authodsed 
person), the Authority shall cease to exercise and discharge all its po-
wers and functions under this Act in relation to such aerodrome civil 
enclave or aeronautical communication station and such powers and 
functions shall be exercised and discharged by the authoris~d person in 40 
accordance with the instructions, if any. whiCh the Central Government 
may give to the authorised person from time to time. 
Provided that no such power or function as may be specified by the 
Central Government by a general or special order shall be exercised or 
discharged by the authorised person except with th:e previous sanction 45 
of the Central Government. 
(3) An order made under sub-section .(1) shall uuleu..r~scinded, be 
in operation for a period of six months from the date on whiqh the mana-
gement of the aerodrome civil encJave or aeronautical. communication' 
station is. entrusted to the authorised person. 50 
Provided that the Central Government may extend such period for 
a further period or periods not exceeding eighteen months .. 
43 of 1961 
22 of 1934. 

13 
(4) 'During the operation of an order made under 8ub-section (1), it 
shall be competent for the Central Government to issue, from time to 
time, such directions to th<! Authority as are necessary to enable the 
authorised person to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of 
, 5 the . Authority under this Act in relation to the aerodrome civil enclave 
or auronauti~l communication station, the management of which .bas 
been entrusted to him and in particular to transfer any sum of money 
from the .fund of the Authority to the authorised person for the mana-
gement of the aerodrome civil enclave or aeronautical communication 
10 station and every such direction shall be complied with by the AuthOrity. 
(5) On the cesser of operation of any order made under sub-section 
(1) in relation to any aerodrome civil enclave or aeronautical communi-
cation station, the. authorised penon shall cease to exercise and perform 
the powers and functions of the Authority under this Act in relation to 
15 such aerodrome civil enclave or aeronautical communication station and 
the Authority shall continue to exercise and perfonn such powers and 
function.s in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(6) On. the cesser of operation of any order made under sub-tection 
(1) in relation to any aerodrome civil enclave, aeronautical communi-
20 cation station, the authorised person shall hand over' to the Authority 
any property (including any sum of money or other asset) remaining 
with him in connection with the management of stich aerodrome civil 
enclave, aeronautical communication station. 
(7) Anything done or any action taken. lawfully by the authorised 
25 person in relation to any aerodrome civil enclave. aeronauticalcommu-
nication.. station during the period of op'l!ration of an order made under 
sub-section ('1) shall be deemed ~o have been done or taken by the 
Authority and shall be binding on the Authority. 
4.0 
35. (1) If, at any time. the Central Gov~rnment is of opinion-
(a) that on account of a grave emergency the Authority is 
unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this act; or 
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in comply-
ing with any direction issued by the Central Government under this 
Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by 
or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default 
the financial position of the Authority or the administration of any 
aerodrome civil enclave, aeronautical commu~ication station has de-
teriorated; or 
(e) that circumstances exists which render it necessary in the 
pUblic interest so to do, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
superSede the Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as 
may be specified in the notification: 
45 Provided. that befor~ issuing a notification under this sub-section ~or 
the reasons mentioned in clause (b) the C~ntral Government shall gIve 
a reasonable opportunity to the .Authori~ to show. cause 'why it should 
not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if 
any. of the Authorit7' 
Power of 
the 
Central 
Govern-
mant to 
supersede 
tbe Autho-
rity, 

Power of 
the 
Central 
Govern-
, lIlent 
to illUC 
direo-
noaa. 
Power 
to' 
mate 
ruta. 
14 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-.section (1) sup-
er8eding the Authority,-
(4) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, 
vacate their oftlces 88 such; 
. (b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under 5 
the prOvisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf 
~f the Authority, shall until the Authority is re-constituted under 
Bub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or per-
sons. as the Central Government may direct; 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until 10 
the Authority is re-constituted under sub-section (3). vest in the 
Central Government. 
(3) On. the expiration of the' period of supersession specified in the 
no~ification issued under sub-secti~n (1); the Central Governm'ent, may-
. " .. ", 
(a) extend the period of ·supersession for such further term, not 15 
exceeding six mo~tbs. as it may consider necessary; or 
. (~) re-constitute the· Authority - by fresh appointment and in 
such case any persons who vacated their offices under clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment: 
PrOVided that the Central Government may, at any time before the 20 
expiration of the period of supersession, whether as originally specified 
ullder sub-section (1) or as extended under this sub-section take action 
under clause (b) of this sub-section. ' 
. (4) The C~ntral Governinent shall -cause a notification {.sued under 
s1UJ-section (1) and a fu.ll report of any action taken under this 'Section 25 
and., the circumJtances _ leadi~g to such action to be . laid before both 
Houses of Parliament at the earl~est opportunity. 
36. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the 
Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this 
Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Gov- 30 
ernmen,t ,IJl8y give in writing to it from time to time: 
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given 
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this 
su~section. 
(2) The decision of the Central GOvernment whether a question is 35 
one of policy or not shall be final. 
31. (1) The Central Government may,by notifi£ation ·in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
J{oinA power. such rules may provide fOT- 40 
(a) the conditions of service of the Chairman and other mem-
bers under .~on 5 including.,the salaries payable to the ,Chairman 
and, to the members who are required to repder whole-time service 
and th~ fees and allowances payable to the members who are re-
Quired to render part-time service; 45 
(b) the period of notice reQuired to terminate the appointment 
of any member, who is required to render part-time service and who 
. 'is not -a servant of the Government" under section 5 and the period 
'. nf notice'that may 'be ~ven to the Central Government by a mem-
hp.r before he resigns his office, under that sect jon; 50 

10 
15 
(c) the conditions and limitations subj~'t to w~ the Autho-
rity may appoint officers and other employees under' sub-section (1) 
of ' section iO; , , 
(d) the terms and conditions subject to which'the non-recurring 
expenditure incurred by the Central Government for or in conngction 
with the purposes of any aerodrome, civil enclavej'aet!onautieal -com-
munication station, the civilJ. aviation centre and the Fire Service 
Training School shall be treated as the 'capital provided by the 
Central Government to the Authority under clause (e) of Bub-sec-
,tion (1) of section 13i 
(e) the manner in which the Authority may invest its funds 
under section 22; 
(f) the form in which the Authority shall prepare the annual 
statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the 
balance-sheet under section 24; and 
(g) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 
38. (1) The Authority may make regulations not inconsistent with 
this Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for all' mattets for ' 
which provision is necessary or expedient for' the purpose of giving 
20 effect' to the provisions of this Act. ' 
35 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregolng power, 
s,uch regulations may provide for-
!;.: (a) the time and places of the meetings of the Authority 
and the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at 
fluch meetings under sub-section (1) of section 8; 
(b) the conditions of service and the remuneration of offteere 
[lnd other employees appointed by the Authority; 
(e) the allotment of residential accommodatlbri-1o me pfltcers 
and ot~ employees appointed by the Authority; 
(d) the contracts or class of contracts which are to be sealed 
with the common seal of the Authority aI).d the form and manner in 
which n contract may be made by the Authority; 
(le) the storage or processing of. goods in any warehouse esta .. 
bUshed by the Authority under clause (h) of sub-section (3)' of 
section 12 and the charging of fees for such storage or processing; 
(f) the custody and restoration of loilt property and the terms 
and conditions under which lost property may be restored to the 
persons entitled thereto; 
(g) the disposal of any lost property in cases where such pro-
perty is not restored; 
(h) securing the safety of aircraft vehicleS and persons usblg 
" the aerodrome or ciVil enclave and preventing danger to the public 
arising from the use and operation of aircraft in the aerodrome or 
civil enclave; 
45· (i) preVentiIig oblrtructiori within the aerodrOrJie or Civil en-
clave. for its normal functioning; 
(.j) prohibiting ,the parking or waiting of any vehicle of car-
. ,riage within the aerodrome, or civil encl&ve pa,pt at place8 specift8tl 
by the Authorityj 
Power 10 
make ret\I" 
...... 

~ 
meatary 
PJOvisions 
I'eIII*dDI 
feIDIa-
tiOlll. 
Rule. 
and 
regula-
tiOJ1ll to 
be laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Power to 
remove 
diftlcul-
.... 
" (~1', p~.w.~~ti,ng 0': ~tri~~iDg ac~ ~ any par)t of the aero-
d,rorile or civil enclave; 
(I) preserving order within the aerodrome or ciyil enr.la"e and 
~t~ damage to property therein; 
(m) regulating or restricting advertising within the aerodrome 5 
or eivil enclave; 
, (n) requiring ,.ny person, if so directecl by an officer appointed 
by the Authority in this behalf, to leave the aerodrome or civil en-
clave or any particular part of the aerodrome or civil enclave; and 
, (0) generally for the eftlcitmt and proper management of the 10 
aerodrome or civil enclave. 
, (3) Any regulation made under any of the clauses (h) to (0) (in-
clusive) of sub-section (2) may provide that a contravention t~reof 
shail be punishable with fine which may e~nd to five hundred n1j)ees 
and in the case of a continuing contravention with- an additional fine 15 
which: may extend tn twenty rupees for every day during which such 
cfi)lltravantioA continues after conviction for tho first such contravention. 
(4) No regulation made by the AuthOrity under this section shall 
have effect until it has been approved: by the Central GQV~ment and 
publiahed in the ,Oftlcial ~tte. lIO 
'"r··· ... •• . ., . 
31. Any regulation which may be made by the Authority under this 
Act may 'be made by the Central Government by nOtiftcation in the 
OfIlctal 'Gazette within one year of the constitUtion of "the AuthoritY and 
any regulation 90 made 'may' be altered or rescinded by the Authority by 
means of a regulation made by it under this Act. lI5 
. ,4«).. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be 
laid. as soon as nmy ~e af.te~ it is mafie. Qe~ore ellqb. &use at Pulia-
~e~t, w~le it is in session, for a total perio~ of thirty days which 
m~y be cOmprised in one session or in two or more succ~ssive s~!I~ons. 
and if, before the expiry of the sesSIon bnmediately following , the 30 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in mak-
ing any modiftcation in the rule Ol'l regulation, as the case may be, or 
both HouseS agree that the rule 'or regwation, as . the case m~y' be, 
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect 
9n1y jn suc,h m.odi6ed fOIm or be ,of DO effect, as the cue m.~ be; so, 35 
hQwever,. th~t 3JlY such modUlcation or annulm~t shall b~ without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously dQl1e upcier that rule or 
regulation. 
41. (1) If any diftlculty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
1t.~:.,:jAC?,~, ~h~ .C,~~a}" Gov~~t ~ay. by gttneJ;a~ orlijJeCial order pub- 40 
1 !'f't~, in, ,th~ Q!~!1 ~~~ ~ 8~ J1l'O~~ npt iDcOl;l~nt with 
t"~e ,J:'rovjsions of t!Us ~,ct: as appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
. for the removal of the di1Bcu1ty: 
" Pro~de,d. that no such order mall be made after the expiration of 
one year from the commencement o~ this Act. 45 
(2) Bvel'y .order made under .s~b-section .(1) shall be Jaidas soon 
~ 'ma~ be after it' is made, before each HoUse ofPai-iiament ~Jrll~ .it Is 
In sesslnn for a total period of thirty days which may be ~omprised in 

'7 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the ex-
piry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
lessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
urder or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the 
5 order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or. be of 
n:> effect, as the ('aSE: may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
freviously done under thnt order. 
42. In sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Aircraft Act, 1934, in clause 
10 (b), after the words and figures "the International Airports Authority 
Aet, 1971", the words and figures, "or the National Airports Authority 
Act, 1985" shall be inserted. 
Amend-
met of 
Act 
2201 
193f. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECtS AND REASONS 
. The Directorate-General of· :Civil Aviation (DGCA), is responsible 
for the regulation and control of civil aviatiOn activity in the country. 
The main functions of this organisation are:-. . 
,. (l) Cons~llction and. ~aintenance of domestic airports, including 
runways, taxi-ways, aprons and terminal buildings; 
(U) Procurement, installation and maintenance of navigational 
aids and provision of tele-communications, navigational and air traffic 
control services; 
(iii) Regulatory functions such as licensing and training, air-
worthiness and air· safety control, ground safety and economic and 
regulatory functions relating to air transport servkes. 
2. As a result of an all-round increase in the above activities and the 
introduction of sophisticated aircraft, the iDfra-structural facilities at 
aerodromes have had to be constantly improved. The functioning of tlle 
DGCA has been found difficult due to its having to have its construc-
tions executed by the CPWD, its purchases routed through the DGS&D 
and its personnel recruited through the UPSC. There had therefore been 
delays in the above activities of the DGCA. 
3. In order to study in depth the ROssibility of improving efficiency 
by introducing increased flexibility and autonomy for the development 
of domestic airports and the provision of air traffic services, the Ministry 
of Tourism and Civil Aviation set up an Experts Committee under the 
Chairmanship of the Director-General Civil Aviation. The Committee 
recommended setting up of a statutory authority, which would have the 
Ilecessary flexibility and autonomy for taking up developmental activities 
in the field of civil aviation. 
4. The recommendations of this Committee have been examined in 
depth and it is proposed to constitute a statutory authority for the deve-
lopment, construction and management of domestic airports and for the 
provision of navigational and tele-communication facilities and air traffic 
control services at airports located in differen,t parts of the country. 
5. For the remaining four-year period of the Seventh ~"ive-Year 
Plan, a sum of Rs. 311.26 crores has been proposed for me~ting the capi-
tal expenditure pn the developmental acti~ties at the various airports. 
This outlay can be spent more effectively with the setting up of the 
Authority. Projections with regard to estimated revenue, receipts and 
expenditure and the internal resources likely to be generated by the 
proposed Authority reveal that the creation of an. autonomous domestic 
airports Authority would not cause any additional financial burden or 
liability on the Central Government and would, in fact, have definite 
functional advantaaes· 
.... ~ ...... -.. 18 

19 
6. It is accordingly proposed to constitute a statutory Authority for 
the. development, construction and maintenance of all the domestic air· 
ports and civil. enclaves in the country and also for provision of air 
traffic, tele-communication and navigational services. The Act will apply 
in relation to all aerodromes, civil enclaves and aeronautical communi ca· 
tion stations, other than aerodromes to which the International Airports 
Authority Act, 1971, applies, and aerodromes and airfields belongiDg' to 
or subject to the control of any armed force of the Union and win in· 
elude premises necessary for carrying on by the said Authority, of the 
functions conferred on it by the Act; 
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.· 
8. The Notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the more im; 
portant provisions of the Bill. 
N~ DEunj ASHOKGEHLOT 
The 25th August, 1985. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES .117 AND 274 
. OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. A. llOI3/1l85-VE, dated the 23ra August, 1985 
from Sbri Ashok Gehlot, Minister -of State in. the Ministry of ~urism 
and Civil Aviation to the Secretary-General, Lok ~abha] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Bill to pr.ovide for the establishment ,of a statutory Autho~itr for 
the management of domestic airports and air traffic services and the mat-
ters connected therewit.h, recommends. the introduc~ion of the Bill in 
Lok Sabha under article 117 (1) r:.!~d with clause (1) of article 274 of the 
Constitution and its consideration under clause (3) of article 117 of· the 
Consti~u~oD. . 

Nofes on cla~s 
Clause 1 (8); specifies the aerodromes, civil encl:we8, aeronautical ec;m-
mllftir:ation centres,tb which the 8nt applies. 
C1d1lse' 2 deals" with' tbe de&mtloris Qf certain expressions used in 'the 
But 
Clause 3 provides fOr the' constitution arid incorporation of the National 
• Airports Authority. Under this clause, the Authority will be a body 
corpO'tate' atld Wflt' c<5l'1s1st' of a whole-time Chairman, the Di~tor­
General of Civil Aviation, ex offiCio memooi- arid not less than' 8' and not 
more than 14 members to be appointed by the Central Government. 
Clause 4 deals with the disqualifications for being appointed as a 
member of the A.utiI!ority. 
Clause 5 provides for the term of' office of members, resignation by 
them and tM' circumstances in which their appointments may be ter-
minated and filling up of casual vacancies. 
Clause 6 deals with the removal of the members on the grounds of 
di§Qualification or on account of becoming incapable of acting or if ~e 
ab~ts himself without proper leave or in the opinion of the Central 
Gove~ment has abused his position. 
n'l4use 7 deals with the eligibility of members for re-appointmant. 
K:'lause 8 provides for the meetings of the Authority for transacting 
b1.;lsiness and the quorum at such meetings. It also provides that in the 
absence of Chairman, an other member could preside over such meetings. 
Matters coming before the Authority shall be decided by majority of 
votes of the members present and voting. ' 
Clause 9 la~ down that any vacancy in or defect in the constitution 
of the Authority 01 any defect in the appointment of a person as a 
n\'erh~ or irregUlarity in tlie' procedure of the Authority, wm not' in-
validate the procee'C:t'mgs. 
Clause 10 deals with the appointment of officers and other emp-
loyeeS of the Authority. 
Clause 11 provides that the Authority shall act on business princi-
ples, 
ClcitI:sc '12'pi'6Vld~ for the fUn~iions of the Authority. It shall be the 
flincti~n 'of' th'e' .A:~ttidi1ty' to' mlfiiage the aerddromes and· the civil en-
claves ~o' wh~ch"the' A~t' appttes fit is made applicable, efficiently. An 
ohHgattOn hasbe~ casfiott·th~ Authority to provide ~t 'the aerodromei, 
ait- trliffic setVt~gS in'clmtlng' af!t'6hau't1ea1 and flight ""!enrms. ~d 
safety services, aeronautical and navigational aids for the safe and em-
cient conduct of the flights; Sub-elause (3) of this clause enumerates 'in 
detail the various funetions to be performed by the Authority. 
20 

21 
Cl.~u.ge 18 provi~$ tor tAe tr/Ulsfer 9£ ~~ ;m.~ Ua:bilities qf th~' 
Ceptral G.ov,ernl1)~nt to the Authority. All non-J;'e~.~rring e;xpenditure 
i9:Clolrret.1 by the Cen~l'~l Governmenf. for Or in cQl1l1ection witp the pur-
• .,~ aer.~romes, civil ~c~v~~s, aerona~~i,cal comIJl.UPic~tion sta~QIlS, 
Civil Aviation Training Centre, Fire Services Tr.~ &c~poJ.,~o w.hich 
the Act applies and declared to be capital expenditure shall be treated 
as the capital provided by the Central Government to the Authority . 
.cl~e 14 pw~ide:.i t~ a,ny 1~nd' requi~~ by ,the Al\tPPtt~!-Y fpr ffis-
c:J'M.tging ¥s ,blnctions un.~ the legis~tion ,shall b,e peeJI?,ed to be n.eeded 
f.oF a p)Jb.J.ic p~rpO$e ~d lan~ IP!iy be ac9..u~~ fR" ;the Aut~O\l'ity _r 
the provisions of the Land Acquisiton Act, 1894 (l.Qf ~~ qr of any 
other corr~sponding law for the time being in force . . "~ ~. . "" . . 
Clause 15empoqrs the A.uthority to enter i~o and pe~dnn aJlY 
contract necessary for the dlscharge of J.tlJ functions ,ltU1~ tilis ~i11. 
CJ"",,-,e 16 provides for the modes of ~cuting cootr"cts oJ'! behalf of 
~he Authonty. It has also been pI'Q.v.i4~d .in this ~l.use tha.t no l'ontract 
fQr "cql,lisitiQn or sale of immovable p.-op,e,ty or of the lease of any &1.loh 
PliQPerty lor a tomn exceeding 30 years IJ.Ild ,1\0 otb.ercqntrap.teJf,C~~g 
s~qh n,l1ie ,or . 8Jllount as the Central Gq,{eFPIPf:1llt ~y, frQIIl time to 
~e, .by Ql'd.er, ax in tbis ·behalf, shl:lll ,be ~~, ;Wllep it has ~n pre-
viously approved by the Central Government. Contracts 'WQioh ~re Dot 
In accCJrdance with the provisions oY this Bill, rules and the regulA-tions 
made"iiiereunde~ .sh..~l1 ~e bin4in:~ ~n '!h~r Autt,prify.· . , ... ' • . 
CZa/use 17 empowers the Authority to charge, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government. fees or rents for the landing, hous-
mg ur marking of aircrafts "" for any other services or facility offered 
in connection with aircraft operations' at any aerodrome of heliport; for 
providing air traffic services, safety servic'3S. a8rona\ltical communi-
cations and naviga'tional aids at any aerodrome, the amenities given to 
the passengers, etc. 
Cl4we 18 empowers the Central Gov~~t ~~ pJ::o.vide additional 
capital to the Authority required by the A~l'lprit!' Jor the discharge of 
its functions und':!r the Act on such term, an.dcQ"~ij.p~ ,as the .central 
Guvernment may determine and also to pay to the Autholrity qy W~y of 
, l~~qs pr ~~an~s such sums o..f mo~ey as ~he. C~ntr~l Gove!"men~ may 
consider ri~cessary for the etBcient discharge by ~he ,A~thority of its 
functions under this Bill. 
Clause 19 provides that the A.u1ho.rity shall have its own fund, and 
all its rece.pts should be credited thereto and all its payments should 
be made therefrom.' The clause also provides that all moneys standing 
at the credit 'of the Authority which cannot immediately be appJi'!d shaD 
be deposited in the State Bank of India or in such scheduled bank or 
l¥.t?~s, as l'O~y be $pecified by the C~n.tr.al Gov~.J'PIP,m~. 
Clau.se20 provides for the establishment of reserve fund or funds 
for purposes of expanding existing facilities or services or cr':!ating new 
facilities or services at any aerodn>me or for purpose of povtding against 
~J.l.Y te~porary decreas,e of re.venue or iJ;l~re~J!~ C?fexP!J?dit.urc from 
t~!!lsien~ causes Ql' for purposes of repla..~,m,~,nJ: pr for meeting exp,n,di-
!u~e ~!~ing from l~s or damag~ froJ!l fu'~, ~yc~on..,e .. ~!r~r~sh .9r pf,he.r 
~ci~e;nt. or for ~eetil1g aoy l~ability 8fi~~~g o,1;lt. of ~ ~~t or o~~~ip~ 
fn the dIscharge dl the functions of the AuthOrity under this legislation. 

22 
After making provision for such reserve fund, or funds and for' bad and 
doubtful debts, depreciation fn assets and all .other matters which are 
usually provided for companies registered or incorporated under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)' shall pay the balance of its net profits 
to the Central Go'\7:ernment. 
Cla.1t8t! 2] imposes obligation on the Authority to prepare, before the 
commencement of' each financial 'year a statement of programmes of its 
'activities during the forthcoming financial year as well as financial 
estimates in respect thereof not less than three months from the c~­
men cement of the financial year and' !;ubmit' thOse for approval of the 
Central Government. . 
Clause 22 empowers the Authority ~o invest its funds (including 
reserve fund) in the securities of the Central Government or in such 
other manner a.s may be prescribed. . 
Clause 23 empowers the Authority to borrow, with the consent of 
the Central Government, money from anY' source by the issue of bonds' 
'or debentures or such other instruments as it may deem fit for diseharg-
in« all or any' of its functions under this Bill. 'nle clause lays down also 
the loans borrowed by the Authority may be guaranteed by the Central 
Government for the repayment of the prineipaI' and the payment of in-
terest theron, 
ClausE' 24 provides for the audit of. the accounts of the Authorlty 
annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
ClaUSe 25 imposes an. obligation on the Authority to p~re and sub-
mit to the Central Government after the end of each financial year a 
report ,;vin~ an account of its activities during that financial year and 
the activities which are likely t~ be undertaken by the Authority during 
the next financial year~ The report so submitted by the Authority to 
tlie Central Government shall be laid before the Houses of par-Jiament. , . 
Cla1lse 26 empo~ers the Authority to delegate to the Chairman or 
any memher or to any officer of the Authority such of its powe~ and 
functions und~r this Bfll (except the rule making power) as it may deem 
necessary. 
Clause 27 provides for authentleatlon of the orders and other instru-
ments of the Authority. 
Ota1L.!e 28 provides that the officers and employees of the AuthOrity 
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the pr-.Msions of .this 
1egislation or of any rules and regulations made th'!reunder shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section .21 of the 
Indian Ppnal Cndp. (45 of 1000). . 
Cl.ause 29 provides that no suit, prosecution o~ other Tega1 proceed-
ing shaH lie against the Authority or any member, oftlcer or other emp-
loyee of the Authority for anything done in good faith or intended to 
be done in pursuance of this Bill. 
C1.o.1fttP. ~O imposes an obligatinn on the Authority to provide by 
regulat:"l'ls for securing the !lafe Mlstddy and restoration of any pr0-
perty, whfcli, while not tn Pf0geT custody, is found on any premises 
belonging to the Authority or under its overall control or in any· aircraft 
'Or any such premises. 

23 
Clause 31 lays doWn that aU for the purpose at. Income-tax Act, 1961, 
the income profits or gains of the'Authomy shall be liable to tax under 
the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) as if it were a Company. 
C14UBe 32 empowers the Authority to carry out on behalf of any 
person any works of services or any class of works or services on such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed upto between the Authority and 
the person concerned. 
Clause 33 empowers the Authority Or any officer specially authorised 
by it in this behalf to issue directions consistent with .the provisions 
mentioned in this clause of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and provides for the 
imposition of penalty for contravention of the said dir~ctions. 
Clause 34 empowers the Central Government to temporarily divest 
the Authority of the management of any airport in cases where the Cen-
tral Government is of the opinion that in the 'public interest it is neces-
sary Ok" expedient so to do and entrust the functions of the Authority to 
any person. The Authority shall be given a reasonabl'! opportunity of 
being heard in the matter before any order is made by the Central Gov-
ernment. Such order divesting the Authority of the management of any 
a.irport will be in operation for a period of 6 mclnths from the date on 
which the management of the aerodrome is entrusted to the authorised 
person. The Central Government has further been empowerd to extend 
the said period of 6 months for a further period or periods not exceeding. 
eighteen months. 
CLause 35 lays down the circumstances under which the Authority 
may be superceded and the period of such supersession. The clause fur-
ther empowers the Central Government to extend the period of superses-
sion for such further term not exceeding 6 months as it may consider 
necessary cJr constitute an Authority during or on the expiry of the 
period of supersession. . 
Clause 311 empowers the Central Government to issue directions to 
the Authority on questions of policy and the Allthority shall be bound 
by the directions issued in this behalf. 
Clause 37 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carry-
ing out the purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules 
may be made by the Central Government are enumerated in detail in 
sub-cla"\se (2). 
Clause 38 confers on the AuthOrity the power to make regulations 
not inconsistent with this Bill and the rules made thereunder to provide 
for all matters for which provision is necessarv or expedient for the pur-
pose of giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. The particular matters 
with respect to which regulations may be made are ~um.rated in detail 
in sub-clause (2) and provides for imposition of penalty for contraven-
tion of the said regulation. 
Clause 39 provides that any rule and regulation made under this 
Bill shall be laid beft,re both Houses. 
Clause 40 empowers the Central Government to make any notitica-
tion in the Official Gazette within one year of the constitution of the 
AuthOrity any regulation which may be made by the Authority under 

this Bill. The clause further provides that no regulation so made by the 
Authority shall not have effect until it has been approved by the Cell .. 
tral Government and published in the Official Gazette. 
Clause 41 empowers the Central Government to make such orders as 
itre necessary for removal of any difficulty which may arise while giv-
ing effect to the provisions of this Bill within one year from th - 'Om-
m~ncement of this Bill. 
Clause 42 seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 5 
of the Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934) to provide for penalty for failure 
to comply with the directions issued under this section. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM. 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Airports 
Authority for the management of aerodromes (other than aerodromes to 
which the International Airports Authority Act, 1971 applies), civil en-
claves and aeronautical eommunication stations. 
2. Under clause 13 (1) (e) of the Bill, all non-recurring expendi-
tLlre incurred by the Central Government for or in connection with the 
purppses of the aerodromes, civil enclaves, aeronautical communicatiun 
stations Civil Aviation Training Centre and Fire Services Training 
School up to the date of the formation of the Authority and declared to 
be capital expenditure by the Central Government shall be treated as 
capital provided by the Central Government to the Authority. Clause 
13(1) (e) will result in the transfer of assets and property worth approxi-
mately Rs. 223.69 crores after taking into' account the element of drpre-
clation. The exact value of the assets to be transferrea will, h~wever, be 
decided by the Government after detailed scrutiny of the assets and 
after determining the value thereof. The capital assets include land and 
buildings (residential and non-residential), machinery and equipment 
including communication and navigational aids, crash fire tenders, motor 
vehicles, etc. 
3. Under clause 13(1) (f) of the Bill, all sums of money due to the 
Central Government in relation to these aerodromes, civil en~laves, aero-
nautical communication stations, Civil Aviation Training Centre and Fire 
Services Trauiing School. immediately before the date of the constitution of 
the Authority shall be deemed to be due to the Authority. The sums of 
money whfch under clause 13(1) (f) shall be deemed to be due to the 
Authority on the date of its formation cannot be estimated at this stage. 
However, th~ annual income for the year 1985-86 on this account is esti-
mated to be Rs. 52.35 crores. 
. 4. Clause 18 of the Bill provides for the payment of additional capi-
tal, loans and grants to the authority by the Central Government. Pay-
m~nf; of additidnal capital, grants and loans to the Authority· will de-
pend on the future requirements of the Authority in the context of its 
development plans. The expenditure that may have to be Incurred by the 
Central Government from the Consolidated Fund of India on this account 
cannot be estimated at present. However. on the basis of prOposals made 
in the Seventh Five Year Plan, an expenditure of Rs. 311.26 crores is likely 
to be incurred during the years 1986-87 to 1989-90 on capital projects to 
be executed by the Authority .. 
5. Clause 23(2) of the Bill provides for tlie guarantees by the Central 
Government on the repayment of the principal and the ip8yment of intereRt, 
in respect of the loanlS borrowed by the Authority under 8ub-clause (1) of 
that clause. The ultimate liability arising out ''If such guarantees cannot 
be estimated at this stage. 
6. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will not involve 
any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. The 
matters with respect to which rules may be made, have been detailed 
in sub-clause (2) and relate mainly to the conditions of service of the 
Chairman and other members of the Authority including the salaries 
payable to the Chairman and to the members who are required to 
ren<"~cr whole-time services, and fees and allowances payable to the mem-
ben' ~equired to render part-time service; the period of notice required 
to t(~rminate the appointment of any member who is required to render 
part-time service and who js not a servant of. the Government and the 
period of notice that may be given to the Central Government by a 
member before he resigns his office; the conditions and iimitations sub-
ject to which the Authority may appoint officers and other employees, 
the terms and conditions subject to which the non-recurring expendi-
ture incurred by the Central Government have or in connection with 
the purposes of any aerodrome, shall be treated as a capital provided 
by the Central Government to the Authority; the manner in which 
the Authority may invest its funds and the form in which the Authority 
shall prepare the annual statement of accounts jncluding the profit and 
loss account .and the balance.sheet. These are all matters of detail and 
it is difficult to provide for all these JlIlatters in the B~ itself. 
2. Clause 38 -of the Bill bestows power on the Authorlt:v' to make 
regulations not inconsistent with the proposed lel{islation and the rules 
made thereunder, to provide for such matters for which provision is 
necessary or expedient for the pur.pose of giving effect to the prOvisions 
of the legislation. The matters. in respect of which the Authority may 
make regulations, have been detailed in particular in sub-clause 
(2) of the clause. The matt~rs, inter alia, relate to the time and 
places of the meetil)gs of the Authority and the procedures to be follow-
ed for the transaction of business at such meetings: the conditions of 
service and remuneration of officers and other employees appointed by 
the Authority, the contracts or class of contracts which are to be sealed 
with the common seal of the Authority; the storage or processing of 
goods in warehouses established by the Authority; the custody or res-
toratiori of lost property; securing the safety of aircraft. vehicles and 
persons using the aerodrome. and preventing danger to the public arising 
from the use and operation of the aircraft in the aerodrome; preventing 
of obstruction within the aerodrome for its normal functioning; prohibit-
ing or restrictinsz access to any part of the aerodrome; preservinJt order 
within the aerodrome and preventin'~ dama~e to property; reQUlating or 
restricting- advertisements within the aerodrome for the efftcient and 
proper mal)agement of the aerudrmne; These ar~ all matten of detail 
and it is difficult to provide for the same in theBtll itself. Under sub~ 
clause {4) of· ela~se 38, .no. regulation made by the Authority under 
- J 26 'I, .' 

27 
this legislation, shall have effect until it has been approved by th~ 
Central Government and published in the Official Gazette. 
3. It has been provided in clause (40) that every rule and regulation 
made under this Bill, shall be laid before each House of Parliament while 
it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, for their scrutiny. 
4. AB the matters with respect to which rules and regulations under 
the aforesaid provisions are sought to be made are matters of procedure 
or detail or matters in respect of which it is not practicable to mark, 
express provision in the legislation itself, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a nonnal character. 

,. LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of an Autliority for the management 
of aerodromes and civil enclaves whereat domestic air transport ser-
vices are operated or are intended to be operated and of all commu-
nication stations and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri ABbok Gehlot, Minister of State in the Ministry of Tourism. 
and Civil Aviation.) 