1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PEPPER GROWERS (WELFARE) BILL,  2018
By
ADV. JOICE GEORGE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures and other facilities for pepper growers and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pepper Growers (Welfare) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Bill  No. 168 of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Definitions.

2
(b) "Committee" means the Pepper Development Committee constituted under
section 3;
(c)  "pepper" includes its products, by-products and extracts;
(d)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e)  "Scheme" means the Pepper Growers Welfare Scheme formulated under
section 3.
3. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a Scheme for the welfare of pepper
growers to be known as the Pepper Growers Welfare Scheme.
(2) The scheme shall be administered by a Committee to be known as the Pepper
Development Committee.
(3) The Committee shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be nominated by the Central Government;
(ii) two members, representing the Governments of pepper growing States, to be
nominated by the Central Government;
(iii) two members representing pepper agriculturists who are growing pepper on
large scale;
(iv) two members representing small pepper growers; and
(v) three Members of Parliament from pepper growing States.
(4) The Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of the
Chairperson and members of the Committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. Without prejudice to the powers of the Central Government, the scheme shall
include:—
(i) framing of a comprehensive insurance scheme for loss or destruction of
pepper;
(ii) providing technical and other kinds of specialized assistance to pepper
growers;
(iii) fixing minimum support price for pepper;
(iv) creation of adequate procurement and storage facility for pepper;
(v) providing assistance for export of pepper and its products;
(vi) encouraging research in pepper related fields with a view to promote it as a
nutraceutical and as a condiment;
(vii) provision of adequate marketing facilities for pepper growers; and
(viii) provision of electricity and water facilities to pepper growers at subsidized
rate.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Pepper
Growers
Welfare
Scheme.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Provisions to
be made under
the scheme.
Power to
make rules.

3
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Members of the botanical family Piperaceae were among the first cultivated plants.
Black pepper (Piper nigrum) and long pepper (Piper longum) are the best known Spices in
this family and are probably among the most recognized spices in the world. Black pepper
alone accounts for lion part of the world's total spice trade. In addition, pepper have been
used medicinally for centuries. In recent years, extensive research on the phytochemistry
and unique pharmacological actions of these plants are also available. But unfortunately,
there are no adequate facilities and support for pepper growers. The pepper based industries
are suffering from numerous problems including problems relating to its storage, marketing,
procurement and export. The Bill seeks to overcome the problems mentioned above.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JOICE GEORGE
November 19, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation of a welfare scheme for pepper growers.
It also provides for the constitution of a Committee to administer the scheme. Clause 4
provides for the activities to be undertaken under the scheme. Clause 5 provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the purposes of this Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures and other facilities for pepper growers and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Adv. Joice George, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2052LS(S3)—04-12-2018.