5
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
Definitions.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 168 of  2022
THE FISHERMEN (PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2022
By
Shrimati Aparupa Poddar, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare and protection of the fishermen and for  
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as 
follows,—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Fishermen (Protection and Welfare) Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of that 
State and in other cases the Central Government; 

2
5
10
20
25
(b) “Board” means Fishermen Welfare Board constituted under section 3;
(c) “fisherman” means a person engaged in fishing and fishing related works such 
as repairing, maintaining and manning boats, nets and other equipments used in fishing 
or peeling, drying and selling of fish and solely dependent on the income earner from 
selling of fish;
(d) “Fishermen Welfare Officer” means an officer appointed under section 7; 
(e) “Fund” means the Fishermen Welfare Fund constituted under section 8;
 (f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) “Tribunal” means the Fishermen Tribunal constituted under section 6.
 3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Board to be known as the Fishermen Welfare Board.
  ( 2) The Board shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of 
properties, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, 
sue or be sued.
  ( 3) The Board shall consist of,—
(i) a Chairperson and four other members to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) not more than one representative each from the Coastal States and 
Union territories to be nominated by the respective State Governments and 
Union territories Administrations;
  ( 4) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of 
officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.
  ( 5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and other members, officers and staff of the Board shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
 4.  ( 1) As soon as may be, but not later than one year from the commencement of this 
Act, the Board shall, in consultation with the appropriate Governments, formulate a scheme 
for the welfare of fishermen. 
  ( 2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the scheme shall 
provide for,— 
 (i) provision of boats, nets, jetties and life boats at concessional rates;
(ii) provision of loan facilities for purchasing of boats, nets and life boats;
(iii) provision of cold storage facilities for fish and other ‘catches’ by fishermen 
at subsidized rates;
(iv) facilitating the export of fish;
(v) transportation facility of processed fish to seaport or airport for the purpose 
of export at concessional rates;
(vi) insurance facilities for the fishermen;
Constitution 
of Fishermen 
Welfare Board.
Formulation of 
a scheme for 
the welfare of 
fisherman.
15
30
35

3
(vii) free health care facilities to fishermen and their family members;
(viii) old age pension for the fishermen;
(ix) subsistence allowance during such situations as floods, storms or rains 
when fishermen cannot go into sea for fishing; and
(x) housing facilities at concessional rates; and 
(xi) payment of compensation in cases of accident during fishing operations.
 5. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force, the Central Government shall pay compensation of—
(i) rupees ten lakh to the nearest kin of a fisherman in case of his death when 
involved in occupation which shall be in addition to any assistance extended by a 
State Government; or
(ii) rupees five lakh to the fisherman in case of a serious injury to him due to 
any accident while catching fish on the high seas or actions of the pirates.
 6. ( 1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute for any area specified therein a Tribunal to be known as the Fishermen 
Tribunal for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
  ( 2) The Tribunal constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of a sole member, 
who shall be an officer not below the rank of Deputy Collector of the district concerned to 
be appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
  ( 3) The Tribunal shall hear and adjudicate all cases relating to welfare of fishermen 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
  ( 4) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Government 
prescribe rules for the procedure of the Tribunal.
 7. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall appoint a Fisherman Welfare Officer 
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
  ( 2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
services of Fisherman Welfare Officer shall be such as may be prescribed.
 8. ( 1) The Central Government shall in consultation with the State Government 
shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Fishermen Welfare Fund to which the 
Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute in such a ratio as 
may be prescribed.
  ( 2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (1) shall be utilised to give effect to 
the provisions of this Act.
 9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Compensation 
to fishermen.
Constitution 
of Fishermen 
Tribunal.
Appointment 
of Fisherman 
Welfare Officer.
Constitution of 
the Fishermen 
Welfare Fund.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
5
10
20
25
15
30
35

4
 10. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty:
 Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period 
of three years from the commencement of this Act.
  ( 2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament.
 11. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Fishing is one of the major livelihoods practiced by the fishermen in the coastal areas. It 
is an important sector in India. It provides employment to millions of people and contributes 
to the food security of the country with extensive freshwater resources, fisheries play a vital 
role. There are approx. 2,80,63,537 fishermen in India are gaining livelihood only through 
this sector.
There are many problems experienced by traditional fishermen, including a lack of 
skills, limited facilities, and extreme competition. They have been bearing the brunt of sea 
erosion and climate change. The Covid outbreak and the economic slowdown affected the 
fisheries sector and many people have lost their source of income. The local fisher folk says 
that they fear of losing their livelihood as they’re neither catching enough fish nor are they 
get paid enough for what they catch. Moreover, the ban along with perpetual bad weather 
due to low pressure in the sea further adding to their woes.
This bill seeks to provide for the welfare and protection of the rights of the fisherman and 
the matters related to it. The bill’s main objective is protection and welfare of the fishermen. 
It establishes a tribunal that will carry out the functions of the Fisherman Tribunal which 
will help in solving and addressing the fishing and fishermen-related disputes. The bill seeks 
to establish a fund to help provide compensation and award the money to the fishermen who 
have suffered an injury, loss, or damage owing to any dispute and climate-related events. 
The Bill also aims to provide a specific scheme for the welfare of the fishermen, it will help 
them to obtain the benefits from the given scheme which will provide them with benefits 
of provisions of boats, nets, jetties, and lifeboats at concessional rates, loan facilities, 
cold storage facilities at the subsidized rates, transportation facilities, insurance facilities, 
healthcare and educational facilities for fishermen and family members, age-old pension, 
housing facilities and lastly than the compensation and losing for the livelihood owing to the 
extreme weather events causing damage. 
This bill seeks to protect these fishermen of the coastal regions, then their occupation of 
fishery besides being a constant source of income for the people of the region, also support 
their daily meal requirements.
Hence this Bill. 
     
   New Delhi;               APARUPA PODDAR 
5 July, 2022.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Fishermen Welfare Board.          
Clause 5 provides for compensation to fishermen in case of serious injury or death. Clause 
6 provides for constitution of Fishermen Tribunal. Clause 7 provides for appointment of 
Fishermen Welfare Officer. Clause 8 provides constitution of Fishermen Welfare Fund. 
Clause 9 provides that the Central Government provide requisite funds for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees 
twenty thousand crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees seven thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare and protection of the fishermen and for  
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shrimati Aparupa Poddar,  M.P .)