Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 168 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Shri Rajeev Rai, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5

2.  In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) existing entries 3 to 9 shall be re-numbered as entries 4 to 10, respectively, and 
before entry 4 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“3.  Bhojpuri.”;
(ii) after entry 10 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall inserted, namely:—
“11. Magahi.”;
(iii) entries 10 to 22 shall be re-numbered as entries 12 to 24, respectively.
.
Amendment 
of the Eighth 
Schedule.
2
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is a long-pending demand for inclusion of Bhojpuri and Magahi languages in 
the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution, so that these can be accorded the status of official 
language. Both Bhojpuri and Magahi languages are over a thousand years old having their 
roots in ancient India and are part of our collective heritage. 
Bhojpuri is the most widely spoken languages in Bihar and eastern Uttar Pradesh with 
its roots in ancient India. Bhojpuri is an important language chiefly spoken in eastern Uttar 
Pradesh, western Bihar, and northwestern Jharkhand in India, as well as by significant 
diaspora communities in countries like Mauritius, Suriname, Fiji, Guyana, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Nepal etc. It is estimated that more than twenty million people speak Bhojpuri in 
India, making it one of the most widely spoken languages in the country. It is also estimated 
that number of Bhojpuri speakers across the world is more than twenty eight lakh fifty 
thousand. Ironically, because of overwhelming official support to other languages, Bhojpuri 
language is listed as potentially vulnerable in the UNESCO World Atlas of Languages.
Similarly, apart from Bihar and eastern part of Uttar Pradesh, Magahi is also widely 
spoken in Jharkhand, West Bengal and parts of Odisha. It is considered to be an Indo-Aryan 
language with roots in the ancient Magadhi Prakrit, a language spoken by lord Buddha and 
is believed to have originated in the region of Magadha. It was the official language of the 
great Mauryan empire. The famous Vajrayani Buddhist poet Sarahapa is well recognised as 
the first Magahi poet. With large scale migration of people from these regions since last five 
hundred years, Magahi is also spoken in countries like Fiji, Jamaica, Trinidad and Guyana. 
It is also widely spoken in the Terai region of Eastern Nepal. It is estimated that there are 
about fifteen million Magahi speaking population in India alone. Magahi has been granted 
the status of second official language in Jharkhand State and the Government of Bihar has 
recommended to the Central Government for it to be included in the 8th Schedule of Indian 
Constitution.The United Nations has recognized the importance of Magahi by publishing 
the Charter of Human Rights in the language.
Despite this, both Bhojpuri and Magahi languages have been treated in step motherly 
manner which is evident from the fact that in the 2011 Census both these languages were 
grouped together under ‘Hindi’ and therefore the exact number of people speaking these 
languages is not available with the Government. Constitutional recognition to both these 
languages would give it official recognition, ensuring its use in Government administration 
and education for its development and promotion and can help preserve and promote our 
shared heritage. I would request the Government to include Bhojpuri and Magahi in the 
Eighth Schedule of the Constitution without any further delay.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi ;                                                              R A J E E V  R A I  
July 4, 2025
3

ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Constitution of India] 
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1)  and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
*  *  *  *  *
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
_______ 
(Shri Rajeev Rai, M.P .) 