1
THE  PROTECTION OF PLANT V ARIETIES AND FARMERS'
RIGHTS (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2017
By
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights
(Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 168 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 39 of the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001, for
sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) Where any propagating material of a variety registered under this Act has
been sold to a farmer or a group of farmers or any organisation of farmers, the breeder
of such variety shall disclose to the farmer or the group of farmers or the organisation
of farmers, as the case may be, the expected performance under given conditions, and
if such propagating material fails to provide such performance under such given
conditions, the farmer or the group of farmers or the organisation of farmers, as the
case may be, may claim compensation in the prescribed manner before the Authority
and the Authority, after giving notice to the breeder of the variety and after providing
him an opportunity to discharge the complete onus in respect of such claim and after
hearing the parties, shall, not more than six months from the date of filing such claim,
direct the breeder of the variety to pay such compensation as it deems fit but not less
than twice the amount of damage which the farmer or the group of farmers or the
organisation of farmers, as the case may be, has suffered.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Authority shall, on
receipt of claim application for compensation under sub-section (2), from any farmer
or a group of farmers or any organisation of farmers, as the case may be, award such
interim compensation, as it deems fit, for necessary subsistence for the livelihood of
a farmer or a group of farmers or any organisation of farmers, as the case may be.".
53 of 2001.Amendment
of section 39.
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Protection of Plant Variety and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001 (popularly known as
PPVFR Act) aims to establish an effective system for protection and development of new
plant varieties, protect farmers' rights by facilitating the growth of the seed industry and the
availability of the high quality seed and planting material to the farmers.
Despite the best intentions of this legislation, the fact is that the farmers productivity
and their future is severely compromised by the non-availability of the quality seeds and
further sale of low quality seeds to them by misrepresentation.
The state of affair further depletes when the farmers approach the Authority
established under the Act for claiming compensation since they do not have sufficient
material to discharge the onus on their claim. Moreover, no time-frame has been prescribed
for the authority to decide the claim. Sometimes, it may take several years for the decision to
come. Also, no interim measures are provided under the Act.
The Authority under the Act has been given more discretion to decide upon the
quantum of the claim. Thus, it is imperative that necessary amendments be brought in to
make a time-bound redressal mechanism for the adjudication of claims being filed by farmers
or organisation of farmers under this Act along with a provision of interim compensation to
be awarded to the farmers. Also, the company being a dominant party should be given the
burden to discharge the onus on the claims and not the otherwise.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
July 7, 2017.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS' RIGHTS ACT, 2001
(53 OF 2001)
* * * * *
39. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
* * * * *
(2) Where any propagating material of a variety registered under this Act has been
sold to a farmer or a group of farmers or any organisation of farmers, the breeder of such
variety shall disclose to the farmer or the group of farmers or the organisation of farmers, as
the case may be, the expected performance under given conditions, and if such propagating
material fails to provide such performance under such given conditions, the farmer or the
group of farmers or the organisation of farmers, as the case may be, may claim compensation
in the prescribed manner before the Authority and the Authority, after giving notice to the
breeder of the variety and after providing him an opportunity to file opposition in the
prescribed manner and after hearing the parties, may direct the breeder of the variety to pay
such compensation as it deems fit, to the farmer or the group of farmers or the organisation
of farmers, as the case may be.
* * * * *
Farmers'
rights.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2107LS(S3)—13-10-2017.