5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 168 of 2024
THE NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION  
 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Ms. S. Jothimani, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the National Medical Commission Act, 2019. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Medical Commission (Amendment) Act, 
2024.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title and 
commencement.

2. In section 14 of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act), in sub-section (3) after the existing proviso the following proviso shall 
be inserted, namely:–
“Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in any provision of this 
Act, the provisions of this section shall not apply, in relation to the National Eligibility-
cum-Entrance Test, at the undergraduate level or postgraduate or superspeciality level 
for admission in State Government colleges, State Universities, constituent colleges of 
the said State Universities, State medical educational institutions and State Government 
seats in Private Colleges affiliated to the State Universities, unless the concerned State 
has voluntarily opted for such National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test.”.
3. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), after the existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–
“Provided further that this section shall not apply to persons studying in the 
State Government colleges, State Universities, constituent colleges of the said State 
Universities, State medical educational institutions and Private Colleges affiliated to 
the State Universities, unless the concerned State Government has voluntarily opted for 
the National Exit Test.”.
4. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–
“Provided further that any person who has completed his undergraduate medical 
course from college, university and medical institutions other than Central Government 
institution in States which have opted out of the National Exit Test, shall, after the 
completion of his undergraduate medical course, be entitled to a license to practice 
medicine and shall have his name and qualifications be registered on the rolls of the 
State or National Register, as the case may be.”.
2
5
10
Amendment of 
Section 14.
Amendment of 
Section 33.
Amendment of 
Section 15.
15
20
30 of 2019.
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET) is conducted by the National Testing 
Agency for admission to the undergraduate and postgraduate medical courses in all medical 
institutions including those governed under any other Law, in accordance with Section 14 of 
the National Medical Commission Act, 2019. Prior to the introduction of NEET, all States 
were free to implement their own selection criteria. Admission to private medical colleges 
and minority institutions was through their own entrance exams. Many States, including the 
State of Tamil Nadu, have expressed their concerns against holding a single test for medical 
education and asked for flexibility in choosing their own admission criteria. 
The Tamil Nadu Assembly passed a resolution stating that the students graduating from 
its own State Board were being put at an unfair disadvantage in comparison to students 
from CBSE (Central Board of Secondary Education) Board. In fact, Justice A.K. Rajan 
Committee, constituted by the Tamil Nadu Government, observed that post the introduction 
of NEET, fewer students were being granted entry into private and Government medical 
colleges. 
The national test is also deemed non-egalitarian and discriminatory by the Committee 
that found that most of the selected candidates had availed academic support/coaching from 
private institutions. This puts the students from underprivileged backgrounds and those 
residing in rural areas at a huge disadvantage. Education is supposed to help liberate a 
person from her/his economic constraints. Unfortunately, in this case, economic constraints 
seem to be affecting access to education for the students. Before NEET, about 65% of the 
selected medical candidates were from rural background (as per a finding by Justice A.K. 
Rajan Committee). 
The conduct of NEET in regional languages has also raised concerns by States such as 
Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and West Bengal, claiming that the difficulty level of tests varies from 
that of English. The Justice Rajan Committee observed that the proportion of students from 
Tamil-medium schools in the selected candidates reduced down to 1.9% from around 15% 
before NEET. 
The financial burden imposed by NEET upon students coupled with the stress of 
preparing for an additional exam besides the Class 12 Board exams, has also led to many 
NEET aspirants committing suicides. 
Multiple protests by NEET aspirants have been witnessed in Tamil Nadu. If a test that 
was introduced in the supposed interest of the students is causing such unrest amongst the 
very students it was supposed to benefit, it is of utmost importance that we reassess our 
decisions and rescind the provisions making NEET mandatory.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   S .  J O T H I M A N I  
November 11, 2024

4
ANNEXURE
[Extracts from the National Medical Commission Act, 2019.]
(Act no. 30 of 2019)
 * * * * *
 14. (1)  * * * * *
 ( 2) * * * * *
 ( 3) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common 
counselling by the designated authority for admission to undergraduate and postgraduate 
super-speciality seats in all the medical institutions which are governed by the provisions of 
this Act: 
 Provided that the designated authority of the Central Government shall conduct the 
common counselling for all India seats and the designated authority of the State Government 
shall conduct the common counselling for the seats at the State level.
 * * * * *
 15 (1) * * * * *
 ( 2) * * * * *
 ( 3) * * * * *
 ( 4) * * * * *
 ( 5) * * * * *
 ( 6) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common 
counselling by the designated authority for admission to the postgraduate broad-speciality 
seats in the medical institutions referred to in sub-section (5):  
 Provided that the designated authority of the Central Government shall conduct the 
common counselling for All India seats and the designated authority of the State Government 
shall conduct the common counselling for the seats at the State level to practice medicine as 
medical practitioners and for enrolment in the State Register or the National Register, as the 
case may be.
 * * * * *
 33.  (1) Any person who qualifies the National Exit Test held under section 15 shall be 
granted a licence to practice medicine and shall have his name and qualifications enrolled in 
the National Register or a State Register, as the case may be: 
 Provided that a person who has been registered in the Indian Medical Register maintained 
under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 prior to the coming into force of this Act and 
before the National Exit Test becomes operational under sub-section (3) of section 15, shall 
be deemed to have been registered under this Act and be enrolled in the National Register 
maintained under this Act:
 Provided that a person who has been registered in the Indian Medical Register maintained 
under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) prior to the coming into force 
of this Act and before the National Exit Test becomes operational under sub-section (3) of 
section 15, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Act and be enrolled in the 
National Register maintained under this Act.
 * * * * *
National Exit 
Test.
National 
Eligibility cum-
Entrance Test.
Rights of 
persons to 
have licence 
to practice and 
to be enrolled 
in National 
Register or State
Register and 
their obligations 
thereto.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to amend the National Medical Commission Act, 2019.
(Ms. S. Jothimani, M.P .) 