As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 169 of  2022
THE ANTARRASHTRIYA MARATHI VISHWA VIDYALAYA 
BILL, 2022
By
Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.
Arrangement of Clauses
Clauses
  1. Short title and commencement. 
  2. Definitions. 
  3. Establishment of the University. 
  4. Objects of the University. 
  5. Powers of the University. 
  6. Jurisdiction. 
  7. University open to all classes, castes and creeds. 
  8. Residence of students. 
  9. The Visitor. 
10. Officers of the University. 
11. The Chancellor. 
12. The Vice-Chancellor. 
13. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor. 
14. The Deans of Schools. 
15. The Registrar. 
16. The Finance Officer. 
17. The Librarian. 
18. Other Officers. 
19. Authorities of the University. 
20. The Court. 
21. The Executive Council. 

Clauses
22. The Academic Council. 
23. The Board of Studies. 
24. The Finance Committee. 
25. Other Authorities of the University. 
26. Power to make Statutes. 
27. Powers to make Ordinances. 
28. Regulations. 
29. Annual report. 
30. Annual accounts. 
31. Conditions of service of employees. 
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students. 
33. Right to appeal. 
34. Provident and pension funds. 
35. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies. 
36. Constitution of Committees. 
37. Filling of casual vacancies. 
38. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. 
39. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
40. Mode of proof of University record.
41. Power to remove difficulties.
42. Transitional provisions. 
43. Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published in the 
Official Gazette.

As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 169 of  2022
  
THE ANTARRASHTRIYA MARATHI VISHWA VIDYALAYA  
BILL, 2022
By
Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.
a
BILL
to establish and incorporate a teaching University for the promotion and development of 
Marathi language and literature, through teaching and research, with a view to 
enabling Marathi to achieve greater functional efficiency and recognition 
as a major international language and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Antarrashtriya Marathi Vishwavidyalaya Act, 2022.
     (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, and the Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the University; 
1
Short title  and 
commencement.
Definitions.
5

(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic 
staff by the Ordinances; 
(c) “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of the University; 
(d) “Chancellor”, “Vice-Chancellor” and “Pro-Vice-Chancellor” mean, respectively, 
the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University; 
(e) “Court” means the Court of the University; 
(f) “Department” means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of Studies;
(g) “distance education system” means the system of imparting education through 
any means of communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence 
courses, seminars, contact programmes or the combination of any two or more such 
means; 
(h) “employee” means any person appointed by the University, and includes 
teachers and other staff of the University; 
(i) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the University; 
(j) “Finance Committee” means the Finance Committee of the University; 
(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the 
University, or of an Institution maintained by the University; 
(l) “Institution” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by 
the University; 
(m) “recognised Institution” means an institution of higher learning recognised by 
the University; 
(n) “Regulations” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University 
under this Act for the time being in force;
(o) “School” means a School of Studies of the University; 
(p) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the Statutes and Ordinances of 
the University for the time being in force; 
(q) “teachers of the University” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such 
other persons as may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in 
the University or in any Institution maintained by the University and are designated as 
teachers by the Ordinances; 
(r) “University” means the Antarrashtriya Marathi Vishwavidyalaya established 
and incorporated as a University under this Act.
3. ( 1) There shall be established a University by the name of “Antarrashtriya 
Marathi Vishwavidyalaya”. 
    (2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Thane in the State of Maharashtra. 
  ( 3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor and the first members of 
the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic Council and all persons who may 
hereafter become such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office 
Establishment of 
the University.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

or membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of “Antarrashtriya 
Marathi Vishwavidyalaya”. 
  (4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue 
and be sued by the said name.
4. The objects of the University shall be to promote and develop Marathi language and 
literature in general and, for that purpose, to provide for instructional and research facilities 
in the relevant branches of learning; to provide for active pursuit of comparative studies 
and research in Marathi and other Indian languages; to create facilities for development 
and dissemination of relevant information in the country and abroad; to offer programmes 
of Research, Education and Training in areas like translation, interpretation and linguistics 
for improving the functional effectiveness of Marathi; to reach out to Marathi scholars and 
groups interested in Marathi abroad and to associate them in teaching and research and to 
popularize Marathi through distance education system.  
5. The University shall have the following powers, namely:— 
(i) to provide for instructions in the relevant branches of learning and to make 
provision for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge for furtherance of its 
objects; 
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas 
or certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of 
examinations, evaluation or any other method of testing on, persons, and to withdraw 
any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinctions for good and 
sufficient cause; 
(iii) to organise and to undertake extra-mural studies, training and extension 
services; 
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by 
the Statutes;
(v) to provide for facilities through distance education system to such persons as it 
may determine; 
(vi) to institute Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching 
or academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other teaching or academic positions; 
(vii) to recognise, with the prior approval of the Visitor, an institution of higher 
learning, within or outside India for such purposes as the University may determine and 
to withdraw such recognition; 
(viii) to appoint persons working in any other University or organisation as teacher 
of the University for a specified period; 
(ix) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments 
thereto; 
(x) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority 
or institution of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as the University 
may determine; 
3
Objects of the 
University.
Powers of the 
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(xi) to establish, with the prior approval of the Visitor, such campuses, special 
centres and specialised laboratories, within or outside India, as are, in the opinion of 
the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects; 
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and 
prizes; 
(xiii) to establish and maintain Institutions and Halls; 
(xiv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to 
enter into such arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, 
as the University may deem necessary; 
(xv) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other 
programmes for teachers, evaluators and other academic staff; 
(xvi) to make special arrangements in respect of the residence, discipline and 
teaching of women students as the University may consider desirable; 
(xvii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, 
Consultants, Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement 
of the objects of the University; 
(xviii) to confer autonomous status on a Department, in accordance with the 
Statutes; 
(xix) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include 
examination, evaluation or any other method of testing; 
(xx) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges; 
(xxi) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make 
arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare; 
(xxii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including 
their code of conduct; 
(xxiii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and 
to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University 
to be necessary; 
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the 
employees; 
 (xxv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage 
and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment 
properties for the purposes of the University; 
(xxvi) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of 
the property of the University, money for the purposes of the University; and
(xxvii) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or 
conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
6. The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of India.Jurisdiction.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4

7. The University shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever caste, creed, 
race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any person, 
any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed as 
a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or to be admitted as a student 
in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof: 
 Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University 
from making special provisions for the employment or admission of women, physically 
handicapped or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in 
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
8. The University shall, primarily, be a residential University: 
Provided that the requirements of residence shall be regulated in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
9. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University. 
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work 
and progress of the University, including any Institution managed by it, and to submit a 
report thereon; and upon receipt of that report the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of 
the Executive Council thereon through the Vice-Chancellor, take such action and issue such 
directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report 
and the University shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or 
persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment and of 
an Institution and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by 
the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter 
connected with the administration or finances of the University or Institutions. 
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub-section (2), give notice of his 
intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made to the University and the University 
shall have the right to make such representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary. 
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor 
may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub-section (3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the 
University shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present 
and be heard at such inspection or inquiry. 
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or 
any Institution address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as 
the Visitor may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice-
Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such 
advice as the Visitor may offer upon the action to be taken thereon. 
(8) The Executive Council shall communicate, through the Vice-Chancellor, to the 
Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such 
University open 
to all classes, 
castes and 
creeds.
Residence of 
students.
The Visitor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

inspection or inquiry. 
(9) Where, the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the 
satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council, issue such directions as he may think fit and 
the Executive Council shall comply with such directions. 
(10) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by 
order in writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this 
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances: 
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to 
show cause why such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a 
reasonable time, he shall consider the same. 
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
10. The following shall be the officers of the University:— 
(1) the Chancellor; 
(2) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(3) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor; 
(4) the Deans of Schools; 
(5) the Registrar; 
(6) the Finance Officer; 
(7) the Librarian; and 
(8) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of 
the University.
11. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University. 
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocation of the University held for 
conferring degrees and the meetings of the Court.
12. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner and on 
such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of 
the University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the 
University and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University. 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on 
any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this 
Act and shall report to such authority the action taken by him on such matters: 
Officers of the 
University.
The Chancellor.
The Vice-
Chancellor.
5
15
20
25
30
35
10
6

Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to 
have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final: 
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved 
by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section shall have the right to 
appeal against such action to the Executive Council within three months from the date 
on which decision on such action is communicated to him and thereupon the Executive 
Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor. 
(4) The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the 
University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the 
Statutes or the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, 
may ask the authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such decision 
and if the authority refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or no decision 
is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor 
whose decision thereon shall be final. 
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.
13. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
14. Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
15. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes. 
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreement, sign documents 
and authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
16. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
17. The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
18. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
19. The following shall be the authorities of the University:— 
(1) the Court; 
(2) the Executive Council; 
(3) the Academic Council; 
(4) the Board of Studies; 
(5) the Finance Committee; and 
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities 
of the University.
The Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.
The Deans of 
Schools.
The Registrar.
The Finance 
Officer.
The Librarian.
Other officers.
Authorities of 
the University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
7
40

20. ( 1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
 ( 2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers 
and functions, namely:— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the 
University and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the 
University; 
(b) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it 
for advice; and 
(c) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
21. ( 1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the University. 
 ( 2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and 
its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
22. ( 1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the University 
and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, exercise 
general supervision over the academic policies of the University. 
 ( 2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and 
its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
23. The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.
24. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.
25. The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may be declared by 
the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
26. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the 
University, as may be constituted from time to time; 
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities 
and bodies, filling up of vacancies of members and all other matters relating to those 
authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide; 
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their 
emoluments; 
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the 
University, their emoluments and other conditions of service; 
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University 
The Court.
The Executive 
Council.
The Academic 
Council.
The Board of 
Studies.
The Finance 
Committee.
Other authorities 
of the University.
Power to make 
Statutes.
5
15
20
25
30
35
10
8

or organisation for specific period for undertaking a joint project; 
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance 
and provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action; 
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the 
University; 
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students 
and the University; 
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student 
against the action of any officer or authority of the University; 
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on an Institution or a Department; 
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls and 
Institutions; 
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions; 
(n) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; 
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University; 
(p) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and
(q) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the 
Statutes.
27. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such; 
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates 
of the University; 
(c) the medium of instruction and examination; 
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, 
qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and 
obtaining of the same; 
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission 
to the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University; 
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and 
prizes; 
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of 
appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators; 
Power to make 
Ordinances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
9

(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline 
and teaching of women students and prescribing of special courses of studies for them; 
(j) the appointments and emoluments of employees other than those for whom 
provision has been made in the Statutes; 
(k) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Board of Studies, Special Centres, 
Specialised Laboratories and other Committees; 
(l) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities, Institutions 
and other agencies including learned bodies or associations in India or abroad; 
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered 
necessary for improving the academic life of the University; 
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff 
as are not prescribed by the Statutes; 
(o) the management of Institutions established by the University; 
(p) setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and 
(q) all other matters which, by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be, provided 
for by the Ordinances. 
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with the previous 
approval of the Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed 
or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
28. The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the 
Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the 
Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
29. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the 
University towards the fulfilment of its objects, and shall be submitted to the Visitor on or 
before such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
(2) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1) shall also be submitted 
to the Central Government which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.
30. ( 1) The annual accounts and balance-sheet of the University shall be prepared under 
the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of 
not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
or by such persons as he may authorise in this behalf. 
 ( 2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be 
submitted to the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council. 
Regulations.
Annual report.
Annual 
Accounts.
5
15
20
25
30
35
10
10

 ( 3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought 
to the notice of the Executive Council and the views of the Executive Council, if any, on 
such observation shall be submitted to the Visitor. 
 ( 4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the 
Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, who shall, as soon as may be, 
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
 ( 5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of 
Parliament shall be published in the Gazette of India.
31. ( 1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written contract, 
which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the 
employee concerned. 
 ( 2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee 
shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of 
one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee 
and an umpire appointed by the Visitor. 
 ( 3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court 
in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal. 
 ( 4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2) shall be deemed 
to be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940).
 ( 5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
32. ( 1) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed 
from the rolls of the University by the orders or resolution of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline 
Committee or Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred 
from appearing at the examination of the University for more than one year, may, within ten 
days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to the 
Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be. 
 ( 2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University 
against a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration 
and the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 31 shall, as far as may be, 
apply to a reference made under this sub-section.
33. Every employee or student of the University or Institution shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of 
the University or of Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon, the Executive Council 
may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.
34. ( 1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such provident 
fund or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such manner 
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
Conditions 
of service of 
employees.
Procedure of 
appeal and 
arbitration in 
disciplinary 
cases against 
students.
Right to appeal.
Provident and 
pension funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
11

 ( 2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central 
Government may declare that the provision of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), 
shall apply to such fund, as if it were a Government provident fund.
35. If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly elected or appointed 
as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the University, the matter 
shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.   
36. Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act or the Statutes 
to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the authority in each 
case may think fit.   
37. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any 
authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person 
or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become vacant and 
any person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such 
authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would 
have been a member.
38. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be 
invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
39. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer or other employee of 
the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
40. A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution of 
any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession of the 
University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by 
the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such receipt, application, notice, 
order, proceeding, resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall 
be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof 
would, if produced, have been admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any other law for the time being in force.
41. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three 
years from the commencement of this Act. 
 ( 2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament.
42. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes,— 
(a) the first Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and the said officer 
shall hold office for a term of five years; 
Disputes as to 
constitution of 
University authorities 
and bodies.
Constitution of 
Committees.
Filling of casual 
vacancies.
Proceedings 
of University 
authorities or bodies 
not invalidated by 
vacancies.
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith.
Mode of proof 
of University 
record.
Power to remove 
difficulties.
Transitional 
provisions.
5
15
20
25
30
35
10
40
12

(b) the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner 
and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and the said officer shall hold office for 
such term, not exceeding five years as may be specified by the Visitor; 
(c) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the 
Visitor and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years; 
(d) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than 
thirty members and eleven members respectively who shall be nominated by the Visitor 
and they shall hold office for a term of three years; 
(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty-one 
members who shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold office for a term of three 
years: 
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the 
same shall be filled by appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the 
Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as 
the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated would have 
held that office, if such vacancy had not occurred.
43. ( 1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette. 
 ( 2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance or 
Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously down under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.
 ( 3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power 
to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this 
Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but not retrospective effect 
shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the 
interests of any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.
Every Statutes, 
Ordinances and 
Regulations to be 
published in the 
Official Gazette.
5
10
15
20
25
30
13

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Marathi is a regional language of Maharashtra. It is one of the most commonly 
spoken languages in India, with the fourth-largest population of native speakers. On the 
list of most spoken languages in the world, it ranks 19th. Marathi as a language belongs 
to the southern branch of the Indo-Aryan languages. It is mainly spoken by the people of 
Maharashtra in the western part of India and is also the official language of the State. Marathi 
language is said to have started quite early on its own and is the oldest of the literature in  
Indo-Aryan languages. In the Indian context, language plays a major role in communication 
and dialect and to understand the region. The tourist and people should be aware of this 
regional language. The development of Marathi as a language will help in the promotion of 
the tourism and culture of Maharashtra.
Marathi language and literature should be ingrained in people, who are very intrigued 
about studying the language. It will also provide them with a great source of knowledge in 
general and also will provide instructional and research facilities for the relevant branches of 
learning in the Marathi language. This will help in promoting the language and also attract 
students globally who want to pursue a career in Marathi language, literature, culture and 
art.
This will help in the promotion and development of accommodating dynamic quest 
for comparative studies of languages and research in Marathi with other Indian dialects. 
As per State  Government of Maharashtra, Marathi is a mandatory language to be spoken 
in Government offices of Maharashtra, so the university will also help a Foreign citizen or 
outsider of Maharashtra to enroll in the university in order to obtain knowledge and will 
have a better understanding of both spoken and written dialect.
The Bill seeks to cultivate and incorporate the teaching and research of the Marathi 
language, the establishment of the university which is the first to the promotion and 
development of the Marathi Language. In order to enable Marathi to achieve greater 
functional efficiency and recognition as a major international language, and to provide for 
matters related to it, the language and literature needs to be promoted and developed through 
teaching and research.
The proposed legislation is anchored on the principle that the established university 
shall stimulate, endorse and develop Marathi Language and literature in general and, for 
that purpose, provide research facilities and opportunities in the relevant field, to provide 
active participation and pursuit of comparative studies and research in Marathi and other 
Indian Languages. The University will help in setting the facilities for the outsourcing and 
development of relevant information not only within the country but also abroad. It will 
help to offer programs in respective field research, education, and training in sphere-like 
translation, interpretation, and linguistics for improving the functional effectiveness of 
Marathi.
The bill seeks to reach out to Marathi scholars and groups who are in quest of teaching 
Marathi abroad and to associate them in teaching and research in order to disseminate and 
broadcast Marathi through various platforms and forums.
   New Delhi;              SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE 
5 July, 2022.
14

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Antarrashtriya Marathi 
Vishwavidyalaya at Thane in the State of Maharashtra. Clause 34 provides for payment of 
pension and provident fund for the benefit of its employees or provide such insurance schemes 
as it may deem fit. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees Two hundred crore per 
annum would be involved from Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved.
15

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 26, 27 and 28 of the Bill empowers the University to make regulations, statues 
and ordinances for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of 
detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.
16

LOK SABHA
_________ 
a
BILL
to establish and incorporate a teaching University for the promotion and development of 
Marathi language and literature, through teaching and research, with a view to 
enabling Marathi to achieve greater functional efficiency and recognition 
as a major international language and to provide for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
_________ 
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.)