Ns

To-uE INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA ¢™ 3०. WS

Bill No. 169 of 1992
ed

THE NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LIMITED, ‘HE
NATIONAL HYDROELECTRIC POWER. CORPORATION LIMITED
AND THE NORTH-EASTERN ELECTRIC POWER CORPORATION
LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF POWER TRANS-
MISSION SYSTEMS) BILL, 1992

A
BILL

to provide in the public interest for the acquisition and transfer of the
power transmission systems of the three companies and the right
title and interest of those companies im the power transmission sys-
tem situated in different parts of India, with a view to develop-
ing the National Power Grid to ensure transmission of power, with-
in and across the different regions of India, on a more scientific!
efficient and economic basis and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

CHAPTER 1
‘PRELIMINARY
1, (1) This Act may be called the National Thermal Power Corpora- Shorttitle
tion Limited, the National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited and extent

5 the North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited (Acquisition and and

‘Transfer of Power Transmission Systems) Act, 1992. कल दर


ee reg

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir,

(3) The provisions of this Act, except sections 8 to 11 and sections
13 to 16, shall be deemed to have come into force on the ist day of April, |
1992.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Defini.
(०) “appointed day” means the Ist day of April, 1992;

(b) “associated personnel”

means the employees of each of the
three companies associated wit

ith its power transmission system;

(०) “Corporation” means the Power Grid Corporation of India 10
Limited, being a company within the meaning of the Companies Act,
1956 and having its registereq office at Hemkunt Chambers, 89, Nehru
Place, New Delhi-110019;

(@) “notification” means a notification

Published in the Official
15

high voltage alternative current (EHVAC) lines

and high voltage direct current (HVDC) jines] ang sub-stations
owned by each such company; 20
(f) “prescribeq” means prescribed ७,

(9) “three companies” means the
First Schedule.

y rules made under this Act;
companies specified in the

(A) words and expressions used herein and not defined but
defined in the Electricity (Supply) “Act, 1948 or, as the case may be, 25
the Companies Act, 1956 shall have the

meaning, respectively,
assigned to them in those Acts, है oh

CHAPTER 11

Acqui. 3. (1) On the appointed da: डे
sition of Might, title and interest of each of the three companies in relation to its
rights of Power transmission system shall, by virtue i

ae to, and vested in, the Centray Government,
in rela- (2) The power transmission systems vested in the Central Govern.
fia? te ment by virtue of sub-section

‘ower vested, be deemed to have been transferred to, and vested in, the Corpo-
trans- ration,
mission

systems, 4. (1) The Power transmission system shall be deemed to include
हक अर all assets, tights, leaseholds, powers, authorities and privileges and all
effectof’ Property, movable and immovable, relating to such system including 40
vesting. lands, buildings, workshops, projects (whether complete or at any stage
of completion or Planning), stores, spares, instruments, machinery and
equipment, construction equipment, unutilised long-term and short-term


3 8

Joans and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such pro-

perty as were, immediately before the appointed day, in the ownership,

possession, power or control of the three companies and all books of

account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating
5 thereto but shall be deemed not to include—

(a) book debts due to the three companies, immediately before
the appointed day;

(b) cash balances and bank balances as on the appointed day;

(c) income and expenditure on revenue account relating to any
10 period before the appointed day.

Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
rights in relation to the power transmission system of each of the three
companies which have been transferred to, and vested in, the Corpora-
tion under sub-section (2) of section 3 and this sub-section shall include
the right to collect transmission charges for traismissoin of power and
any monies collected on or after the appointed day by any of the three
companies as transmission charges (whether shown separately or not)
shall be payable by such company to the Corporation.

(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all deeds, bonds,
20 guarantees (other than guarantees given by the Government of India),
agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and other
instruments of whatever nature in relation to the power transmission sys-
tem of cach of the three companies, subsisting or having effect immedia-
tely before the appointed day, and to which each of the three companies
25 is a party or which are in favour of any of the said companies shall he of
as full force and effect against or/in.favour of the Corporation and may be
enforced or ected upon as fully and effectually as if in the place of the
concerned company, the Corporation had been a party thereto or as if
they had been issued in favour of the Corporation.

30. (9) If, on the date of asset of the President to this Act, any suit, appeal
or other proceeding of whatever nature, in relation to any property or
assets which have heen transferred to. and vested in, the Corporation
under stib-séction’ (2) of section’ 3, instituted or preferred by or against
any of the three companies is pending, the same shall -not abate, be

35 discontinued or be, in anv way, prejudicially affected by reason of the
transfer of the power transmission system of that company or of any-
thing contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may
pe continued, proseeuted or enforcerl, subiéct to the provisions of sub-
section (1) of section 5. by or against the Corporation. *

40 5, (1) Subiect to the provisions of sub-section (2), every liability of
aach of the three companies in relation to its power transmission system,
in respect of anv neriod nrior to the annointed day. which has been trans-
ferred to. and vested in, the Sorporstion under sub-section (2) of section
3. shall he the liability of the Corporation and shall be enforceable against

45 the Corporation and not against the company;

Corpo.
ration to
be lisble
for
certain
prior
Tiabi-
Iities,


Corpo.
ration to
be lessee
or
tenant,

Removal
of
doubts

eee 4 कै 3 ire

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to—

(a) the income and expenditure on revenue account relating to
any period before the appointed day and received or, as the case may
be, incurred by any of the three companies on or after the appointed
day; ४ क्‍

(0) arrears of depreciation, regarding contingent liabilities on
capital account relating to any period before the appointed day, aris-
ing on account of the decision of any court, tribunal or other
authority...

(2) Where any repayment of a loan or interest, or both, has been 10
made, on or after the appointed day, by any of the three companies to
any lending agency, such repayment shall be deemed to have been made
by the Corporation and the amount of such repayment shall be reim-
bursed by the Corporation to the concerned company on adjustment of
transmission charges or any other amount due to the Corporation from 15
the concerned company,

6. (1) Where any property is held by any of the three companies in
relation to its power transmission system under any lease or right of
tenancy, the Corporation shall on and from the appointed day, be deem-
ed to have become the lessee or tenant, as the case may be, in respect of 20
such property as if the lease or tenancy in relation to such property had
been granted to the Corporation and thereupon all the rights under such
Tease or tenancy shall be deemed to have been transferred to and vested
in, the Corporation. पे 1

(2) On the expiry of the term of any lease or tenanev referred to in 25
sub-section (1), such lease or tenancy shall, if so desired by the Corpo-
ration, be renewed on the same terms and conditions on which the Tease
or tenanov was held by any of the three companies immediately before
the appointed day. ;

7, (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pro- 30
visions of sections 3. 4, 5 and 6 shall apply to the extent to which any
property appertains to the business relating to the power transmission
svsfem carried on by the three companies and to the rights and powers
acquired, and to debts. liabilities and obligations incurred, and to con-
tracts, agreements and other instruments made by any of the three 35
companies and to leal proteedings relating to those matters pending in
any court; tribunal or other authority in India.

(2 Tf anv question arises as to whether anv proverty appertains. on
the anointed day. to anv business of any of the three companies in
relation to its power transmissfon system, or whether any rights. powers. 40
debts, Habilities or obligations were acquired or incurred or any con-
tract. agreement or other instrument was made by anv of the three com-
panies for the nurposes of its said business or whether any document
relates 10 those nuronses, the auestion shall be referred to tha Central
Government which shall, after giving a reasonable ovportunity of being 45
heard to the persons interested in the matter, decide it in such manner
as it may think fit. 2 2!


ment

dunt.

5

8. (7) For the  fransfer to, and vesting in the Central Goversment
under section 3 and 4, of the power transmission system and the right,
title and interest of each of the three companies in relation to its power
transmission system, there shall be paid, in the presexbed manner, by

5 the Central Government to each of the three companies such amount: as
is equal to the book value of all the assets and properties after deduc-
tion of liabilities (offer than contingent abilities) given in the andited
statement of accounts of each of the three companies as on thse 3156 day
of March, 1992. ve

10 (2) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Corporation under sub-.
section (2) of section 3 of the power transmission system and the right,
title and interest of each of the three companies in relation to its power
transmission system, there shall be paid, in the prescribed manner, by
the Corporation to the Central Government, the amount which is paid

15 by that Government to the three companies under sub-section 0).

(3) In case of any dispute relating to the nature of any asset, property
or liability or the amount payable under sub-section (1). the dispute
shall be referred by the Central Government to such authority as it may
appoint and the decision of that authority in the matter shall be final.

20 CHAPTER पा
DELIVERY OF ASSETS, ETC., TO THR CORPORATION

9. (1) Any person who has, on the date of commencement of this
Act, in his possession or under his control, any assets, books and any
other documents relating to the power transmission system which has
25 been transferred to, and vested in, the Corporation under sub-section
(2) of section 3, shall be liable to account for the said assets, books and
documents to the Corporation and shall deliver them up to the Corpo-
ration or to stich person or persons.as the Corporation may specify in this
behalf. \

30 (2) The Corporation may take or cause to be taken all necessary steps
for securing possession of the power transmission system which has been
transferred to, and vested in, the Corporation under this Act.

(3) Each of the three companies shall, within such period as the Cor-
poration may allow in this behalf, furnish to the Corporation a com-
35 plete inventory of all its property and assets as on the appointed day
pertained to its power transmission system which has been transferred
to, and vested in, the Corporation under sub-section (2) of section 3.

CHAPTER. IV
PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSOCIATED PERSONNEL

40 10, (1) On the vesting of the power transmission system of the
three companies in the Corporation, the associated personnel who have
een. immediately on or before the appointed day, employed in any of
the three companies and have not already become employees of the Cor-
poration shall become, on and from the date of commencement of this

45 Act, employees of the Corporation and shall hold office or service under
the Corporation on the terms and conditions which are not in any way

Duty of
persons

account
for
assets,
ete, in
their
Posses-
sion,


6

less favourable than those which would have been admissible to them
if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless | ‘
until their employment under the Corporation is duly terminated or
until their remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered
by the Corporation

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, or any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of
the services of the associated personnel to the Corporation, shall not
entitle such personnel to any compensation under this Act or any other
law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by 10
any court, tribunal or other authority,

Provident li. (1) Where any of the three companies has established a provident
Swe. fund or any other fund for the benefit of the persons employed by it, the
atten monies relatable ६0 the associated personnel who have already become
funds, employees of the Corporation or whose services have become transferred 15
under this Act to the Corporation shall, out of the monies standing, on
the date of transfer of the associated personnel, to the credit of such pro-
vident fund or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Corpo-
ration
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to 20
the Corporation shall be dealt with by the Corporation in such manner
as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
MiscrLLANEOUS
fee 12, The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any- 25
ae thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
riding being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law.
effect. other than this Act, or in any deerce or order of any court, tribunal or
other authority.
Penal.
ties, 13. Any person who— 30

(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property
forming part of the power transmission system of any of the three
companies wrongfully withholds such property from the Corpora-
tion; or

(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 35
forming part of the power transmission system of any of the three
companies; or

(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Corporation or
any person or body of persons specified by the Corporation, any
document or inventory relating to the power transmission system 40
of any of the three companies, which may be in his possession, cus-
tody or control; or

(०) fails to deliver to the Corporation or any person or body of
persons specified by that Corporation, any assets, books of account,



7

registers or other documents in his’ possession, custody or control
relating to the power transmission system of any of the three com-
panies,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
5 two years and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand Tupees.

14. (1) Where an offence punishable under this Act has been com-
mitted by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,

10 shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge and that he had exercised all due

15 diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it
is proved that the offence has been commitied with the consent of con-
nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,

20 Manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, mana-
ger, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of thai offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm
25 oF other association of individuals; and

(०) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
the Central Government or the Corporation or any of the three com-
panies or any officer of that Government, Corporation or company or

30 any other person authorised by that Government, Corporation or com-

pany for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act.

46, (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act,

35... (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:— i

(a) the manner in which the amount is to be paid under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 8;

40 (b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund
or other fund, referred to in sub-section (2) of section 11, shall be
dealt with; i

(c) any other matier which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed,

Offences
by

panies.

Protec-
tion of
action
taken in
good,
faith.

Power

to make
rules,


8

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in, two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that _any such modification
or annulment. shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre- 10
viously done under that rule. =



THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(e) and (g)1

NAMES oF COMPANIES ui

1. The National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, a company
incorporated and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 having
its registered: office in Core No. 7, SCOPE Complex, Lodhi Road, New
Delhi-110 008.

2. The National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited, a company
incorporated and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 having its
registered office at Hemkunt Tower, 98, Nehru Place, New Delhi-110 019.

3. The North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited, a company
§ncorporated and registered under the Companies Act, 4956 having its
registered office at Kharmalki Road, Shillong-793001.


gional power grids, The Government of India took a policy decision in 1981
4a form a National Power Grid along-.with load despatei and: communi-
“tion facilities to ensure transmission of ‘power, within and across
#ifferent regions of India, on’a more scientific, efficient and economic
asis.

a National “Power .- Grid. Tt was. also. decided to transfer
inter alia the power transmission Systems of the three companies.
namely, the National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd. The National Hy
droelectrie Power Corporation Ltd. and the North-Eastern Electric Power
Corporation Ltd. to the newly formed Corporation. Accordingly, the man-
agement of the said Power transmission systems of the aforesaid three
companies was taken over by Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.
(POWERGRID) with effect from 16th August, 1991, 19th November, 1991

3. The dela y in transfer of the ownership of the assets relating to the
said power transmission systems of the eforesaid three companies to the
POWERGHID has, however, restricted its resource mobilisation efforts
both through internal cash generation as well as by going to the market
Yor commercial borrowings, As the legal formalities involved in trans-
ferring the ownership of ihe aforesaid three companies in relation to
their said power transmission systems will be time-cousuming, and it js
necessary in the public interest that the said ox. nership should be vested
in the POWERGRID immediately with a view to develop and
operate an integrated transmission net-work by establishing a National
Power Grid, it is PFoposed to acquire the right, title ang interest of the
aforesaid three companies in relation to their assets pertaining to their
Power transmission systems and vest them in the POWERGRID with
effect from Ist April, 1992. The said acquisition of assets and their transfer
will be on the basis of the book-value of all the assets and Properties
after deduction of liabilities (other than contingent liabilities) given in
the audited statement of accounts of each of the three companies as on
3ist March, 1992, पे

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deum; KALP NATH RAI
The 16th November, 1992.


“FINANCIAL: MEMORANDUM

2 i ase (1) of clause Bot 1 Seeks to provide that the power
transmission systems and the right, title and interest of the National Ther-
mal Power Corporation Ltd. the National Hivdrociecirie Power Corpo-
ration Ltd. and the North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd., in
relation to their power transmis: +oms-shali..be- deemed cto have
been transferrest to, and vested in, the Central vernmment with effect
from ist April, 7992. Sub-clause (2) of that ‘clause further provides that
the power transmission systems vested in the Central Government by
virtue of sub-Clause (1) shall, immediately after they had so vested! be
deemed to have. been transferred to, and yested in, the Power Grid
Corperation of. India. ५

2: Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill geeks’ to provide that the
Central Government shall pay as compensation, in the prescribed manner,
to each of the aforesaid three companies such amount as is equal to the
pook-value of the assets and properties, after deduction of liabilities
fother than contingent liabilities) given in the audited statement of
aecounts of each of the aforesaid three companies as on 31st March, 1992.
The said amount of compensation is for the acquisition by the Central
Government of the power transmission systems and the right, title and
interest of each of the aforesaid three companies in relation thereto.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 further provides that the amount of compen-
sation so paid by the Central Government shall be ultimately paid to
it by the Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. to whom the power trans-
mission systems so acquired by the Central Government are transferred
under sub-clause (2) of clause 3. Since the transfer of the power trans-
mission systems from the aforesaid three companies to the Central
Government and ultimately to the Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.
will be on the basis of the corresponding equity, loans, grants utilised
for the construction of the assets, no expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India is involved. No other expenditure of recurring or non-
recurring nature is involved.

it


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill, Such rules may, ami

other things, provide for any of the following matters, namely :— ‘

रु »

(a) the manner in which the amount is to be paid under sub-.
clause (Q) or sub-clause (2) of clause 8;

(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or
other fund, referred to in sub-clause (2) of clause 11, shall be dealt
with,

2 The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedure and detail and it is not possible to incorporate the same in

the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character,

12


. .. LOK SABHA

A
BILL

(Shri Kalp Nath Rai, Minister of State of the Ministry of Power.)