1
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMANENT BENCHES OF HIGH
COURTS AT STATE CAPITALS  BILL, 2014
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of permanent Benches of the High Courts in State
Capitals where the principal seat or a permanent Bench of the High Court
concerned is situated at a place other than the State Capital and
for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Establishment of Permanent Benches of High Courts
at State Capitals  Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
where the principal seat or a permanent Bench of the High Court of a State is situated at a
place other than the State Capital, the President may, on recommendation of the State
Government, by order, provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of that High
Court at the State Capital.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Establishment
of a permanent
Bench of the
High Court
concerned at
capital city of
every State.
Bill No. 169 of  2014
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) The number of Judges who will sit at the permanent Bench at the State Capital
shall be such as the Chief Justice of the High Court of that State may from time to time
nominate.
(3) The permanent Bench at the State Capital shall exercise the jurisdiction and power
for the time being vested in the High Court of that State in respect of cases arising in the
territories comprising of the State Capital and such other territories within that State as the
President may by notification specify.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There have been constant demands from several quarters for establishing permanent
Benches of High Courts at State Capitals where the principal seat of the High Court of a
State is situated at a place other than the State Capital.
The principal seat of the Kerala High Court is at Ernakulam, which is situated at a
distance of 200 kms. from the State Capital, Thiruvananthapuram. Ever since the formation
of the State of Kerala in 1956, there has been a demand for the establishment of a permanent
Bench at the State Capital.
It has been observed that the State is a principal litigant in a majority of cases pending
before various High Courts. This had led to the State Governments incurring considerable
expenditure on account of travelling allowance and leave allowance given to the Government
employees for travelling from State Capitals to the places of principal seats of the
High Courts concerned for depositions.
Moreover, it has been the policy of the successive Governments that justice should
be taken to the doors of the litigants and therefore the litigants should not be compelled to
travel long distance to reach the Court. In the interest of administration of justice, the court
must be easily accessible to the litigants and witnesses.
There is no provision for establishing a permanent Bench of High Court in State
Capital in respect of existing States where the principal seat of that High Court exists at a
place other than the State Capital. Therefore, it is necessary to enact a legislation providing
for establishing a permanent Bench of a High Court of the State in the State Capital on the
recommendation of the State Government concerned, where such seat does not exist or the
principal seat of that High Court exists at a place other than the State Capital.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
November 7, 2014.
3

GMGIPMRND—2870LS(S-3)—04.12.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of permanent Benches of the High Courts in State
Capitals where the principal seat or a permanent Bench of the High Court
concerned is situated at a place other than the State Capital and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P .)