820t 1972. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
Bill No. 16 of 198Z 
. THE LIMESTONE AND DOLOMITE MINES LABOUR WELFARJ: 
FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982. 
A 
BILL 
to Clmend the Limestone and Dolomite Mine, Labour WelfAre Fund Act, 
1972. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India sa follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Shorll 
Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1982. title. 
5 2. In section 2 of the Limest~ne and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Amend,.. . 
Fund Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause . ment of 
(b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: _ section 3. 
• (bb) "limestone" includes minerals like lime-shell, calcareous 
sand and sea sand essentially composed of lime-shell, marl, kankar 
10 or lime-kankar;'. 
15 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (ii), for the words "iron or steel", the words "iron, 
steel,. ferro-alloys, alloy steels, chemicals, 6ugar, paper, fertilizers, 
refractories, iron ore pelletisation or sUC'h other article or goods 01' 
class of articles or goods, as the C.entral Government may, from time 
to time, specify by notification in the Official Gazette"· shall be 
tubstituted and shall be deemed always to have been substitu~; 
(b) i~ the Explanation, for the words "cement, iron- or steel", 
the words, brlekets and figures "any artic)e or goods referred to in 
~o or specified under clause (ii)" shall be substituted and shall ,be 
deemed always -to have been substituted; 
• AmeDd-
ment of 
section J. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 4. 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in clause (l;), for the words 
"cement, iron or steel", the words, .brackets and figures "any article 01' 
goods referreCi to in or specified under clause (ii) of section 3" shall be 
substituted and shall be deemed always to have been substituted. 
Insertion 5 Afte of new . r section 7 of the principal Act, the following section ahall be 5 
section 'lAo, inserted, namely:-
Power 
to co-opt, 
etc., 
A.1nend-
meQt at 
.~ection 8. 
.Amend-
ment of 
section 16. 
Valida-
tio" 
f ' 
"7A. (I) An Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Com-
mittee may, at any time and for such period as it thinks fit, co-opt any 
person or persons to the Committee. 
(2) A person co-opted under sub-section (1) to a Committee shall to 
exercise and dillcharg2 all the powers and functions of a member 
thereof, but shall not be entitled to vote .... 
6. In section 8 of the prineipal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Inspectors, Welfare Ad-
ministrators", the words "Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Adminis- 15 
trators, Inspectors" shall be substituted; 
• "" . ,II .. ; (, ;,-
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "Any In6pector or Welfare 
Administrator~', the' wOrds "Any' Welfare CommiSsioner. 'WelfareD-
ministrator or 'Inspector" shall be substituted. 
7. In section 16 of the principal- Act,-
• ,ta) in <;lause (m). for. ~hewords ,"an Inspector or a ,W~are Ad-
niini~tra'tor"; the words' CIa' Welfare Cotnmissioner or a' Welfilre'" Ad-
ministrator or an Inspector" .'shah be substituted; 
20 
(0) in Clause' (n), after the words "the occupier' of 'factorl.es;~i the 
words ", the purchasing agents or stockists of'limestone or dot6thite" 25 
shall be inserted. 
8. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, 
tribunal or other authority,- . 
(a) all duties of excise levied, assessed or collected or purport-
ed to have been levif!d, assessed or collected under the principal 'Ad 30 
befOl:e the commencem~nt of this Act shall, for all purposes, be 
decmed to be, 'and to have always been, as validly and effectively 
levied, assessed or collected as if the provisions of sections, 3 and 4 
of the principal Act as amended by sections 3 and 4 of this
J
, Act had I 
been in force at all material times; 35 
(0) nO: stiit or proceeding,shall be maintained or continued in any 
. coull for the re'funci of, and no enforcement shall be made by any 
cO\J!'t.'of any decree ot order directing the refund 'of, any 8U~ duty 
of excise which had' been collected and which would have· been 
validly collected if the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the' pr:mcipal':40 
;"Act;:as amended by sections 3 and 4 of this Act, had been in~.force 
'at al~ material times; 
(c) retunds ·~ll'Qe made of ali 'such duties of- ex~Sf!.:which 
have been collected b¥t' ",hieh would- not have been so collected ~, 
the provisions of sections 3'and 4 of the principal Act, ·as amended 45 

3 
by sections 3 and 4 of this Act, had been in force at all material 
times; 
(eI) recoveries shall be made of all such ddties of excise which 
have not been collected or, as the case mar ,be, which have been 
5 refunded but which would have been collected or, 'as the case may 
be, ~Quld, not have been refWlded if the provisions of sections 3 and 
4 of ,the: princjPll1 Act, a~ amendeq, by sectio:ns 3 and 4 of this Act. 
h~(j ,l>~n in force at all material times.' , 
Erpl,anation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
10 no act OJ; omj,ssion on the pa,rt of any pers,?n, ,before the commencement 
ofthi~.Act, shall be punishable as,an offence which would)lot have been 
scfpurytshable. if. thil,i Act had not come into torc~.. . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
TPe Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1972, 
was enacted with a view to ameliorating the living conditions of labour 
employed in limestone and dolomite mines. It provides for the levy and 
collection of a cess on limestone and dolomite consumed in factories and 
for the crediting of the proceeds of the cess, after due appropr'iation, to 
the Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund. The Act al50 
provides for the application of the said Fund for meeting the expenditure 
in connection with welfare measures undertaken for the benefit of 
wprkers engaged in limestone and dolomite mines. 
. .' 
2. The 1972-Act does not define the expression "limestone". To 
secure that minerals like lime-shell, calcareous sand and sea sand essen-
tially composed of lime-shell, marl, kankar or lime kankar which are 
similar in composition to limestone are also treated as l.irnestone for the 
purposes cJf. the Act, it is proposed to include a definition ot limestone in 
the Act (clause' 2 of the Bill). 
3. In an appeal under the rules made under the Act, the view hu 
been taken that an owner of a mine who uses the limestone or dolomite 
produced in the mine would be liable for payment ot duty under the 
~ct only when such limestone or dolomite is used in connection with the 
manufacture of cement, iron or steel. The Act has all along been adminii-
tered ·on the basis that the duty. is leviable not only when the owner 
uses the Ilmestone or dolomite for the ~ufacture o~ cement, iron or 
steel, but also when he Ules it for other purposes, such as, manufacture 
of lerro-ailoys, alloy steels, chemicals, BUgaJ:" paper, fertilizers, refractori .. 
and iron ore pelletisation. It is, therefore, proposed to amend sections 
3 and 4 of the Act luitably to bring out this intention clearly. and 110 
validate 1.v'.ies made in the past in aceordance with thie tn"\1@ 
(clauses 3, 4 and 8 of the Bill). 
• 4. The other amendments proposed in ihe Bill, which are of a minO!" 
nature, are as follows:-
'(a.) a provision is being included to enable the AdvilOl"y' Com-
mittees under the Act to co-o.pt members (clause 5 of the Bill); 
(b) the power to make inspections under the Act, which at 
present can be exercised only by Inspectors and Welfare Adminis-
trators under the 'Act, is proposed to be conferred on the Welfare 
Commissioners under the Act who rank above Welfare AdministrateI'll 
(clause 6 of .the Bill); 
. 
(c) with a :view to keeping trzck of the mode of disposal of 
minerals, provision is being made to enable the Central Govemment 
to make rules for collection of statistical information from purchasmg 
4 
( ..... -' 

5 
agents and stockists of limestone and dolomite [clause 7 (b) of the 
Bill]. . 
5. The Bill ~eeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; BHAGWAT JHA AZAD. 
The 22nd February, 1982. 
RECOMMENDATION OF THE PRESIDENT UNDER ARTICLE 
117 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. S-23011/8/81-M. V. dated the 24th February, 1982. 
froJ'll Shri Bhagwat Jha Azad, Minister of State of the Ministry of Labour 
to the SecretClry, Lok Sabha.] . 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
above Bill to amend the Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare 
Fund Act, 1972, has recommended under article 117(1) of the Constitu-
tion, the introduction iIi Lok Sabha of the said Bill. 

FlIfl1NCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 7 A empowering an 
Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee to co-opt any 
person or persons' to act as members on that Committee. If and when 
any ~rson is. CO-OP~t he may. lrave to be paid nominal allowances 81 
may be specified under the rules -ed s\1eh expellditure wW".be·.met-from 
out of the IAmestone and Dolomite ·Mines· Labour Welfare Fund main-
~ed under section 5 of the Act. There is no expenditure, whether 
~C or nOn-reCurring,,, ollt -of .u.eameeUdatedFund-'ofiln~ 
6 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
ClaUJe 7 01. the Bill seeks tal iIlMtid~'8ection 16 of the Act which em-
powers the Central Government to make rules fur carrying out. the 
purposes,' of ·tbt" ... .A:ct Clatme (m)·, ofi,WC!tten"16 irbImg' alll8lulichlo as to 
provide therein that the ¥Iles~Y'ptrOYid8''fOl'Wpecifying the powers that 
may be exercised by a Welfare Commissioner also. Clause (n) of that 
section is being amended to pitiYide~'tiWein that the rules may provide 
for furnishing to the Central Government by the purchasing agents or 
stockists 'of limestone or dolomite of such statistical or other iJitormation 
as may be required to be furnished, from time to time, by the Central 
Government. 
2. The matters in 'respect of which the rules may be made are of 
administrative detail and procedure and hence, the delegation of legisla-
tive powet"ls·~o'fnormaI· ~lUi~~cter. . 
7 

• 
Uv7aod 
oollection 
ole_OIl 
limestone 
aa4delo-
.... 
• 
ANNEXURE 
~ noM THJ: I..n.aIrroHB AND· Doi.oMlT!: MINE LABoUR 
WELrAaZ Ftnm ACT, 1972 
(62 or 1972) 
• • • • • 
I. In this Act, unleSs the context otherwise requiree,-
• • • • • 
" I. With ~ect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notiftCtltion in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be levied and 
collected as a cess for the purposes of this Act on so much of limestone 
and dolomite pI:Qduced in any mine-
• • • • • 
(ii) as is used by the owner of such mine for any purpose in 
connection with the manufacture of cement, iron or steel, 
a duty of excise, at such rate not exceeding one rupee per metric tonne. 
of limestone or dolomite, as the case may be, as the Central Government 
may, from time to time, fix by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette. 
E:cplanation.-Where the owner of any limestone or dolomite mine 
is also the occupier of any factory, then, for the purposes of clause (ii), 
all limestone or dolomite, as the case may be, produced in the mine and 
not sold or otherwise disposed ot to the occupier of any other factory 
shall be deemed, unless the contrary is proved, to have been used by 
such owner for any purpose in connection .with the manufacture ot 
cement, iron or steel. 
4. (1) Every duty of excise leviable under this Act on limestone or 
dolomite shall be payable-
• • • • • 
(b) to the Central Government, by the owner of the limestone 
or dolomite mine where the limestone or dolomite is used by such 
owner for any purpose in connection with the manufacture of cement, 
iron or steel, 
within such period as may be prescribed . 
• • • • • 

Appoint-
mentef 
Inspeo-
tors, etc., 
and 
their 
powers. 
Power 
to 
make 
rules. 
9 
-8. (1) The Central Government may appoint as many Ins~ctors, 
Welfare Administrators and &Uch other oftlcers and staff· as it thinkJ 
Decessary for the purposes of, this. A4 
• • • • • 
(3) Any Inspector or Welfare Administrator may,-
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he may think fit, enter at any 
reasonable time, any place which he considers it necessary to enter 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act; 
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper dis-
charge of his duties; and 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed . 
• • • • • 
141. (1) * • • * • 
(2) In particular and without prejudiCe to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for-
• • * • • 
(m) the powers that may be exercised by an Inspector OJ;" a Wel-
fare Administra~or tinder section I; • 
(n) the furnishing to the Central Government by the occupier 
of factories 8Bd the owners, agents or managers of limestone or 
dolomite mines, of BUch statistical and other information as may be 
required to be furnished from time to time by that Government; 
• • • • • 

• 
·LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
Act, 1972 . 
• 
.. 
(Sh"i BM.gwat Jha Azad. 
Min.i4te" of State 
of the Ministry of Labou".) 