I 
.1 
!, . 
1 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 16 of 1979 
\' THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
I .~ AMENDMENT BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industries (DevelopfMnt and Regulation) Act, 195]. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Industries 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 1979. 
(Development and Short 
title and 
com-
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of mence-
December, 19'78. ment. 
85 ~of 1951 
2. In sub-section (2) of section 18FB of the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951 (hereinafter refelTed to as the principal Act), 
in clause (b) o,f the proYiso, for the words "five years", the words."eiirht 
10 years" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
18FB. 
3. In the First Schedule to the principal Act,-
(a) under the heading "12. MISCELLANEOUS MECHANICAL AND 
IlNGINIDING INWSTRIES: ", after item (3), the following items shall 
be inserted, namely:-
.. (41) Pressure Cookers. 
(5) Cutlery. 
(6) Steel furniture."; 
Amend-
mentof 
the First 
Schedule. 

Repeal 
and 
saving. 
2 
(b) under the heading "34. CERAMICS:", after item (7), the 
following item shall be inserted, namely:-
"(8) Graphite Crucibles."j 
(c) under the heading "38. MISCELLANEOUS INDUSTRIES: ", after 
item (2), the following items shall be inserted, namely: - 5 
"(3) Zip fasteners (metallic and non-mettalic). 
(4) Oil stoves.". 
4. (1) The Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment 
Ordinance, 1978, is hereby repealed. 
(2) NQtwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 10 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance. shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the pr:ncipal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 

_____ ~.., ~n T1O',..rrc;: A Nn REASONS 
LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPHENT AND REGULATION) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1979 
(1'0 be/As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. Page 2, line 6,-
.f2! "non-rnettalic) " read "no n- me t alIi c ) " 
2. Page 3, line 20,-
fer "decentral sed" read "decentraJ..i sed" -
NEW DEIJ-II; 

, 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
,
~: The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, contains pro-
", visions for the taking over of management of industrial undertakin?s 
pertaining to the industries specified in the First Schedule to the Act In 
certain Circumstan~es. Section 18FB of the Act empowered the Central 
'.,!,; ('rOvernment, by the issue of a notified order, to suspend for a maximum 
~;i period of five years the operation of all or any of the contracts, assurances 
,
:, 'of property, agreements, settlements, awards, standing orders' or other 
instJ:ll.ltn6nts in. force immediately before the issue of such notified 
"order. Over the past few years, experience has shown that it has not 
: been possible for the Central Government to bring back sick industrial 
:; undertakings taken over by Government to a state of financial viabillty 
~; within the aforesaid period of five years. Further, in the few mont.1S 
r beginning from January 1979, the maximum period of five years specified 
I above was expiring in respect of a number of industrial undertakings 
t.'; whose management was with the Central Govern.ment. It was, therefore, 
, necessary to increase this period of five years on an urgent baSis. 
2. The major thrust of the Statement on industrial policy presented to 
'i
~".".," Parliament in December 1977 is on the rapid development of small scale 
and cottage industries on a decentraLsed basis. Doubts had been expressed 
in respect of some of the items reserved for small scale sector as to whe-
'I ther these would fall under the First Schedule to the Act which specifies 
the industries in respect of which the provisions of the Act would apply. 
It was, therefore, necessary to include a few of these items like pressure 
cookers, cutlery, zip fasteners (metallic and non-metallic), oil-stoves, steel 
furn.iture and graphite crucibles in tlJ.e First Schedule SO that there may 
not be any scope for such doubts. 
3. To give effect to the above proposals, an Ordinance to amend the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, was promulgated by 
the President on the 30th December, 1978. 
The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW Dr.Llu; GEORGE FERNANDES. 
T:te 14th February, 1979. 

Power of 
Central 
Govem-
mentto 
make 
certain 
declara-
tions in 
relation to 
industrial 
undertak-
ings. the 
mana,e-
mentor 
control 01 
which 
has been 
taken 
ove"t 
under 
section 
lllA,.aec-
tion 18AA 
ersec:Uon 
18FA. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRlt~~ (DEVEI.OPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1951 
(65 OF 1951) 
• • • • • 
• • • • 
(2) The notified order made under sub-section (1) shall remain in 
force, in the first instance, for a period of one year, but the duration of 
such notified order may be extended from time to time by a further noti-
fied order by a period not exceed:ng one year at a time: 
Provided that no such notified order shaU, in any case, remain in 
force-
(a) after the expiry of· the period for which the management of 
the industrial undertaking was taken over under section 18A, section 
18AA Or section 18FA, or 
(b) for more than five years in the aggregate from the date of 
issue of the first notified order, 
whichever is earlier. 
• • • • 
4 

LOK SABHA 
A 
Bn...L 
funher to amend the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1961. 
\ 