8W No. Ui of 1"7 
THE RAILWAY PASSENGER FARES 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LOK SABHA) 

aill No.1' 01 1 .. 1 
THE RAILWAY PASSENGER FARES BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABBA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of a tax on railway fares. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Railway Passenger Fares Act, 1957. Short title. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
S (a) 'fare' means the total amount of all charges of whatever 
10 
IS 
nature payable by a passenger or gr9Up of passengers, and 
includes-
(i) haulage charges for supply of carriages of particular 
types; 
(ii) empty haulage charges on tourist cars and salOOD8; 
(iii) charges for pilot engines; and 
(iv) charges for dining cars attached to special trains; 
but does not include-
(i) the tax payable under this Act; 
(ii) terminal taxes, pilgrim taxes and tolls on bridges; 
(iii) reservation charges; and 
(iv) hire, detention and stabling charges in respect of 
pauenger traffic booked in reserved carriages and special 
trains; 
20 (b) 'passenger' means any person travelling on a railway 
in any description or class of train or carriage on payment of his 
fare, whether at full rates or at concessional rates; 
DeftDldou. 

2 
(c) 'railway' and 'railway administration' have the mean-
ings respectively assigned to them in the Indian Railways Act, 
1890. 9 01' 1890. 
LtYJ of ta 3. (1) Subject to the provisions of .this Act, there shall be levied 
~tenpr and collected on fares paid by passengers carried by any railway 5 
in India, whether by itself or in conjunction with any other mode 
of transport or in conjunction with railways in any adjacent 
country, a tax at the rate specified in that behalf in the Schedule. 
(2) The tax levied under sulHection (1) shall be collected by the 
railway administration as an addition to the fares, and the railway 10 
admjnistration shall have all the powers and remedies for the 
recovery thereof· as though the same were a rate or fare which the 
railway administration is empowered to levy under the Indian 
Railways Act, 1890. 9 of 1890. 
RuIn for 4. In computing the tax payable under this Act, the following IS 
~_ rules shall apply, namely:-
ICIIIOI' fuel. 
Power t. 
c:scmpt. 
Rule I.-The tax leviable shall, wherever necessary, be rounded 
oft to the nearest naya paisa, fractions of half-a-naya patisa and over 
being counted as one, and less than half being disregarded. 
Rule 2.-In the case of return tickets, the rate of tax shall be 20 
based on the distance for a single journey. 
Rule 3.-In the case of tickets issued from or to out-agencies or 
city booking oftlces, the tax shall be leviable only in respect of the 
fare at~ributable to the actual journey by railway. 
Rule 4.-The amount of the tax for any distance shall, wherever 25 
necessary, be so adjusted that the aggregate amount of the fare and 
tax for such distance is not less than the aggregate amount of the 
fare and tax for any lesser distance in any case. 
5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette and for reasons to be specified therein, exempt, either in 30 
whole or in part and either absolutely or subject to such conditions 
as it may specify, any passengers or class of passengers from the 
tax leviable under this Act. 
Power to 8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
make rule.. Ofticia1 Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 3S 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, rules so made may,-
(a) I regulate the collection by or on behalf of the railway 
administratiOll of the tax levied under this Act, and provide 

for the authority to which, and the time and manner ill which, 
~ 
the tax shall be paid; 
(b) prescribe the fonn of the returns to be submitted by 
any authority collecting the tax and the particulars to be 
5 contained therein and the manner in which it is to be verified. 
(3) In making any rules under this section, the Central Govern-
ment may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees for each such breach. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
1 2 
De.cription of traffic Rate of tGz 
1. Passengers travelling by railway for distances 
up to 30 miles (inclusive) 5% of fare. 
2. Passengers travelling by railway for distances 
from 31 miles to 500 miles (inclusive) 15% of fare. 
3. Passengers travelling by railway for distances 
over 500 miles. 10% of fare. 
4:. Pasaengers travelling on mileage coupons 
5. Passengers travelling on season tickets 
6& ••• , i 
12,% of the cost 
of the ceupoDl. 
nil 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to impose a tax on fares payable by 
passengers travelling by railway. Under article 269(1) of the 
Constitution, the proceeds of the tax less the portion attributable to 
Union territories shall be assigned to the States concerned. The 
principles of such distribution will have to be formulated by 
Parliament by law. 
Nzw DBLHI; 
The 15th May. 1917. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
In the case of railways administered by companies, it is necessary 
to regulate the collection of taxes under this law by means of rules 
made by the Central Government. The tax may also have to be 
collected by other authorities on behalf of the Railways. Clause 6, 
therefore, authorises the Central Government to make rules provid-
ing for the regulation of the collection of taxes, the authority to 
which the taxes so collected may be paid, the form in which returns 
should be made and the like. 
The rule-making power is of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of a tax on railway fares. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II7 and 
clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, re-
commended to Lok Sabha, the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
S~cretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 