Bill .0. 1. 011818 
THE MINIMUM WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1953 
(As INTllODUCED IN 'l'IlE HOUSE OF 'l'BE l'EOl'LE) 
A 
BILL 
/urthel' to CJ:rnend thc Minimum lVa.ges Act., 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament us follows :-
1. Short tit1e.-·'l'his Act. may be called the Minimum Wages 
(Amendment) Act, Hl53. 
2. Amendment of section 2, Act XI of 194,8.-111 section 2 of the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- is 
(a) ill clause (a), for the words und figures "Factories Act, 19B4 
(XXV of U)(J4) , " t.he words and figures "Factories Aot., 1948 (LXIII 
of 1048)" sha.ll be substituted; and 
(b) in sub-clauso (i) of clause (e), for the words, braokets, 
letter and ligures "clause (0) or tlUu-sectioll (l} of I!ection {) of tho 10 
.Factories Act, 10M (XXV of 1934)", the words, braokets, letter and 
figures "clause (f) of sub-seotion (1) of section 7 of the :Faotories Act., 
1948 (LXllI of 1948)" shull be substituted. 
3. Amendment of section 3, Act XI of 1948.-For sub-section (1) 
of section 3 of the prinoipal Aot, the fofiowing' sub·seotion. shall be Bub· is 
stituted, namely:-
.. (1) The nppropriute Governmellt shull, in the munner herein-
after pl'ovided,-
(II) fix the minimum fates of wagos payable to employees 
eUlployed- 20 
(i) in an employment specified in Part 1 of the 
Schedlolle at the commencement of this Act, before the 
31st day of December, 1953; 
(i0 in an employment specified in Part· II of the 
Schedule at the commencement of this Act, before the B1st 25 
day of December, 1958: 

10 
15 
20 
2 
Provided that. the appropriate Governinellt tully, 
insw!ld of ~xing minimum rates of wages uuder thi!; suI,,-
clause for the whole State, fix such rates for a part of the 
State or for any specified class or olasses of such employ-
ment in the whole State or pllrt thereof; and 
(iii) ill lUi employment added to Part· I or Part II of the 
Schedule by llutificu tioH ulldel' /ieotion 27, before the expiry 
of oue year from the date of the notiticatioo; 
(b) review at tiuch intel'vuls a.s it may think fit, such iutel'vlllti llOt 
exceediug five years, the minimum rates of wa.ges so fixed and 
revise the minimum rates, if necessury. 
(1A) lIiotwithlitanding anything coutained in tiub-Hectiou (1), 
the appropriute Government mlLy refrain from fixing minimum rates 
of wages in respect of any scheduled employment iu which there 
are in the whole Etllte less than one thousllnd employees engllged 
in such employment, but if at any time, whether before or nfter 
the expiry of any tiwe limit specified in sub-section (1), the appre-
prillt.e Government comes to a finding after such illquiry as it. may 
make or caul:!e to be made h~ this behalf that the number of 
employees in any scheduled employment iu respect 8f which it has 
refrained from fixing minimum rutes of wages - has risen to oDe 
thousand or morc, it shaU fix minimum rates of wages puyable to 
employees ill such emI)loymeut within one year from t.he dute on 
which it comes to such finding. ". 
26 4. Amendment of I18CtioD 14. Act XI of 1H8.-In· sectiol1 14 of the 
priucipl~1 Act. in sub-st:ction (2), for the words IUld figures "sl:lction .i7 of 
the Factories Act, HJ34 (XXV of 1904)", the words and figures "sectioa 
59 of the l"uctories Act., HJ48 (LX1II of 1048)" shall be substituted. . 
6. Amendment of section 28, Act XI of 1968.- For sllb-section (1) 
30 of section 26 of the prineipal Act, the following Bub-section shall be 
substituttld, namely:-
.. (1) Tho appropriute Government may, subject to such 
oonditions, if all~·. as it Dlay think fit to impose, direct thut the 
provisioIlI:! of this Act shall not apply or shall be deemed never to have 
applied in relation to the wages payable-
(4) to disabled employees; 
(b) to any class of employees in a scheduled employment 
where on an average the wages paya.ble are or have been 
seventyfive rupees or more" month if tho wages 8rc computed 
on a monthly basis or three rupees or more per day if the wages 
are oomputed on a daily basis." 
8. InsertiOll of new .. etlon 81 in Act lm of IH8.-Aftel' sectioll 30 of 
the principal Act, the following section shall be iuserted, namely:-
"81. Validation 0/ foration 0/ cBrtain minimum ,dtu 0/ wagBB.-
Where during the period commencing on the 1st day of April, 1952, 
and ending with the date of commencement. of the Minimum Wages,: 

3 
(Amendment) Act, 1953, mlDlmum rates of wages have been fixed 
by an aPI)roprinte Government ns hfoing payable to employees 
employed in any employment specified in Part I of the Schedule in 
the belief or purported belief that such rates were being fixed under 
sub-clause (i) of olause (a) of sub-section (1) of seotion 3, such rates 5 
shlllI be deemed to have been fixed in accordance with law, and 
shall not be culled in question in nny court on the ground merely 
that the dat.e specified in that Rub-clause hnd expired at the time 
the rates wl'rc fixed: 
Provided thRt nothing conto,ined in this section shall extend, or 10 
be construed to extend, to affect any pel'fton with any punishment or 
penalty whatsoever by reason of the payment by him by way of 
wages to any of his employees during the period specified in this 
section an amount; which is less thon the minimum rates of wale. 
referred to in this section or by reRson of non-compliance during the 16 
period aforesaid with llny order or r\llll issued under s('ctioll 1~." 

, 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-clause (1) of section 8 of 
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (XI of 1948), the appropriate Govern-
ments were required to fix minimum ra.tes of wages in the employments 
listed in Part I of the Schedule before the 31st March, 1952. Since the 
Aot was extended to Part B States only with effeot from the 1st AprU, 
1951, they had to complete all formalities required for fixing minimum 
wages within a period. of less thM one year with the result {,hat it has 
not been possible for them to fix minimum wages in all cllses. Moreover, 
the rates fixed after the 31st March, 1U52 have no validity in law. IlJ 
order to remove these legal difficulties and to give some mOre time to 
the States for enforcing the provisions of the Act it is proposed to extend 
the time-limit fOIl' fixing minimum rates of wages in employments 
mentioned in PArt I of the ~ch8dule to the 81st December, 1958. 
2. It is also proposed to provide for the fixation of rates in respeot of 
those scheduled employments for whioh no minimum rates of wages 
were initially fixed--in view of the proviso to olause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of secti~n 3-within one year from the date on which the appl'Oprinte 
Government is satisfied thnt no less than ODe thousand employeeB are 
engaged in the employment in the whole State. 
3. Similarly, when new itoenlS nre added under the powers conferrpd 
under section 27 of the Aot, the amending Bill provid,es that lOlnimllm 
wages in respect of those items should be fixed within one year from the 
date of iBBue of the Notification llllder seotion 27 of the Aot. 
4. As the object of t.be Minimum Wages Act is to provide safeguards 
for labour in what are called swented industritls, it is propoRed to amend 
section 26(1) BO that the appropriate Oovernment has power to direct 
that minimum rates of wages may not be fixed in respect of employees 
whose wales overage sevenLyfive rupees or more per month if the wage$ 
are computed on a monthly basis or rupees three or more per day, if 
computed on a daily basis. As the Act stands nt prescnt,-minimum WAges 
hBV~ to be fixed for all classes of employees in the Scheduled employ-
ments including those in whose elMeS there is no renl need to do so. 
V. V. GIRl. 
NEW DaLHI: 
'l'he ~81'd February, 1958. 

5 
ANNEXURE 
li:XTRACTS FROM THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948 (XI OF 1948) 
• * • • 
Section 2 (a) and (6) (i) 
S. IDt&rpretAtkJIl.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in 
the subject or context,-
(a) "adult", "adolescent" and "child" have the meanings 
respectively assigned to t.hem in section 2 of the Factories Act. 1934 
(XXV of 1984); 
• • * • • 
(e) "employer" means any person who employs, whether 
directly or through another person, or whether on behalf of 
himself or any other person, one or more employees in any scheduled 
employment! in respect of which minimum rates of wages have been 
fixed under this Act, and inoludes, except in sub-section (3) of 
section 26,-
(i) in a factory where there is carried on any scheduled 
employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages have 
been fixed under this Act, any berson named under clause (6) 
of sub-section (1) of section 9 of the Fa(ltories Act, 1OR4 (XXV 
of 1934), as manager of the fll(ltory; 
* , . * • • 
Section 3 (1) 
8. J'lzlq Of mlD1mum r&tel of w&gel.-{l) 'l'he appropriate Govern-
mfmt shall, in the manner hereinafter provided,-
(a) fix the minimum rates of wages payable to employees 
employed in all scheduled employments-
(i) in an employment specified in Part I of the Schedule at 
the oommenoement of this Act, before the 81st day of March, 
1952; 
(ii) in an employment specified in Part II of the Schedule 
at, the commencement of this Act. before the 31st. day of Decem-
ber, 1953; and 
(iii) in an employment included in Part I or Part II of the 
Schedule by notification under section 27, from such dAte as 
ma,y he specified in this behalf in the notification; 
(b) review at suoh intervals as it may think fit, such intervals 
no~ to exceed five years, tibe minimum rates of wages so fixEld Bnd 
revise the minimum ra.tes, if necessary: 
Provided that the appropriate Government shall not be reqUired 
to fix minimum rates of wages in respect of any soheduled employ-
ment in which there Bre in the whole State less than one thousand 
employees engaged in such employment'; 
Provided further that, in the CAse of an employment refelTed to 
in sub-clause (ii) of clause (a), the appropriate Government may fix 
minimum rates of wages only for B part of the State or for any 'c1ass 
or olass88 of such employment. 
... III * • III 

U. Overllme.-
'" • 
6 
Sectioa 14 (2) 
* '" '" 
(2) Nothing in this Act shn.ll prejudice the operation of the provisions 
of sOf!tion 47 of the Factories Act, 1984 (X~V of 1984), ip any cuse where 
those provisions are applioable. 
• '" * '" '" Section 96 (1) 
•. J:ump&lODl IDd .zcepUODL-{l) The appropria.te Government 
may, s'lhjp-ot to slIoh oonrJitinns, if Iny, all it may think fit to impose, 
direc.b that the provisions of this Act shAll 1I0~ Apply in relation to the 
wages payable to diilRbled employees. 
'" • • 

HOUSE OF THE poop I.E ~ 
BILL 
further to amend the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. 
(8h,ri V. v. airi, 
Minister for Labour.) 
uU'V--LAD-1l91 P8-3·3·53-1.7150. 