As INTRODUCED IN LOB: SABHA 
8lll No. I' of lf70 
THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BIU.., 1970 
A 
BRd. 
to provide for the acqu.isition and transfer of the u.ndertakings Of certain 
banking companies, having regard to their size, reBOurceB, !Coverage 
and organisation, in order to control the heights of the economy and 
to meet progreSSively,. and serve better, the needs of development of 
the economy in conformity with national policy and objectives and 
for matters connected therewith or. incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republk 
of India as follows ~ -
CHAPTER I 
·PRELIMINARY 
~ 1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Acquisition Short 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970. title pnd 
commen-
(2) The provisions of this Act (except section 21, which shall 
come into force on the appOinted day) shall be deemed to have come 
into force on the 19th day of July, 1969. 
421 M of Law-I. 
cement. 

Defin1-
tWas. 
Establish. 
• ment of 
corres-
ponding 
new 
banks 
and busi-
neaa 
thereof. 
2 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 14th day of February, 1970, being 
the day on which the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1970, was promulgated; 
(b) "banking company" does not include a foreign company:'i 
within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956; 1 of 1856. 
(c) "commencement of this Act" means the 19th day of July, 
1969; 
(d) "corresponding new bank", in relation to an existing bank, 
means the body corporate specified against such bank in column 2 10 
of the First Schedule; 
(e) "Custodian- means the person who becomes, or is appoin-
ted, a Custodian under section 7; 
. (f) "existing bank" means a banking company specified in 
column 1 of the First Schedule, being a company the deposits of 15 
which, . as shown in the return as on the last Friday of June, 1969, 
furnished to the Reserve Bank under section 27 of the Banking Re-
gulation Act, 1949, were not leS!; than rupees fifty crores; 10 of lIK8. 
(g) "Schedule" means a Schedule t<1 this Act; 
(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 20 
defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, have the meanings 1~ of 1H8. 
respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPl'ER n 
TRANSPER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS (JJ' EXISTING BANKS 
3. (1) On the Commencement of this Act, there shall be constituted 2S 
such corresponding new banks as are specified in the First Schedule. 
(2) The paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted 
under sub-section (1) shall. untfl any provision is made in thf!ll behalf 
in any scheme made under section 9. be equal to the paid-up capital of 
the existing bank in relatlO'n to which it is the corresponding new bank. 30 
(3) The entire capital of each corresponding new bank shall stand 
vested in. and allotted to. the Central Government. 
(4) Every corresponding new bank shall be a body corporate with 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power. sub1ect to the pro-
visions of this Act, to acauire. hold and dispose of property. and to con- 35 
tract, and mav sue and be sued in its name. 
(5) Everv corresponding new bank shall carry on and tran!llact the 
business of bankin~ as deftned in clause (h) of sectfon 5 of the Bankfn~ 
Relnllation Act. 1949. and may enga~e in one or more fonns of husiness 10 of 1MB. 
specified in sub-section (1) cl section 6 of that Act. 40 
(6) Every corresponding new bank shall establish a reserve fund 
to which shan be transferrM the shAre premium!': And the bR1Rncf'. if 
any. standin~ tn the crerlit of the reserve fund of the existinS! bank in 
relation to which it is the eorrespn"ding nl:'W bank. !lnd su('h furlhf"r 
:<:um!';. if anv. al'! may he b-ansferred in accordanc!' with th .. provi!'{fon!l 4S 
of section 17 of the Banking Re~Iati()n Act, 1949. 10 of 1MB-

... On the commeneement of this Ad, the uudertakin, of every 
Uiatinr bank shall be transferred to, and shall vest in. the eorrelpondin, 
new bank. 
5. (1) The undertaking of each eXisting bank shall be deemed to in-
S dude all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all pro-
perty,movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, invest-
ments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property 
as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the 
ownership, possession, power or control of the existing bank in relation 
10 to the undertaking, whether within or without India, and all books of 
accounts, registers, records and all other documents of whatever nature 
relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings. lia-
bilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the existing 
bank in relation to the undertaking. 
I" (2) If, according to the laws of any country outside India, the pro-
visions of this Act by themselves are not ·effective to transfer or 
vest any asset (1f liability situated in that country which forms part of the 
undertaking of an existing bank to, or in, the corresponding new bank, 
the affairs of the existing bank in relation to such asset or liability shall, 
~o on and from the commencement of this Act, stand entrusted to the 
chief executive officer for the time being of the carresponding new bank, 
and the chief executive officer may exercise all powers and do all such 
acts and things as may be exercised or done by the existing bank for the 
purpose of effectively transferring such assets and discharging such 
liabilities. 
(3) The chief executive officer of the corresponding new bank shall, 
in exercise of the powers conferred on him by sub-section (2), take all 
such s~eps as may be required by the laws of any such country outside 
India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, and may 
30 either himself or through any person authqrised by him in this behalf 
realise any asset and discharge any liability of the existing bank. 
(4) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all con-
tracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal 
representation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or 
having effect immediately before the commencement of this Act and 
35 to which the existing bank is a party or which are in fawur of the 
existing bank shall be of as full force. and effect against or in favour of 
the corresponding new bank, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully 
and effectuany as jf in the place of the existing bank the correspondin.!! 
new bank had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in favour 
40 of the corresponding new bank. 
(5) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature in relation to any business of the undertaking which 
has been transferred under section 4, is pending by or against the exist-
45 ing bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, 
Under. 
taklniof 
existinc 
bankato 
vest in 
corres-
ponding 
new 
banks. 
General 
effect 
of vest-
in,. 

Payment 
of com-
pellS'lltion. 
4 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertaking of 
the existing bank or of anything contained in this Act but the suit, 
appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced 
by or against the corresponding new bank. 
(6) Nothing in thi.:> Act shall be construed as applying to the assets, 5 
rights, powers, authorities and privileges and property, movable and 
immovable, cash balances and investments in any country outside India 
(and other rights and interests in, or ariSing out of, such property) and 
borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind subsisting at the 
commencement of this Act, <1f any existing bank operating in that coun- 10 
try if, under the laws in force in that country, it is not permissible for 
a banking company, owned or controlled by Government, to carry on 
the business of banking there. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION 
6. (1) Every existing bank shall be given by the Central Government 
such compensation in respect of the transfer, under section 4, to the cor-
responding new bank of the undertaking of t,he existing bank as i. speci-
fied qainst each such bank ill the Second Schedule. 
15 
(2) The amount of compensetion referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 20 
civen to every existing bank, at its option,-
(a) in cash (to be paid by cheque drawn on the Reserve Bank) 
in three equal annual instalments, the amount of each instalment 
carrying interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum from the 
commencement of this Act, Or 25 
(b) in saleable or otherwise transferable promissory note. or 
&toek certificates of the Central Government issued and repayable at 
par, and maturing at the end of-
(i) ten years from the commencement of this Act aDd car-
rying interest from such commencement at the rate of four and 30' 
a half per cent. per annum, or 
(ii) thirty years from the commencement of this Ad and 
carry ina interest from such commencement at the rate of five 
and a half per cent. per annum, or 
(c) partly in cash (to be paid by cheque drawn on the Reserve 35 
Bank) and partly In such number of securities specified in .Iub-clause 
(i) or sub-clause (ii), or both, of clause (b), as may be required by 
the existing bank, Or 
(d) partly in such number of securities specified in sub-clause 
(i) of clause (b) and partly in such number of securities speclfted in 40 
sub-clause (ti) of that clause, as may be required by tbe existinr 
beak. ' It 

5 
(3) 'l'he first of the three equal annual instalments referred to in clause 
(a) of sub-section (2) shall be paid, and the securities referred to in 
clause (b) of that sub-section shall be issued, within sixty days from the 
date of receipt by the Central Government of the option referred to in 
5 that sub-section, or where no such option has been exercised, from the 
latest date before which such option ought to have be.en exerci~ed 
(4) The option referred to in sub-section (2) shall be exercised. by 
every existing bank before the expiry of a period of three months from 
the appointed day (or within such further time, not exceeding three 
10 months, as the Central Gcvernment may, on the application of the 
existing bank, allow) and the option SO exercised shall be final and shall 
not be altered or rescinded after it has been exercised. 
(5) Any existing bank which omits or fails to exercise the option 
referred to in sub-section (2), within the time specified in sub-sectian (4), 
15 shall be deemed to have opted for payment in securities specified in sub-
clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-s~ction (2). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any existing 
:bank may, before the expiry of three months from the appointed day (or 
within .such further time, not exceeding three months, as the Central, 
20 Government may, on the application of the existing bank, allow) make an 
application in writing to the Central Government for an interim payment 
of an amount equal to seventy-five per cent. of the amount of the paid-up 
capital of such bank, as on the commencement of this Act, indicating 
therein whether the payment is desired in cash or in securities specified 
25 in sub-section (2), or in both. 
(7) The Central Government shall, within sixty days from the receipt 
of the ,pplication referred to in sub-section (6), make the interim pay. 
ment to the existing bank in accordance with the option indicated in such 
application. 
30 (8) The interim payment made to an existing bank under sub-section 
(7), shall be set off against the total amount of compensation payable to 
such existing bank under this Act and the balance of the compensation 
remaining outstanding after such payment shall be given to the existing 
bank in accordance with the option exercised, or deemed to have been 
35 exercised, under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5), as the case may be: 
Provided that where any part of the interim payment is obtained by 
an existing bank in cash, the payment so obtained shall be set off, in the 
first instance, against the first instalment of the cash payment referred to 
in Bub-section (2). and in case the payment so obtained exceeds the amount 
40 of the first instalment, the excess amount shall be adjusted against the 
Recond instalment and the balance of such excess amount, if any, against 
the third instalment of the cash payment. 
(9) Any payment purported to have been made to an existing bank 
under sub-section (3) of section 15 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
22 of 1989. 45 and 'Transfer of Undertakings) Act. 1969, shall be deducted by the Central 
Government from the amount of the interim payment made to such 
existing bank under sub-section (7), 01' where no such interim payment 
has been made, from the total amount of the compensation due to such 
existing bank, and the amount so deducted shall be paid by the Central 
so Government to the corresponding new bank. 

a-s 
otIlceand 
man., .. 
men\. 
MANAG&I4ENT OF CORRESPONDING NEW BANKS 
7. (1) The head office of each corresponding new bank shall be at such 
place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf. and, until any such place is so specified, S 
mall be at such place at which the head ofiice of the existing bank, in 
relation to which it is the corresponding new bank, is on the commence-
ment of this Act, located. 
(2) The general superintendence. direction and management of the 
affairs and business of a corresponding new bank shall vest in a Board 10 
.of Directors which shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all 
such acts and things as the corresponding new bank is authorised to 
exercise and do. 
(3) (a) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Gov-
ernment shall, in consultation with the Reserve Bank. constitute the first J S 
Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, consisting of riot more 
than seven persons, to be appointed by the Central Government, and 
every director so appointed shall hold office until the Board of Directors 
of such corresponding new bank is constituted in accordance with the 
scheme made under section 9: 20 
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it 
is necessary in the interests of the corresponding new bank so to do, 
remove a person from the membership of the first Board of Directors and 
appoint any other person in his place. . 
(b) Every member of the first Board cf Directors (not being an officer 2S 
of the Central Government or of the Reserve Bank) shall receive such 
remuneration as is equal to the remuneration which a member of the 
Board of Directors of the existing bank was entitled to receive immediate-
ly befoTe the commencement of this Act. 
(4) Until the first Board of Directors is appointed by the Central Gov- 30 
ernment under sub-section (3), the general superintendence, direction and 
management of the affairs and' business of a corresponding new bank shall 
vest in a Custodian, who shall be the chief executive officer of that bank 
and may exercise all powers and do all acts and things as may be exer-
cised or done by that bank. 35 
(5) The Chairman of an existing bank holding office as such imme- ~ .. 
diately before the commencement of this Act, shall be the Custodian 
of the corresponding new bank and shall receive the same emoluments 
as he was receiving immediately before such commencement: 
Provided that the Central Government may, if the Chairman of an 40 
existing bank declines to become, or to continue to function as. a Custo-
dian of the corresponding new bank, or, if it is of opinion that it is neces-
sary in the interests of the corresponding new bank so to do, appoint 
any other person as the Custodian of a corresponding new bank and the 
Custodian so appointed shall receive such emoluments as the Central 45 
Government may specify in this behalf. 
(6) The Custodian shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
Government. 

7 
8. Every correspoml1l1g uew bank shall, in the discharge of its iunc· 
tions, be guided by such directions in regard to matters of policy inVO'lv-
ing public interest as the Central Government may, after consultation 
with the Governor of the Reserve Bank, give. 
S t. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Reserve Bank, make a scheme for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fote-
going power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the following 
10 matters, namely:-
(a) the capital structure of the corresponding new bank, so how-
ever that the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not be in excess 
of rupees fifteen crores; 
(b) the constitution of the Board of Directors, by whatever name 
IS called, of the corresponding new bank and all such matters in con· 
nection therewith or incidental thereto as the Central Government 
may consider to be necessary or expedient; 
(e) the reconstitution of any corresponding new bank into two 
or more corporations, the amalgamation of any corresponding new 
20 bank with any other corresponding new bank or with another bank-
ing institution, the transfer of the whole or any part of the under-
taking of a corresponding new bank to any other banking institution 
or the transfer of the whole or any part of the undertaking of any 
other banking institution to a corresponding new bank; 
2S (d) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as 
may be necessary to carry out the prOvisions of this Act. 
~ (3) Every Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank. eonstitu-
,ted under any scheme made und~'!" i"ub-section (1). shall include-
(a) representatives of the employe~s, and of depositors, of such 
30 bank, and 
(b) such other persons as may represent the interests of each 
of the following cate~ories, namely. farmers, workers and artisans, 
to be elected or nominated in such manner as may be specified in the 
scheme. 
35 (4) The Central Gov~mment may, after consultation with t"'f" Reserve 
Bank. make a scheme to amend or vary any scheme made under sub· 
section (1). 
(5) Every scheme made by the Central Government under this 
Act shall be laid. as soon as may be atter it is mnde. befo'!"e each 
40 House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which m.ay be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions. 
and if. before the expiry of thp. session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately followin~. both Houses agree in makinJ:t' anv IT'odJftcntfnn 
In the scheme or both Houses agree that the scheme should not be marl". 
4S the scheme shall thereafter have P.f'fect only in such modiftedform or he 
Correa. 
pondin, 
new banks 
to be CUid. 
ed by the 
directions 
of the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Power 
ofCen-
tral Gov-
ernmentto 
make 
scheme. 

Clolureof 
accounts 
anddil-
poaalof 
pro8tJ. 
8 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that scheme. 
CHAPl'ER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
10. (1) Every corresponding new bank shall cause its books to be 
closed and balanced on the 31st day of December of each year and shall 
appoint, with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank. auditors for 
the audit of its accounts. 
5 
(2) Every auditor of a couesponding new bank shall be a person who 10 
is qualified to act as an auditor of a company under section 226 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, and shall receive such remuneration as the Reserve 
Bank may fix in consultation with the Central Government. 
(3) Every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance-
sheet and profit and loss account and a list of all books kept by the IS 
corresponding new bank, and it shall be the duty of the auditor to examine 
the balance-sheet and profit and loss account with the accounts and 
vouchers relating thereto, and in the performance of his duties, the 
auditor-
(a) shall have, at all reasonable times, access to the books, 20 
accounts and other documents of the corresponding new bank, 
(b) may, at the expense of the corresponding new bank, employ 
accountants or other persons to assist him in investigating such 
accounts, and 
(e) may, in relation to such accounts, examine the Custodian 25 
or any officer Or employee of the corresponding new bank. 
(4) Every auditor of a correspondin~ new bank shall make a ret'ort 
to the Central Government upon the annual balance-sheet and accounts 
and in every such report shall state-
(a) whether, in his opinion, the balance-sheet is a full and fair 30 
balance-sheet containin~ all the necessary particulars and· ht properly 
drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the affairs of the 
corresponding new bank. and in c!lse he had called for any explana-
tion or information. whether it hs!'l been given and whether it is 
satisfactory: 35 
(b) whether or not the transactions of the corresponding new 
bank, which have come to his notice, ha~· been within the powers 
of thnt bank; 
(c) whether or not thE' T'e~urns T(!ceived from the offices and 
branche~ of the correspondin~ new bank have been found adequate 40 
for thf' purpose of his audit; 
(d) whethf'T the profit /\,.,d 10s<; IH.'C'ount shows a true balance of 
profit or loss for thf" period covered by such account; and 
(e) any other matter which he considers should be brought to 
the notice of the Central Government. 45 
(5) The report of the auditor shall be verifled. siJa'led and transmtttetl 
to the Central Gover'1ment. 
(6) The auditor sh:<l'l also forwarci n ('()py of the audit report to the 
corresponding new h:lnk and to the Reserve Bank. ' 
1 of 1958. 

43 of 1a61. 
9 
(7) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation 
in asse~ oontr.ibutiona to staft. and .. BUpe.&l8D1luation .1uncis ,·ud,.aU ether 
mailt8q ~~ 1 whiah.~ provision .. is· necessary'Qnder, any l~w .... ar .. wbkhl • ..,arEu 
usuan~ IJllroyidedr for .by bankUllg i companies. a correspeapinlJ 1 ~w Qauk .. l 
S shall transfer the balance· ~f profits/.to the :Central. IGoveJalJDeDtI ~ . 
(8) The Central Government shall cause every auditor's repoTt aud 
report on the'working and·activities· of each·-correaponding new·bankJto 
be laid for not -less ·than thirty' days hefore each .. Hoaae . .of P.arltamadl :.ae 
soon as may be after each such report is received by the ,CentrdGovern-:.f 
10 ment. 
11. For'the :purposes :of the Income..~x Act. 1961,.every,CPrru.pcmdlng 
newlbank_uaU.he aeemad to be an Indian cona.pany· and· ... ;compllll)l,·~ 
which the public are substantially interested. 
12. (1) Every person holding office, immediately before the com'" 
15 mencement of this Act, as Chairman of . an existing bank shbll. if 
he becomes--Custodian of the ·corresponding new bankp be .deemed, .:.Ion 
such coIlllTrel1cement, to have vacated· office as IUchr:Chalr:man; ar, 
(2) Save as otherwise provided. in sub·section (1). every office\" or 
other employee of an existing bank shall become, on the commencement 
20 of this . .Act,',an officer t')r other employee, as the case may be, of the cor-
respeadiAg. new· banlQ, and shall hold his office, or service in that bank 
on tile',same. terms and conditions and. with the same rights, to pensiDn~ 
g~uity.' and".other, matters .as would have been admissible, to him if the' 
undertaking,of the existing bank had not been transferred to and vested 
25 in the CO'rresponding new bank and continue to do s.o unless and until, 
his employment in the corresponding new bank is terminated or until 
his,x:emuneration,terms or conditions are duly altered by the correspon· 
ding new. bank. 
(3) "For the, persons who immediately. before the commencement of 
30 this Act wer-e ,the· trustees Aor aoy pension, provident, gratuity or 
other like fund constituted for the officers or other employees of an 
existing bank, there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the 
Central Government may, by general or special order, specify. 
(4). Notwithstanding anything C'JDtained in the. Industrial Disputes 
It of 1947. 3S Act, • .l947 ... CU' in any-other . .law.for the time being in force, the transfer 
of the- aervicas' of any,.officfU'. or other employee, from an existing b~nk 
to .. ,cerraspon.d.in~ new, bank shan not entitle such . officer or othetem-
ploye~ to any compensation under this Act or any other Jaw for'the" 
time being in force and no ~uch claim shaH be entertained by any court, 
40 tribunal or other authority. 
COI'J!ii,I;H',\ 
pondiJqrtv I,' 
new ~., 
bank .: 
deemed 
to be . 
an In4fJm~ . 
compq.' 
Reld ..... "(1 
ofChtdN:,,··, 
mllD-b8! 
from 
office. 
13. fi) Every,correSJ!loncUug.new .. bank. shaU.observe, -exoept as other-
wtI8·~1.deed:rby lew,dhe ,.prac.tices .and. !tUsages ,.oCustornar&" .. among 
bal1bn:s. end . .,.in particular •. it shall aot;divulge.any,Jnformation relating. 
to or to ~e dairs IOf its OOD8titueAts rexceptf,n clrcumatanceS.in which 
4S it is, ill aeccrrdance.~witb 'law.-or practiQes. andAlSages.,customary. among 
banlDea, 1aeces&lfJa or aP'Pf'Opdate.~ for: the ..I:ortespo~g . .new bank to 
dlvu.,ftt'h riBfonnation.· 
ObUp-
tiona uto 
ftdelity 
and 
aecrecy. 
421 M of Law-2 .. 

Custodian 
to be pub-
lic ser-
vant. 
Certain 
defecta 
not to 
invalJdate 
acttor 
proceed-
in ... 
Inde'1lnlty. 
10 
(Z) Every director, member ofa local board or a commiUee, or audi-
tor, adviser, ofticer or other employee of a corresponding new bank shall, 
before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity ~d sec-
recy in the form set out in the Third Schedule. 
(3) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank shall, 8S soon &s 5 
possible, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out 
in the Third Schedule. 
14. Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank shall be deemed 
to be a public servant for the purposes of Chapter IX Of the Indian 
Penal Code. 10 45 of 1880. 
15. (1) All acts done by the Custodian, acting in good faith, shall, 
notwithstanding any defect in his appointment or in the procedure, be 
valid. 
(2) No act or proceeding of any Board of Directors or a local board 
or committee of a corresponding new bank shall be invalid merely on 15 
the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitu-
tion of, such board or committee, as the case may be. 
(3) All acts done by a person acting in good faith as a director or 
member of a local board or committee of a corresponding new bank 
sl:1all be valid, notwithstanding that it may afterwards be discovered that 20 
his appointment was invalid by reason of any defect or disqualification 
or had terminated by virtue of any provision contained in any law for 
the time being in force: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to give validity 
to any act by' a director or member of a local board or committee of a 25 
corresponding new bank after his appointment has been shown to the 
corresponding new bank to be invalid or to have terminated. 
16. (1) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank and every 
ofticer of the Central Government fir of the Reserve Bank and every 
ofticer or other employee of a corresponding new bank, shall be indemni- 30 
tied by such bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in or 
in relation to the discharge of his duties except such as have been caused 
by his own wilful act or default. 
(2) A director or member of a local board or committee of a corres-
ponding new bank shall not be responsible for any loss or expense caus- 35 
ed to such bank by the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, or title 
to, any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the corres-
ponding new bank, or by the insolvency or wrongful act of any custo-
mer or debtor, ot' by anything done in or in relation to the execution of 
the duties of his office, unless such loss, expense, insufticiency or defici- 40 
ency was due to any wilful act or default on the part of such director or 
member. 

It 
17. Any reference to any existing bank in any law, other than thiS 
Act, or in any contract or other instrument shall, In so far as it relates 
to the undertaking which has been transferred by section 4, be construed 
as a reference to the corresponding new bank. 
S 18. No provision of law relating to winding up of corporations shall 
apply to a corresponding new bank and no corresponding new bank shall 
be placed in liquidation saVe by order of the Central Government and in 
such manner as it may direct. 
19. (1) The Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank may, after 
10 consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of 
the Central Govemment,make regulations, not inconsistent with the 
provisions 0'£ this Act or any scheme made thereunder, to provide for all 
matters for which provision is expedient for the purpose of giving effect 
to the provisions of this Act. 
IS (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, the regulations may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
20 
30 
3S 
4S 
(a) the powers, functions and duties of local boards and restric-
tions, conditions or limitations, if any, subject to which thl;y may be 
exercised or performed, the formation and constitution of local com-
mittees and committees of local board (including the number of mem-
bers of any such committee), the powers, functions a,nd duties of such 
committees, the holding of meetings of local committees and com-
mittees of local boards and the conduct of business thereat; 
(b) the manner in which the business of the local boards shall 
be transacted and the procedure in connection therewith; 
(c) the delegation of powers and functions of the board of direc-
tors of a corresponding new bank to the general manager, director, 
officer or other employee of that bank; 
(d) the conditions or limitations subject to which the correspond-
ing new bank may appoint advisers, officers or other employees and 
fix their remuneratiW1 and other terms· and conditions of service; 
(e) the duties and conduct of advisers, officers or other employ-
ees of the corresponding new bank; 
<f> the establishment and maintenance of superannuation, pen-
sion, provident or other funds for the benefit of officers or other em-
ployees of the corresponding new bank or of the dependants of such 
officers or other employees and the granting of superannuation al-
lowances, annuities and pensions payable out (1f such funds; 
(g) the conduct and defence of legal proceedings by or against 
the corresponding new bank and the manner of signing pleadings; 
(h) the provision of a seal for the corresponding new bank and 
the manner and effect of its use; 
(i) the fOlm and manner in which contracts binding on the cor-
responding new bank may be executed; 
Reference. 
to exist-
m,banlu 
on and 
from 
the com-
mencemeDt 
ofthia 
Act. 
Dissolu. 
tion. 
Power to 
make 
regula-
tions. 

Amend. 
mentol 
certain 
enact. 
menta. 
, , (1) -the' conditions and the requirements subject to·.wl'liclt loana 
at advances may be made or bills may be-'discounted 01' ptlJtfttased 
I .• , by the-corresponding new' bank; 
(k) the persons or authorities who shall administer any pension, 
provident or other fund constituted for the benefit of officers or S 
other employees of the corresponding new bank or their dependants; 
(l) the preparation and submission of statements of programmes 
at·, activities and .tinancialstatements -of the",collfesp~gmeW' bank 
. and Ute- period for w.hichand the ,time within whica BUch .statements 
(I, and-,estimates Me to be prepared and· submitted; and 10 
(m) generally for the efficient oonduct of, the;affai1\'!l 'Of; tIM; cor-
responding new bank. 
-. (3). Until. any regulation is .made "'nder sub-sec.1ion (1 )., the" articles 
of"associa.tion of the existing bank .and every regulation" rule"bye-Iaw 
i·. .11 OI'dermade by the existing ·bank sha U, if in ,force at· the .commence- IS 
-.... 011 ent 'IiIlfi . this Act, }j)e. deemed to be the regulations. ,made· under sub-section 
(1) and shall have effect accordingly and!~ ,reference· therein .to ,any 
authority of the existing bank shall be deemed to be a reference to the 
. ~-corresponcling authority of. the' conreeponding ·new -bank·'Bnd until any 
suchcorrespooding authority i'8 constituteo:·under this Act,·'~shalh' be 20 
deemed to refer to the Custodian. 
20. (1) In the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,- 10 of 1949. 
j (a)m seetion 134A, inllSW-Seetionl (3); fOl'i the wordaL,!~and any 
d\subsidiary';bank", the. words, figures. arxl,obradtets "8 'eorresponding 
.. " new··bank, c:onstltnated·.1Ulde.r"'8ecticm 3 oft the:,.I Banlting ,-<i1ampanies 2S 
.' (AoqUisitiQill 'and Transfer of Undertakings) Actj :1970,,' nand any 
subsidiary' bank" . shall be· 'llubstituted; 
I': (b} m eection ,-36AD,in ,sub-eeetion, (3h fol" the. words "and any 
subsidiary bank"; ,the' ,words/.figures. and;, hl'aokeUi '!a ()()lJresponding 
new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 30 
(AcqUisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act;'1970, and any 
9Ubsidiary bank" shall be substituted; . 
I' (e) in section 51, for the words "or any other banking institu-
"""ticm !lOtifted by' tne' CetitnU· Govem.ment iBI,thilf·b8Walf".j the words, 
,:. flgures" and: braekets· "at· any- 'COrresponding" new 'bank·" eMtitute4 3S 
'" Uhde' 'Section S cit the'Benk:itig'Cempaatet!t '~AeqUisition"a1\tl Trans-
",. fer of Undertakings) :Act, 1970, or any other . banking institution 
notified by the Central Government in this behalf", sha1J.be substitu-
ted; 
. (d) in. the Fifth Schedule, in Part I of paragraph '1, in claUJe 40 
(e), the E.rplanations shall be deemed never to have been .inserted. 
-('I (2) 1ft the:lndultriakDlsputes·Act;~1947, in·seotion I, ill!~U8e (bb), Uofl947. 
for., the· words "and. any' 'subsidiary :bankl~, the· Iwords,1 il'1ret:18nd brae-
. kets "a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the 
nanlting Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under;akings) A~t, 4S 
'1970, and any subsidiary bank" shall be substituted. 
(3) In the Banking Companies . (Legal Practitioners' Clients' 
Accounts) Act, 1949, in section 2, in clause (a), for the words "and any '6 of 1949. 
,,; sUbsktial7' ,lHtnk'\, theftrd3j,ftguresi.~nd·brackets ''.tl eottesponding new 
bank constituted under 8eC!tionS of th"IBanking'CompanieB>;(~cquisi_ So 

47 of 1961. 
60 at 1968. 
22 of 1969. 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
13 
tion and Transfer of·· Undertakings) Act, '1970, 'and any' subsidiary 
bank" shall be substituted. 
;, (I) In, the Deposit lnsunnce Corpqration Act~: 1961,-
'(a) in section 2,-
(i)'after clause (e)'-:; the 'following·c!ause· .. Shall be inserted, 
namely:-
, (ee) "corresponding new· bank!~ . means a. corresponding 
new. ,bank oonstitut.e<1 \lnder. section 3 of the .• ~ng Com-
I panies .(Acquisitionand ,Transfer of Undena~iJlgs) Act, 
1970;'; 
(it) in' clause (g) ,-
(a) for the words "or a banking company", the words 
"a corresponding new bank or-abaftking 'COmpany", and 
(b) for the words "with a banking c:ompany", the words 
"with a corresponding new bank orA with a 'banking com-
pany", 
shall be substituted; 
{iii) in .. clause. (i),..after, the werds., "banlPniCPlllpany", the 
.words "or a corresponding 'new ,bank"·$hall beJnlertedj 
.' (b) 'Section 19 shall bere·numbered as subJSeetion~ (~ thet-eof 
and after sub.;.section (1-) as so re-numbered,the following-sub1eCtion 
Shall be inserted, namely:-
." (2) The provisions of clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) .ancl (h) 
, 01 sub-section (l) shall apply to a corresponding new bank as 
they apply to a banking company.". 
,:, (5) In· the· State Agricultural Credit CorpoNtiolla,Aatr·.l»68,-
/', (u)in 'sectidn2',afterolause (i)c," the ·6tllowing l 'olaUlft ahllt be 
inserted, namely:-
'(ii) "corresponding new bank" means a corresponding new 
30 bank constitNted . lunder- settion S of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition,and'ilfrtmsfer 'Of.lJnciertakings) Act, 1970;'; 
3S 
(b) !8fter,·thenwords "subsidiary Sanks',' OTI'fsubsidiary bank", 
as the case may be,occurring in' clause' (d) t)f sub-seetion' (8) of 
section 5, in clause (b) of section 9 and in the proviso to section 18, 
the words·f'eorrespon,ding new banks" 01' "oon-espeR4ing,..new .bank", 
as the case! m.ay be, shall be . inserted, 
21. (1) THe Banking Companies (AcqUisition 'ant!"Tnmsfet ~ Under-
takings) Ordinance,' 1970, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding 'such repeal and notWithstanding 
40 ment, decree or order of any court or tribunal,-
Repeal 
and 
any ijudg_ Savin,.. 
45 
(a) any-action taken, or purported to have-bee'rl-otakeft', 'Or'8ny-
thing done, or purported to have been done,l-between' t1W~9Ih"day 
of July:' 1969; 'and the 10th day of February; ;191{); ~'1lft,..oorr8llpClnd­
ing new' bank "put"pOrted to have been constituted 'Yn~l\'· tlJlt .. aank-
ing Companies· ,(Acquisition and Transfer. of, '\ftinc:t.:taidngs) 
Ordin.n~EfllC196t, 01' the Banking Cempanies.(AeqUilition,iallllli\'ans-
fet Of TJndwlaldngs)! Act, 1969, or bylan~J~perSOJl;"plU'PCBtiag)~ act 

on behalf of such bank and any right, obligation or l~bility acquir .. 
ed or incurred, between the said dates, by or on behalf of such cor-
responding new bank shall be deemed to have been taken, done, 
acquired or incurred under the provisions of this Act by or on 
behalf of the corresponding new bank constituted thereunder; 5 
(b) any action taken, o~ purported to have been taken, or any-
thing done, or purported to have been done, between the 10th day 
of February, 1970, and the appointed day, by an existing bank or 
by any person acting on behalf of such bank, and any right, obli-
gation or liability acquired or incurred, ,between the said dates, by 10 
or on behalf of such existing bank shall be deemed to have been 
taken, done, acquired or incurred under the provisions of this Act 
by or <m behalf of the corresponding new bank constituted there· 
under; 
(c) anything done or any action taken, including any order 
made, notification issued or directions given under the Banking IS 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance 
1970, &hall be deemed to have been done, taken, made, issued or 
given, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of 
this Act. 
(3) Any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature institu-
ted on or after the 19th day of July, 1969, by or a&ainst a corresponding 
new bank purported to have been constituted by the Banking Companies 
20 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1969, or the 22 'Of 1969. 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 2S 
1969, shall not abate, be discontinued, or be, in any wfiY, prejudicially 
affected by reason of the expiry of the said Ordinance or the invalida-
tion of the said Act, as the case may ,be, but such suit, appeal or other 
proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the 
corresponding new b,ank as if such suit, appeal or other proceeding had 30 
been instituted by or against the corresponding new bank constituted 
under this Act. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(S" sections 2, 3 and 4) 
Existing banle: Corresponding new bank 
----
Column I Column 2 
------------------_._-------
The Central Bank of India Limited 
The Bank of India Limited 
Th~ Punjab National Bank Limited 
The Bank of Baroda Limited 
The United Commercial Bank Limited 
Canara Bank Limited 
United Bank of India Limited 
Dena Bank Limited 
Syndicate Bank Limited 
The Union Bank of India Limited 
Allahabad Bank Limited 
The Indian Bank Limited 
The Bank of Maharashtra Limited 
The Indian Overseas Bank Limited 
o Central Bank of Indis. 
o Bank of India. 
Punjab National Bank. 
Bank of Baroda. 
o United Commercial Bank. 
Canara Bank. 
· United Bank of India. 
· Dena Bank. 
o Syndicate Bank. 
Union Bank of India. 
• Allahabad Bank. 
o Indian Bank. 
o Bank of Maharashtra. 
• Indian Oversea. Benk. 

IS 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(SH section 6) 
----------- ----- ------------------
Name of existing bank 
The Central Bank of India Limited 
The Bank of India Limited 
The Punjab National Bank Limited 
The Bank of Baroda Limited 
The United Commercial Bank Limited 
Canara Bank Limited 
United Bank of India Limited 
Dena Bank Limited 
Syndicate Bank Limited 
'!'he Union Bank of India Limited 
Allahabad Bank Limited 
The Indian Bank Limited 
The Bank of Maharashtra Limited 
The Indian Overseas Bank Limited 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
Amount ot 
compensation 
(in lakhs of rupees) 
1750 
1470 
11920 
840 
830 
360 
420 
360 
360 
310 
:UO 
230 
23f) 
250 
[See sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 13] 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
I, do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to 
the best of my skill and ability execute and perform the duties required 
of me as Custodian, Director, member of Local Board, member of I.ocal 
Committee, auditor, adviser, officer or other employee (as the case may 
be) of the· 
and which properly relate to the office or position in the said· 
held by me. 
r further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com-
municated to any person not legally entitled thereto any i-nformation 
relating to the affairs of the· 
or to the affairs of ,any person having any dealing with 
the· ; nor will 
I allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or docu-
ments belonging to or in the possession of the-
and relating to the business of the· 
or to the business of any pf:!rson having any dealing with the· 
-Name of corresponding new bank to be filled in. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Supreme Court by a majority judgment,delivered on the 10th 
Febnlary, 11,970; declared the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer _of Undertakings) Act, 1969, void. The effect of the judgment 
is that the undertakings of the 14 maj-or Indian scheduled banks, which 
were acquired by the Central Government under the authority of the 
Act, reverted to the said banks. With a view to resuming control over 
these banks, the President promulgated, on the 14th February, 1970, the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordi· 
nance, 1970. The provisions of- the earlier Act, which were struck down 
by the'majority judgment of the Supreme Court, have been duly amend- ," 
ed or deleted while promulgating the said Ordinance. The Ordinanoe;' ~ 
provides'for the acquisition of the undertakings of the said banks with", 
effect froin the 19th July, 1969, i.e., the date on which ,tbeseundertakings: , 
were initially acquired" having regard to their size, resources, coverage:'" 
and ol'gllnisation. As contemplated by Article 31 (2) of the Constitution f ," 
the Ordmance now fixes the amount of compensation payable to each of !' 
the said ;Banks. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinanoe. 
The provisions of the Bill are explained in detail in the Notes on 
Clauses. 
NEW DELHI; I INDIRA GANDHI. 
The 23rd February, 1970. 
PRESlDENTS .RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF, THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. I (1)·NBI1(), dated the 23rd February, 1970 from 
Shriinati Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister, to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President of India having been informed of the subject matter l(1f ' 
the proposed Banking Companies (AcquisitiQ'O and Ttansfer' Elf Undertak-
ings) Bill, 1970,' recommends' the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha' 
under clause (1) of Article 117 and its consideration under clause (3) of 
Article 117 of the Constitution. 
16 

Notes on dawes 
Clause 2 seeks to insert definitions of certain new expressions in the 
Act. The proposed definitions are self-explanatory. 
Clause 3 seeks to provide for the constitution of 14 new banks the 
share capital of each bank being allotted wholly to the Central Govern-
ment. Each new bank will be a body corporate and will carryon the 
business of banking. 
Cla~ 4 seeks to provide for the transfer and vesting of the under-
takings of the 14 existing banks, as mentioned in the First Shedule, in 
the corresponding new banks. 
Clause 5 clarifies the general effect of vesting so that the business of 
each bank may continue uninterrupted. 
Clause 6 seeks to provide for the payment of compensation to each 
existing bank for the acquisition of its undertaking. The amount will 
be payable in cash or in Central Government securities according to the 
option of the recipient company. If the company opts for cash, it will 
be paid in three annual instalments, each instalment carrying interest 
at 4 per cent from July 19, 1969. If the company opts for compensation 
in the form of securities, it can choose either a IO-year security carrying 
interest at 46 per cent per annum or a 30-year security carrying interest 
at 51 per cent, in either case from July 19, 1969. The company can also 
opt for payment partly in cash and partly in securities in such propor .. 
tion or proportions as it may desire. If no option is exercised, it will 
be deemed to have opted for the payment of compensation in the form 
of 10-year securities carrying 41 per cent interest. 
Provision has also been made for the payment of interim compensa-
tion up to 75 per cent of the paid-up capital of each bank. 
Clause 7 provides for the appointment of the Chairman of an existing 
bank as the Custodian of the corresponding new bank until the constitu-
tion of the first Board of Directors. The first Board of Directors will 
consist of not more than 7 persons and will continue till the Board of 
Directors is constituted in terms of a scheme framed under section 9 
of the Act. 
Clause 8 seeks to provide for the issue of directions by the Central 
Government in regard to matters of policy involving public interest. 
CZause 9 seeks to empower the Central Government to make a 
scheme providing for the. constitution of the Boards of Directors of the 
nationalised banks, changes in their capital structure in case such 
changes, reconstitution or amalgamation, are considered desirl!ble, and 
aU other matters which are necessary for carrying out the provisions of 
the Act. 

Clawe 10 contains provision regarding the annual closing of accounts 
and audit of each bank. 
Clause 11 seeks to declare every corresponding new bank as an Indian 
company for the purpose of taxation and also a company in which the 
public are substantially interested. 
Clawe 12 provides fw the vacation of office of the Chairman of each 
bank and for the transfer of the services of the officers and employees 
of each existing bank to the corresponding new bank. 
Clause 13 seeks to place an obligation on the directors and other 
persons connected with each nationalised bank as tn the fidelity and 
secrecy relating to the accounts of individual constituents of every bank. 
Clawe 14 seeks to make every Custodian of a new bank a public 
servant for the purpose of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clawe 15 seeks to provide for protection for anything done in good 
faith by the Custodian or Board of Directors for any action irrespective 
of any defect in their appointment. 
Clause 16 seeks to provide indemnity to every bank and office of the 
Central Government or the Reserve Bank against all Josses which are 
not wilfully caused. 
Clause 17 provides that any reference to an existing bank in any law, 
contract or instrument shall in relation to the undertaking transferred 
by section 4 be deemed to be a reference to the new bank. 
Clause 19 provides for the regulation making power of the Central 
Government in regard to certain spe.cified matters relating to the busi-
ness of each nationalised bank. 
Clause 20 provides for consequential amendments to certain existing 
enactments. , 
Clause 21 provides for the repeal of the Banking Companies (Acquisi-
tion and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1970, which is being 
replaced by the proposed new Act. All action taken before the com-
mencement of the new Act will be deemed to have been taken under 
that Act. 

FINANCIAL MEMORAl'fDUM 
Clauses 4 and 6 provide tor the acquisition of the undertakings of the 
:14 banking companies and the payment of specified amounts as compensa· 
tion in respect of these companies. The aggregate amount of compensa-
tion will be Rs. 87.40 crores as shown in the Second Schedule to the 
Bill and will be payable in cash or in Central Government securities, 
or partly in cash and partly in Government securities, acoording to the 
. option of' cash recipient company. It a recipient company opts for 
payment in cash only, payment will be made in three equal annual ins-
talments, each instalment carrying interest at 4 per cent per anm 1m from 
July 19, 1969. If a recipient company opts to take the compensation 
either wholly or partly in the form of securities, it can choose either a 
'lO-year security repayable at par, carrying interest at 4i per cent per 
annum or a 30-year security repayable at par, carrying interest at 5i 
per cent per annum, in either case from July 19, 1969. A similar option 
regarding payment in cash or security or both is available also in respect 
of interim compensation for which provision has been made for payment 
up to 75 per cent of the paid up capital if the company so opts. 
In view of the availability of option, it is not possible. to indicate the 
amount of compensation which will be actually payable in each financial 
year. If all the 14 companies opt for payment entirely in cash, the 
principal amount which will be paid in each of the three years beginning 
from 1970-71 will be about Rs. 29'13 crores. In that event the interest 
payable will be about Rs. 4'32 crores in 1970-71, Rs. 2· 33 crores in 1971-
72, and Rs. 1·17 crores in 1972-73. This will be a recurring expenditure 
for a period of three years. Thereafter, there will be no recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. It is possible that some companies may 
choose to receive compensation in Government securities and some com-
panies partly in cash and partly in Government securities. There is 
thus a possibility the interest payable on account of compensation in 
cash may be reduced while the interest payable on securities may 
increase depending on the proportion and nature of securities which 
may be issued. It is therefore not practicable at this stage to calculate 
the amount of recurring expenditure on account of interest which will 
~be paid each year. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the. Bill empowers the Central Government to make a 
scheme in consultation with the Reserve Bank for carrying out the 
provisions of the Act. The scheme will, inter aUa, provide for matters 
relating to the capital structure of the corresponding new banks, the 
constitution of the Board of Directors and such incidental or conse-
quential matters as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions 
of the Act. Every such scheme. shall be laid before both 'Houses of' 
Parliament and be subject to modification and annulment by Parliament. 
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Board of Directors of the corres-
ponding new bank to frame re.gulations, in conSUltation with the Reserve 
Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, for the 
transaction of its business. Such regulations shall not be inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Act. 
The matters in respe.ct of which any scheme or regulations may be' 
made are matters of detail or of procedure within the scope of the 
general provisions and guiding principles in the Act and it is not pos-
sible to provide for them in the Act. The delegation of legislative power' 
is, therefore, of a normal character. 

23 of 1955. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949 
(10 OF 1949) 
• • • • • 
PART 'II 
BUSINESS OF BANKING COMPANIES 
• • • • • 
MA. (1) • • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking com.pany" includes the 
Industrial Development Bank of India, the Reserve Bank, the State Bank 
of India and any subsidiary bank. 
• • • • • 
PART lIB 
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES IN RELATION TO BANKING COMPANIES 
36AD. (1)· • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes the 
Reserve Bank, the Industrial Development Bank of India, the- State Bank 
of India, and any subsidiary bank. 
• • 
• • 
• 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
• 
• • 
• • 
51. Without prejudice to' the provisions of the State Bank of India 
Act, 1955, or any other enactment, the provisions of section 10, 13 to 15, 
17, 19 to 21, 23 to 28, 29 (excluding sub·section (3», 31, 34, 35, 35A, 36 
(excluding clause (d) af sub-section (1», 46 to 48, 50, 52 and 53 shall 
also apply, so far as may be, to and in relation to the State Bank of 
India or any other banking ins.titution notified by the Central Govern· 
ment in this behalf as they apply to and in relation to banking com· 
panies: 
Provided that---
(a) nothing contained in clause (c) of sub-section (1) <1f section 
10 shall apply to the chairman of the State Bank of India or to a 
general manager of any subsidiary bank in so far as the said clause 
precludes him from being a director of, or holding an oftlce in, any 
instituthm. approved by the Reserve Bank; 
(b) nothing contained in section 19 shall apply to the holding 
by the State Bank of India of shares in the capital of any such 
subsidiary bank; and 
(c) nothing contained in section 46 or in section 47A shall apply 
to any officer of the Central Government (Jf the Reserve :Sank or 
the State Bank of India, nominated or appointed as director of the 
State Bank of India, or any such subsidiary bank or any other bank-
mg institution notified by the Central Government under this 
section. 
• • • • • 
21 
Produc-
tion ol 
documents 
of confl· 
dential 
nature. 
Punish. 
mentsfor 
certain 
activities 
in relation 
to b'ank· 
ing com_ 
panies. 
Applica-
tion ot 
certain 
provi-
sions to 
the State 
Bank of 
India and 
other 
notified 
banks. 

Defini. 
tlons. 
Deftni-
tioOI. 
Dt:flnition~. 
22 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER ·1 
PRELIMINARY 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
• ... • • ... 
(bb) "banking comp~ny" means a banking company as defined in 
section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, having branches or 
other establishments in more than one State, and includes the Indus· 
trial Development Bank of India. the Reserve Bank of India, the 
State Bank of India and any subsidiary bank as defined in the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; 
• III ... • • 
EXTRACT FROM THJI: BANKING COMPANIES (LEGAL PRACTITIONERS' Cl.IENTS' 
ACCOUNTS) AcT, 1949 
(46 OF 1949) 
... * • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject OT 
context,-
(a) "banking 'company" means any banking company as defined 
in section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, and includes the 
State Bank of India and any subsidiary bank as defined in the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. 
(b) "legal practitioner" has the same meaning as in the Legal 
Practitioners Act, 1879. 
• ... • • ... 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DEPOSl'f INSURANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1961 
(47 OF 1961) 
• • ... ... • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • ... • ... 
(9) "deposit" means the aggregate of the unpaid balances due to 
a depositor (other than a foreign Government, the Central Govern-
ment, a State Government or a banking company) in respect of all 
his accounts, by whatever name called, with a banking company and 
includes credit balances in any cash credit account but does not 
include,-
(i) where a banking company at the. commencement of this Act 
is working under a scheme of compromise or arrangement or of 
recollltruction sanctioned by any competent authority providing for 
the acceptance of fresh deposits, any amount due to the depositor in 
respect of his deposit before the date of the coming into force of the 
scheme to the extent it is not credited after the said date under the 
provisions of that scheme; or 
10 of 1949 
38 of 1959 
1001 1949 
38 ot 1959. 
18 of 1879 

23 
(ii) any amount due on account of any deposit received outside 
India; 
• • 
(i) "insured bank" means a banking coni>any for the time 
being registered under the provisions of this Act and includes 
for the purposes of sections 16, 17, 18 and 21 a banking company 
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of section 13 the registra-
tion whereof has been cancelled under that section; 
... ... • • ... 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE AGRICULTURAL CREDIT CORPORATIONS ACT, 1968 
(60 OF 1968) 
... ... ... • 
CHAPTER n 
.iNCORPORATION OJ'! STATE AGRICULTURAL CREOI'r CORPORATIONS A"iD THEIR 
CAPITAL 
5. (1)'" ... ... ... ... 
(3) Out of the capital issued under sUb-section (2) ,-
• ... • ... ... Share 
capital 
and (d) the Food Corporation, State Bank, subsidiary banks and share_ 
banking companies may subscribe for, in the aggregate, thirty per holders. 
cent. of the share capital: 
Provided that none of the said parties shall subscribe for more 
*han fifteen per cent. of the share capital. 
• ... ... ... 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE CORPORATION 
... ... ... ... 
9. The Board of directors of the Corporation shall 
following, namely:-
... • ... 
... 
... 
consist of the 
• 
(b) two directors nominated by the appropriate Government, 
one of whom shall be a person who has spec.ial knowledge of co-
operation and who is not an employee of the Central or State Gov-
ernment or of the Reserve Bank, State Bank, subsidiary bank, bank-
ing company, or Food Corporation; 
• • • • • 
18. Every director and every member of a committee shall be paid 
:Iuch fees and allowances 8S the Board may, by regulations, determine, 
for attending the meetings of the Board or, as the case may be, any of its 
committees, or attending to any other work of the Corporation: 
Provided that no fees shall be paid to the Chairman, managing director 
or any other director, if he is an officer of the Government, Reserve Bank. 
State Bank, subsidiary bank, banking company or Food Corporation . 
• • • • ... 
I. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Board . 
Fees and 
allowan-
ces of 
directors 
and 
members 
of com-
mittees. 

LOK SABHA 
-
A 
BIU. 
\ 
I 
i 
\ 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of certain banking com-
panieF, having regard to their size, resources, coverage and organisation, in order 
to control the heights of the economy and to meet progressively, and serve better, 
the needs of development of the econOnty in conformity with national policy and 
objectives snd for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 