As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SABRA ON' 
BW No. I' of I", 
THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
*0 provide for the languages which may be wed for the o6icitll 
purposes of the Union, for transaction of b1L8inesB in Pqrliameftlt, 
for CentTal and State Acts and for certain purpose, in High 
Coons. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) Thil Act may be called the Official Languages Act, U~e3. .. .... ua4 __ 
(2) Section 3 shall come into force on the 26th day of January, =:--
S 1965 and the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force • 
10 
on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
different provisions of this Act. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day·', in relation to section 3, means the 28th 
day of January, 1965 and in relation to any other provision of 
this Act, means the day on which that provision comes into 
force; 
(b) "Hindi" means Hindi in Devanagari script . 
• 
Deft.i· 
ticm.. 

Continu-
ance of English 
language 
for official 
purposes 
of the 
Union and 
for use in 
Parlia-
ment. 
Committee 
on Oftlcial 
Language. 
2 
3. Notwithstandin'g the expiration of the period of fifteen years 
from the commencement of the Constitution, the English language 
may, as from the appointed day, continue to be used, in addition to 
Hindi,-
(a) for all the official purposes of the Union for which it S 
was being used immediately before that day; and 
(b) for the transaction of business in Parliament. 
4. (1) After the expiration of Cen years from the date on which 
section 3 comes into force, the President may appoint a Committee 
c:onsisting of thirty members, of whom twenty shall be m~rs of 10 
the House of the People and ten shall be members of the CouneB 
of States, to be elected respectively by the members of I the House 
of the People and the members of the Council of States in ac:eord-
. &Dee with the system of proportional representation by means of 
the ~le transferable vote. IS 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Committee to review the progress 
made in the use of Hindi for the official purposes of the Union and 
submit a report to the President making recommendations thereon. 
(3) The President may, after consideration of the report referred 
to in sub-section (2), issue directions in accordance with the whole 20 
or any part of that report. 
A!lthorlsed 5. (1) A translation in Hindi published under the authority of the 
:::lation President in the Official Gazette on and after the appointed day,-
of Central . Acts, etc. (a) of any Central Act or of any Ordmance promulgated by 
the President, or 25 
(b) of any order, rule, regulation or bye-law issued under the 
Constitution or under any Central Act, 
shall be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in Hindi. 
(2) As from .the appointed day, the authoritative text in the 0 
English language of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto 3 
to be moved in either House of Parliament shall be accompanied by 
a translation of the same in Hindi authorised in such manner as 
may be prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
AuthOl'ised 6. Where. the Legislature of a Sta.te has prescribed any language 
Hindi other than Hindi for use in Acts pa<;sed by the Legislature of the 35 
~s~~or.. State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor of the State, a 
~ds in translation of the same in Hindi, in addition to a translation thereof 
certain in the English language as required by clause (3) of article 348 of 
cases. . f th 'tdd the Constitution, may be pubbshed on or a ter e appom e ay 
under the authority of the Governor of the State in the Official 40 

• 3 
Gazette, of that State and in such a case, the translation in Hindi 
of any such Act or Ordinance shall be deemed to be the authoritative 
text thereof in the Hindi language. ' 
1. As from the appointed day or any day thereafter, the Governor Optional 
S of a State may, with the previous consent of the President, authorise use of 
the use of Hindi or the official language of the State, in addition to Hind~ 
the English language, for the purposes of any judgment, decree or ~~~~ler 
order passed or made by the High Court for that State and where language in 
any judgment, decree or order is passed or made in any such langu- judgments, 
10 age (other than the English language), it shall be accompanied by a et~., of 
translation of the same in the English language issued under the ~lgh ts 
authority of the High Court. our . 
I. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official ~k:rto 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. rules. 
IS (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successiV'e sessions, and if before the expiry , 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
20 following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of ~o effec,t .. 
as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
2S done under that rule. 
9. The provisions of section 6 and section 7 shall not apply to the' Cert~ , . proVislODa 
State of Jammu and Kashmir. not to 
apply to 
Jammu 
~ md 
.. Kashmir. 

• 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Committee constituted under clause (4) of article 344 of the 
Constitution to examine the recommendations of the Commission 
constituted under clause (1) thereof expressed the opinion that com-
plete change over to Hindi by the 26th January, 1965 was not 
practicable and that provision should be made in pursuance of clause 
(3) of article 343 of the Constitution for the continued use of Engl:sh 
even after 1965 for purposes to be specified by Parliament by law 
tor as long as may be necessary. During the debate on the Report 
of the Committee, the Prime Minister made a speech on the 4th 
September, 1959 indicating broadly the approach of the Government 
to the official language question. After considering the Report of 
the Committee, the President issued directions on the 27th April, 1960 
in exercise of the powers conferred on him by clause (6) of article 344 
in which a reference \1:as made to the speech of the Prime Minister. 
In order to give effect to the policy of the Government as indicated 
by the Prime Minister, it is proposed to provide for the continued 
uae of the English language, in addition to Hindi, for ofRcial purposes 
of the Union and for the transaction of business in Parliament after 
the ~th January, 1965. 
2. The :Bill also seeks to make provision by law for certain other 
aatten eoTered by the Presidential order, namely. (a) authorised 
ftlndt translation of Central Acts, Ordinances and other statutory 
instruments and of Bills or amendments to be introduced or moved 
In Parliament; lb) publication of a Hindi translation of State Acts 
and Ordilumces; and (c) for the use optionally of Hindi and other 
ofBcial lapguages of States for purposes of judgments, decrees and 
orden of !ligh Courts with the previous consent of the President. 
N'I1N DI:Lm:; 
The 3rd llprft, 1963. 
-
LAL 'BAHADurt 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4( 1) of the Bill provides that after the expiration of 10 years 
from 26th day of January, 1965, the President may appoint a Com-
mittee, consisting of 30 members, of whom 20 shall be members of the 
House of the People and 10 shall be members of the Council of 
States, to review the progress made in the use of Hindi for the official 
purposes of the Union and to submit a report to the President mak-
ing recommendations thereon. No expenditure is likely to be involV-
ed, if the meetings of the Committee are held in Delhi during the 
period when Parliament is in session. If, however, such meetings 
are held at any time when Parliament is not in session, some expen-
di ture may be incurred on allowances of members and also on con-
tingencies. It is not possible to give a precise estimate of the expen-
diture that may thus be incurred. It is not, however, likely that 
such expenditure would exceed Rs. 15,000 . 
• 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
ClaUSe 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for c~ing out the purposes of the proposed legislatjon. 
Under sub-clause (2) of clause 5, authorised Hindi translation of the 
Bills to be infroduced and amendments thereto to be moved in either 
House of Parliament have to be supplied. The manner in which 
such translation will be authorised may be prescribed by rules. 
Similarly, the procedure to be followed in obtaining the authority 
of the President for the publication of a translation in Hindi of 
Central Acts, Ordinances, orders, rules, etc., may have to be prescrib-
ed by rules. All these matters are of a procedural character. More-
over, the rules made under clause 8 will have to be laid before each 
House of Parliament and they will be subject to the scrutiny of 
Parliament. 
The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal character. 
6 

.. 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BnL 
to provide for the languages which may be used for the official 
}!urposes of the Union, for transaction of business in 
Parliament, for Central and State Acts and for certain 
purposes in High Courts. 
The President has, in pursuance of article 349 and clause (3) of 
anic1e 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended 
to Lok Sabha the introduction and consideration of 
the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri 1Al Bahadur Shastri, 
Minister of Home ADair,.) 
• 