AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

7) SUN 099 .

Bill No. 16 of 1998

‘THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
‘Suet MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

it enactedby Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
)४४६:--

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998. Shont title.

2, In article 174 of the Constitution, in clause (7), for the words "six months", the Amendient of
rds "three months" shall be substituted. (०174.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At presentyys MOF, Perens of the Constitution, there can be a gap of six months
between the last sit a stssion and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next
session of the State Legislature. However, it has been seen that the sessions of the State
Legislatures are not being held regularly. Taking advantage of the long gap, the State
Governments are functioning arbitrarily and thereby ignoring the basic principle of
responsibility to the State Legislatures. As the sessions of the State Legislatures are not
being held regularly, the issues concerning the States which should have been raised in the
concerned State Legislature are being raised in Parliament.

To ensure regularity in holding sessions and make the State Governments more
responsible to the Legislatures, it is suggested that the gap between two sessions of the
State Legislatures should not exceed three months.

‘The Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend the Constitution.

New Deir, MOHAN SINGH
March 31, 1998


ANNEXURE,

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* - * *

1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of _ Sessions of the

of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months State
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first pice
ext session. and dissolution.


oe SR रजत coon जाए? ge उन्काग्रकेओं ऋ [LENE हई
83. % आई या ia) ist Mat oy Hee onde wir ty जा जाऊछुछ To
कक eee SoBe Flame ५, ००. आएं ५५ eatin oe od SSMS ton eke

Sa ERs hae पु ee eat of का इधर

ie oe

= amend the Constitution of India.