.--~----
CORRIGEIDA 
to 
TIlE EYES (AUTIiORITY FOR USE FOR TIfERAPEJT1C PtffiPOSES) 
BILL, 1978 
Do bfJ/AS introduced in Lok Sabha 7 
fo r " 2" re ad .. 102" 
- -
2. Page 2, line 16,-
---.. 
for----*-adrnin~·Tead·~ 
- -
after "case" 2!!!l! "in cases" 
-5. . ... ..Page- 4, line _ 4,-
for -,·1t-proce.e<ting.s.~_ read--~----
-. Page -.4, line 25,-
for-'- tlfcum"_ re ad· -"the. foDTt" .- -
Phalguna 4, 1899 (Saka) , 
, 

As INTRODUCBD IN Lo& SA8HA ON 
BIU No.1. 01 ltD 
THE EYES (AUTHORITY FOR USE FOR THERAPEUTIC PURPOS'IB) 
BILL. 1978 
BILL 
to provide for the use oj eyes of deceased persons for therapeutic 
purposes and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Eyes (Authority for Use for 
Therapeutic Purposes) Act, 1978. 
S (2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Admini.~tor. may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the colitext otherwise requires,-
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator of the Union ter-
10· ritory of Delhi appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
Constitution; 
(b) ··near relative", in relation to a deceased ~on, means any 
person related to him as spouse, parent, son, daughter, brother or 
sister and includes any other person who is related to him-
IS (i) by lineal consanguinity within three degrees or Dr col-
lateral consanguinity within six defI'ees; qr 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and com-
mencement. 
DeIlnitiou. 

Authorlt,. 
!or" 
of eyeI 01 
deceued 
pe1'IOIII. 
Removal 
of~ 
not to be 
authorf8ecl 
ill eertaID 
CUll. 
.... 2 
(U) oy marriage with any of the relatives aIoreAid. 
Explanation.-The expressions "lineal consanguinity" and 
"collateral consanguinity'" shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in the Indian Succession Act, 1925, and 390t 1925. 
degrees of relationship shall be computed in the manner laid 
down in that Act; S 
(t:) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(d) "registered medical practitioner (ophthalmic)" means a medi-
cal practitioner who possesses any recognised medical qualification 
n defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council 10 
Act, 1956, and possesses a post-graduate qualification in Ophthal- 2 of 1958. 
mology or a certificate showing that he had received training in 
enucleation procedure in the Ophthalmic Department of a hospital 
or teaching institution for therapeutic purposes approved by the 
administrator in this behalf and who is enrolled on a State Medical 15 
Register as defined in clause (k) of the said section. 
3. (1) If any person had, either in writing or orally, in the presence 
of two or more witnesses (at least one of whom is a near relative of such 
person) unequivocally authorised, at any time before his death, the use 
of Pis ~yes, Il«er. bis death, for therapeutic purposes (such person being 20 
hereafter in. th1s sub-section referred to as the donor), the person law-
fu.IJ.¥ m'pOIJeNion of the deacl body of the donor shall, unless he has 
any reason to believe that the donor had subsequently revoked the 
authorisation aforesaid, grant to a registered medical practitioner (oph-
thalmic) all reasonable f,acilities for the removal, for therapeutic purposes, 25 
of the eyes from the dead body of the donor. 
(2) Where no such authorisation as is referred to in sub-section (1) 
was made by any person before his death but no objection was also 
expressed by such person to his eyes being used after his death for thera-
peutic purposes, the person lawfully in possession of the body of the 30 
deceased person may, unless he has reason to believe that any near 
relative of the deceased person has objection to the deceased person's 
eyes being used for therapeutic purposes, authorise the removal of the 
eyes of the deceased person for their Use for therapeutic purposes. 
(3) The authority given under sub-section (1) or, as the case may 3S 
be, under sub-section (2), shall be sufficient warrant for the removal, 
for therapeutic purposes, of the eyes from the body of the deceased 
person; but no such removal shall be made by any person other than a 
registered medic$,! practitioner (ophthalmic) who h?d satisfied himself. 
before such removal, by a personal examination of the body from which 40 
eyea are to be removed, that life is extinct in such body. 
t. (1) No facilities .hall be granted under sub-section (1) of section 3 
and no authority shall be given under sub-section (2) of. that sectfon 
for the removal of eyes from the body of a deceased person if the person 
~u.ir.oto grant such f~i1ities, or empowered to give such authority,4S 
~as 1'NIOQ to believe that an inquest may be required to be held in rela-
tion to such body in pursuance of the provisions of any law for the time 
being in force. 
(J) Ko authority for the removal of eyes from the body of a d. • 
cealed persoD shall b. given by a per.oll to whom sucb body hal b •• 

j 
~Iltrusted solely for the pUq)oae of intermtltt, cr'ertiftiCJtl or ~ dWr 
poAl. 
S. (1) In the case of a dead body lying in a hospital or prison and not 
claiJm,ed by any of the near relatives of the deceaaed penon, the authGrify 
S for the removal of the eyes from the dead body which so remains 1IIl-
claimed may be given, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), ill the 
prescribed form, by the person in charge, for the time being, of the 
management or control of the hospital or prison or by an employee of 
such hospital or prison, authorised in this behalf by the person in ebarae 
10 of the management or control thereof. 
(2) The authority referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be givm 
except after the expiry of-
(i) half an hour from the time of the death of the CGIlcerned 
person, in cases where no facility for cold storage o,f tile dead bod)' 
IS il available in the hospital or prison; or 
(ii) two hours 1rom the tiJ1le of the death of the ooneernecl petsGlt, 
in cases where facility for cold storage of the dead body it. lI'ftila-
ble in the hospital or prison. 
(3) No authority shall be given under su.b-section (1) if the person 
20 empowered to give such authority has reason to believe that any near 
relative of the deceased is likely to claim the dead. body even thougD 
such near relative has not come forward to claim the body of the 
deeeased Within the time specified in ClSUM .(i)or~, .. tl)e cae may be. 
clause (ii) of sub-section (2). 
2S ExPlan4tion.-For the purposes of this section, "hospital" includes a 
nursing home, medical or teaching institution for therapeutic purposes 
or other like institution. 
6. Wbere the death of a person it. caused by accident or any other 
unnatural cause, and his dead body has been sent foe post mOl'tem -.ami-
30 nation for medico-legal purposes, the person competent under this Act 
to give authority for the removal of the eyes from such d~d bOdy may, if 
he has reason to believe that the eyes will not be required for any medi-
co-legal purpose, authorise the removal for therapeutic purposes, of:the eyes 
of such deceased person provided that he is satisfied that the deceased 
3sperson had not expressed, before his death, any objection to hts e1es 
being used for therapeutic purposes after his· death or, where he Ilad 
grmted an authority for the use of his eyes for ther~tit putpflise8' 
after his death, such authority had not been revoketd by him befoIIe· his 
death. 
040 1. After tli.e removal of the eyes from the body of the deceased per-
sOtt, the registered medical practitioJ.er (ophthalmk) allaH take such 
step. fal' the preservation of the eyes so removed as may be prescribed. 
8. (1) Nothing In the tonegoing provisions of this Act Shall be con-
strued as rendering unlawful any dealing with the body or with any part 
4S of the body Otf a deceased person if such dealing would have been lawful 
if this Act had not been passed. 
(2) Neither the grant of, any facility or authority tor the removal of eye. 
from the body of a deceased person in accordance with the provisions .f 
Authority 
torr ..... 
val ot Elf. 
in cui 
inc .... 
ofunclaba 
ed bodi .. 
in hospital 
or 
prilCin. 
Authority 
torremo-
val of 
eyes from 
bodies 
sent for 
polt 
mortem 
uamina. 
tiOD for 
medico-
lepl 
purposes. 
Preserva· 
tiOD of 
ey .. re-
moved 
from 
dead 
bodJ.,. 
Savin, •. 

Protee-
tioa of 
action 
taken iD 
gOOd 
faith. 
Cessation 
of opera-
tion of 
Bombay 
Act 23 of 
19B7. 
Power to 
make 
naJa. 
4 
this A~.-DQr the removal of eyes (rom the body of a deceased person in 
pursuance of such authority shall be deemed to be an offence punishable 
under section 297 of the Indian Penal Code. 
•. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any 
perlOn for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done s 
under this Act. 
10. (1) On. the commencement of this Act, the Bombay Corneal Graft-
ing Act, 1957, as in force in the Union territory of Delhi, shall cease to 
be in fwee in the Union ten'itory of Delhi: 
Provided that such cesser Sihall not affect the previoUs operation of 10 
the enactment aforesaid arid anything done or any action taken (includ-
ing any authority granted, any direction or notice issued) under 
any provision 01. such enactment shaU, in so f81' as it is not inconsistent 
with the provislons of this Act, continue to be in force unless and Wltil 
superseded. by anything done or any action taken under this Act. 
(2) Any reference, in the enactment so ceasing to be in force, to 
any oftlcer, autho.rity or person entrusted with any functions thereunder, 
shall be construed, where necessary, as a reference to the corresponding 
officer, authority or perl't>n functiOning under this Act. 
IS 
11. (1) The Administrator may, bY'Dotification in the Oftic:ial Gazette, 20 
make rules fOr carryin, out the provisiOns of this Act. 
. ..... (2) In particular and without prejudice to the ,enerality of the 
ioreeom, power, such rules may provide for all or any of the rolluwinl 
matters, namely:-
(4) form ill whieh removal of eyes from unclaimed bodies may be 2S 
authorised, as required by section 5; 
(b) the preservation of removed eyes, as required by section 1;. 
(c) Dy other matter which is required to be or may be pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 30 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session. 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
Or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately follOWing the session or the successive sessions afore-
said. both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule Or both 35 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made. the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification Or annulment shall be with-
out prejudice to the validity of any thine previously done under that rule. 
~ of lUO . 

STATEMENT.oF OBJECTS AND R&SONS 
Modern science has rendered possible the use of eyes of deceued 
persons for restoring sight to blind persons. It is also possible to con- . 
serve the eyes of deceased persona tor use at a future date. With,. view 
to taking full advantage of these developments and building up an eye-
bank in the Union territory of Delhi, the Bombay Comeal Grafting Act, 
)957, was extended to the Union territory of Delhi in 1964 by a noti1lca-
tioD under the Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1D5O. 
2. Experience of the working of the Act has revealed that it is deftcient 
in certain respects. In the first place, under the Act, eyes can be removed 
by any registered medical practitioner practising any system of medicine 
and recognised as a registered medical precti tioner under any law for 
the time being in force in India. , The removal and preservati0ll 01 eyes 
requires special skill and special facilities. If a person who is not suffi-
Ciently qualified removes the eyes, there is a danger of the eyes becoming 
useless for any purpose. It is, therefore, considered necessary to ensure 
that only those who qualify as registered medical practitionem under the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, and who have post-graduate qualifica-
tions in ophthalmology or who possess adequate experience and training 
in enucleation procedure are permitted to remove eyes from the bodies 
of deceased persons. In the second place, the Bombay Act does not pro-
vide for the making of rules and experience has shown that the objects 
of the Act can be better achieved if it is supplemented, with regard to 
details, by detailed rules. In the third place, under the Bombay Act, 
eyes can be removed f.rom bodies lying in certain hospitals or medical 
or teaching institutions for therapeutic purposes without obtaining the 
permission of any person. With a view to respecting the wishes of the 
relatives of the deceased persons concerned and giving them an oppor-
tunity to claim the bodies, it is considered appropriate to prohibit the 
removal of the eyes from the bodies till such time as they do not get 
damaged and also to wait even beyond that period in cases where there 
is some possibility of the relatives claiming the bodies. 
3. It is intended to avail of the present opportunity to replace the 
Bombay Act as extended to the Union territory of Delhi by independent 
legislation which would give effect to the aforementioned proposals. 
4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above object.. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 30th Decemnel', 1977. RAJ NARAIN. 

Clauee 11 of the Bill empowen the Adndnistrator to malIe rulM. It 
i& intended to mUe suitable rules for giving publicity to the provtskRls 
oj the legislation 80 as to attract donations of eyes. Rules win also deal 
with the facilities for storage ot eyeI. Though the Smnbay CorMal 
GmftinM Act; 1~?, wbieh has been m force In the Uftion tel'Fitory of 
Delhi does not prO!Vide for the making of rules, the afanmentiened mat;. 
ters have been, to some extent, regulated by administrative instroetiODS 
and facilities have already been created in the Union territory for the 
stONge of f!1es. The expenditure in respect o~ the aforementioned 
ntatters is hemg met from out of the nonnal budgetary grants for eradi-
cation of bUndhess. Hence, no additional expenditure of a recurring or 
n8ft..ret'Urring nature over and above the said budgetary grants win be 
iaeurred on account of the provisionlr made in the Bill . 
• 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Administrator to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which 
rules may be made relate to the form in which removal of eyes of un-
claimed bodies may be authorised, preservation of removed eyes, the 
manner in which publicity may be given to the prOvisions of the legis-
lation and any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are of adminis-
trative detail and procedure, and as such. the delegation of legislative 
power is of. normal character. 
7 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the use of eyes of deceased persons for therapeutic purposes 
and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Raj NaT4in, Minist.r of Health and 7amiltl W'.lfa.N> 