1
THE CHILDREN OF PA VEMENT DWELLERS AND SEX WORKERS
(PREVENTION OF ABUSE AND WELFARE MEASURES) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of exploitation and abuse including sexual abuse of
children of parents living on pavements of Urban areas and of sex workers
languishing in red light areas and for welfare measures to be undertaken
by the State for such children by establishing special care homes for
them and making provisions for free education, including
vocational education and employment and other
amenities and for matters connected
therewith, or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Children of Pavement Dwellers and Sex Workers
(Prevention of Abuse and Welfare Measures) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No.  16 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a boy or girl who has not attained the age of fifteen years;
(c) "pavement dweller" means person living on the pavement of road, street or in
the open space;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "sex worker" shall have the same meaning assigned to the term "prostitute"
under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956; and
(f) "Special Care Homes" means an institution established or certified as such by
the appropriate Government under section 4.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall take custody of every child born of or accompanying a
pavement dweller or a sex worker, as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every child taken custody of under sub-section ( 1) shall be admitted to Special
Care Homes, established under section 4, in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1)  The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain such number of
Special Care Homes as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that where the appropriate Government is satisfied that any Institution run
by any Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) is capable for the reception of the children
under this Act, it may recognise such an institution as Special Care Home for the purposes
of this Act.
(2) Every Special Care Home or an institution recognised as such, as the case may be,
shall provide every child with free accommodation, boarding, lodging, meals, dresses and
other necessities for his maintenance and facilities for education, vocational training,
rehabilitation, and all facilities for the development of his character and career in such
manner as may be prescribed to ensure his all-round growth and development.
5. (1) The appropriate Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the
conditions for granting of recognition to the institutions or NGO's including the standards
and nature of services to be maintained by such institutions and the circumstances under
which and the manner in which the recognition of institution of NGO's may be withdrawn.
(2) The rules made under sub-section (1) may also provide for criteria for classification
and separation of children on the basis of sex, age and other requirements of such children.
6. The appropriate Government shall provide adequate grants-in-aid to the institutions
or NGO recognised under this Act.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for the implementation
of this Act.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever having charge of or control over a child governed by the provisions of this Act
assaults, abandons, exposes or wilfully neglects the child in a manner likely to cause such
child unnecessary mental or physical suffering shall be punishable with imprisonment which
shall not be less than two years but which may extend to five years and also with fine which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
Definitions.
104 of 1956.
Establishment
of Special
Care Homes.
Appropriate
Government
to take
custody of
children born
of pavement
dwellers and
sex workers.
Grants-in-aid.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Standards for
Non-
Governmental
institutions.
Penalty for
cruelty to
children.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Penalty for
sexual abuse of
children.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, whoever sexually
abuses any child, governed by the provisions of this Act, shall be punished with death.
10. Whoever forces any child, governed by the provisions of this Act, to beg shall be
punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than two years but may extend to five
years and also with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
11. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the
Official Gazette, under such name as it may think fit for the welfare and rehabilitation of
children under this Act and provide initial fund of rupees two hundred crores after due
appropriation made by Parliament by Law in this behalf and thereafter the Central and State
Government shall contribute to the Fund in such proportion and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund such voluntary donations, contributions or
subscriptions as may be made by any individual or organisation.
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt
with in this Act.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Penalty for
forcing child
to beg.
Constitution
of a Welfare
Fund.
Over-riding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is said that prostitution is the oldest profession in the world and this profession is
going on consistently throughout the world even today despite being declared as illegal in
many parts of the world. In our country also there are lakhs of sex workers in the flesh trade
and despite their best efforts not to conceive, thousands of unfortunate children are born to
these sex workers who are forced by circumstances to live in the inhuman surroundings and
atmosphere of brothels. Here the boy ultimately becomes a pimp and the hapless girl a sex
worker and that is the destiny of these innocent and unfortunate children.
Similarly many people due to acute unemployment and abject poverty are forced to
live on pavements and sustain on begging, ragpicking and even stealing, cheating etc.
Children are born on these pavements and become part and parcel of the vicious circle of the
pavement. They too ultimately become beggars, ragpickers, pickpockets and other anti-
social elements.
These children too, like other children are the future citizens of our country and it is our
duty to make them good citizens. Ours being a welfare State, the Central and State Governments
have to ensure that these children grow in good atmosphere and their future becomes safe.
They are not exploited and they do not become the victims of lust. The Government must
take care of them, open special care homes for them and provide all requisite facilities for their
proper growth and advancement in life.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL   CHINAYYA  SHETTY
December 17, 2018.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Care Homes. Clause 7
prescribes that Central Government will provide funds to the States. Clause 11 provides for
the constitution of a Welfare Fund for the welfare and rehabilitation of Children. The Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of rupees three hundred crores will involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to construct Special Care Homes in the country sum of
rupees six hundred crores may also involve.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for governing the NGO
institutions. Clause 14 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
Legislative Power is of normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of exploitation and abuse including sexual abuse of
children of parents living on pavements of urban areas and of sex workers
languishing in red light areas and for welfare measures to be undertaken
by the State for such children by establishing special care homes for
them and making provisions for free education, including
vocational education and employment and other
amenities and for matters connected
therewith, or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3264LS(S3)—30-01-2019.