As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 16 of 2025
THE RIGHTS OF TENANT FARMERS BILL, 2025
By
Shri La vu Sri Krishna Dev arayalu, M.P.
A
BILL
to confer certain rights on every tenant farmer without affecting the rights of title holders 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Tenant Farmers Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the Union Territory only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “agricultural land” means land used or capable of being used for agricultural 
purposes, excluding land allocated by the Central Government for such purposes;
(b) “agricultural Officer” includes officers designated by the Central Government 
for the implementation of agricultural policies under this jurisdiction; 
(c) “agricultural year” means the year beginning on the 1st of May;
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10

(d) “card” means Tenant Farmers’ Rights Card issued under section 4;
(e) “crop” includes any crop notified by the Central or State Government, such as 
food grains, oilseeds, vegetables, and horticultural products;
(f) “tenant Farmer” refers to any person who cultivates land belonging to others 
with written or oral permission for a crop season or up to one year, excluding family 
members of the landowner;
(g) “family member” means spouse, sons, daughters, and parents;
(h) “portal and database” means any system set up by the Central Government for 
the registration, accounts, audit, and any other details of the tenant farmers as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government;
(i) “public Financial Institution” refers to any financial institution defined under 
sub-section (72) Section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(k) “title Holder” refers to a person having legal ownership of  agricultural land.
3. (1) The Central Government shall ensure that every tenant farmer shall under 
its juisdiction in April each year, register the details of his cultivation arrangements, 
including particulars of the  agricultural land under cultivation, on the digital portal 
and database established for this purpose under this Act.
 (2) Upon registration, the title holder of the agricultural land shall be notified through 
the digital portal and database who shall communicate his consent or objection to the 
cultivation arrangement within three days from the date of such notification:
    Provided that if the title holder fails to respond within the aforesaid period, it shall be 
deemed that the title holder has granted consent to the cultivation arrangement.
4. (1) The agricultural Officers shall upon registration of the tenant farmer under 
sub-section (1) of section 3, issue a Tenant Farmers’ Rights Card both digital and hard 
to the tenant farmer in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Card issued under sub-section (1) shall be proof of the entitlement of tenant 
farmer to benefits under this Act. 
5. (1) Every tenant farmer who has been used the Card shall,–
(a) be eligible to apply for crop loans from public financial institutions without the 
requisite of any other revenue records or guarantees; and
(b) be entitled to all benefits of government schemes, including but not limited 
to crop insurance, financial assistance, input subsidies and crop loss compensation, 
subject to prevailing  laws and regulations in this regard.
(2) The financial institutions of the Central Government shall be provided with a 
database of Tenant Farmer Rights Cards to facilitate loan applications.
(3) The Card issued under sub-section (1) of section 4 confers rights solely over the 
crops grown and does not entitle the holder to any rights over the agricultural land itself:
   Provided that title holders may avail loans other than crop loans while the land is 
under cultivation by a registered tenant farmer.
6. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Agricultural Officer with respect to 
the issuance of the Card may appeal to the designated authority appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
 ( 2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of within forty-five days 
through a summary hearing in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The Union Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare shall be the nodal agency 
for the implementation of this Act which may issue guidelines and instructions from time to 
time, to ensure effective implementation of the process of this Act.
2
Rights and 
Benefits through 
the Tenant 
Farmers’ Rights 
Card.
Grievance 
Redressal 
and Appellate 
Authority.
Nodal Agency.
Registration of 
Tenant Farmers.
18  of 2013.
Issuance of 
Tenant Farmers’ 
Rights Card.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the National Commission for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty :
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from  
the date of commencement of this Act.
 10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
5
10
15
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
Power to make 
rules.

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 India’s agrarian economy relies heavily on the contributions of tenant farmers. Despite 
their significant presence in the agriculture sector, they face systemic challenges in accessing 
financial support and Government welfare schemes, due to their informal land arrangements. 
The lack of formalization of tenant farmers entails that they bear all the risks associated 
with crop failure while having no legal claim to compensation or benefits. Their exclusion 
from insurance to welfare schemes leaves them without financial support, specifically after 
disasters. They do not receive benefits under Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi also, 
adding to their vulnerabilities. There is also a lack of reliable data on the number of landless 
and tenant farmers across India, complicating the efforts to address their needs through 
policy measures.
 A comprehensive legislation is necessary to protect these tenant farmers’ rights and 
ensure that they have access to Government support systems.
 This Bill aims to address the longstanding issues faced by tenant farmers by establishing 
a legal framework that recognizes their status and guarantees them access to welfare 
programs designed for the agricultural sector. It aims to strengthen their resilience, reduce 
economic disparities, and promote a more equitable agricultural system across India.
 Hence this Bill.
  New Delhi;                                 LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARA Y ALU  
November 11, 2024

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 provides for establishment of digital portal and database by the appropriate 
Government to ensure registration of details of agricultural land by Tenant farmers.  
Clause 4 provides for issuance of both digital and hard card to tenant farmers. Clause 8 
provides that Central Government shall provide funds for carrying out purposes of this 
Act. The Bill, therefore if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore will be 
involved.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 10 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purpose 
of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to confer certain rights on every tenant farmer without affecting the rights of title holders 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, M.P .) 