As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 16 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri Punnu Lat Monate, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fith Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment)
| 2004.
2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order, 1950, in Part IX-
Madhya Pradesh,
(a) inentry 14, the words, “Ramnami, Satnami, Surjyabanshi” shall be omitted;
(b) after entry 45, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“45A. Satnami, Ramnami, Surjyabanshi”.

Short title

Amendment
of the
Schedule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Indian society has many sects. one of these sects is "Satnami’ sect which has a glorious
past. Sant Baba Guru Ghasidas ji was the founder of this sect. He protested against the evils
Prevalent in the society and laid emphasis on maintaining peace in the society. He struggled
for elimination of all sorts of discrimination prevalent in the society. At present, there are
about one crore and ten lakh followers of this sect living in various parts of the country. The
majority of the followers of the *Satnami’ sect belong to Ramnami and Surjyabanshi castes.
‘They mainly reside in the States of Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh. These castes have
been included in the list of Scheduled Castes Order under Part IX-Madhya Pradesh in entry
14 alongwith other castes, although they are not related with these castes. The inclusion of
these castes in one entry alongwith other castes has created a feeling of humiliation among
them as they are the followers of a different sect. Therefore, the followers of Satnami sect
with the names like Satnami, Ramnami and Surjyabanshi should be included in a separate
entry *45A° in the list of Scheduled Castes and all the benefits presently being provided to
these castes under the Constitution should also be continued, The Government of
Chhattisgarh has also sent its proposals to the Central Government for placing these castes
ina separate entry in the list of Scheduled Castes Order, 1950. The Bill accordingly seeks to
amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.

New Dein; PUNNU LAL MOHALE
June 11,2004.


ANNEXURE

Extract FRow THe CoxstiteTio (ScueDcLeD Castes) 0४500, 1950

. . . . . * .
THE SCHEDULE
a . . . . . .

Part IX—Madhya Pradesh

क्र

SEN की की की की पल

ढ़

ig
12.*
oe

14. Chamar, Chamari, Bairwa, Bhambhi, Jatav, Mochi, Regar, Nona, Rohidas, Ramnami,
Satnami, Surjyabanshi, Surjyaramnami, Ahirwar, Chamar Mangan, Raidas

नि . नि . न . न
न . . . . . +
45. Sansi, Sansia

* . ‘+ . . न .

8 * . . . . *



LOK SABHA.

A
BILL.
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.

(Shri Punnu Lal Mohale, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—740LS—28 06.2004