1
Bill No. 16 of  2012
THE PROHIBITION ON USE OF COERCIVE METHODS FOR RECOVERY OF
BANK LOANS BILL, 2012
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the use of coercive methods such as intimidation and harassment either
verbal or physical against any person or his family members for recovery of
loans by banks, or their agents, whether authorized or not, and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition on Use of Coercive Methods for Recovery
of Bank Loans Bill, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bank" means any scheduled bank included in the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934 or any private or foreign bank or any financial institution authorized by the
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
2 of 1934.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Government to accept deposits, channel deposits into lending activities and includes
their agents;
(b) "family" includes mother, father, spouse, son, daughter, sister and brother
and their families; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No bank or its agent, whether authorized or not, shall, for the purpose of recovery of
a loan,—
(i) resort to use of intimidation or harassment, either verbal or physical, against
any person or his family;
(ii) make any threatening call or make false and misleading representation to that
person or his family;
(iii) insult that person or his family in public;
(iv) cause damage or take away any movable property of that person;
(v) cause damage or forcefully acquire the immovable property of that person; or
(vi) visit residence of that person during odd hours.
4. No bank shall outsource its process of recovery of loan to any outside agency
without the approval of the Reserve Bank of India.
5. The Reserve Bank of India shall, from time to time, issue necessary guidelines to
banks for proper scrutiny of papers relating to disbursement of loans.
6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment,
which may extend to five years and also with fine, which may extend to rupees five lakh.
7. (1) Where a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act is committed by a
company, every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of,
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company as well as
the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the contravention was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act is committed by a company and it is proved that the
contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Banks not to
resort to use of
illegal means
for recovery
of loan.
Bank not to
outsource
loan recovery
without
approval of
Reserve Bank
of India.
Reserve Bank
of India to
issue
guidelines for
scrutiny of
papers
relating to
disbursement
of loans.
Penalty.
Offences by a
company.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other law for the time
being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Today, there is a cut throat competition among the banks and financial institutions to
increase their customer base, particularly, by giving loans on attractive terms. Day in and day
out, numerous calls are made by the representatives of banks or their agents to lakhs of
persons offering loans for all kinds of their requirements. Once a person accepts the offer
and completes the formalities, his ordeal begins. A number of hidden conditions and charges
about which the customers are not informed at the time of offering loans comes to light.
If due to some genuine reasons, a customer fails to repay one or two instalments of loan, the
bank or its agent which were so soft while providing loan, change their colors and adopt all
kind of illegal and harsh methods to recover the loan. Though many of the banks are doing
a fair business and following the procedure established by law in case of default, yet there
are banks which resort to intimidation and harassment. In normal course, if a customer is not
paying his debt, proceeding against him may be initiated in debt recovery tribunal or courts
instead of harassing him. In fact, in the era of outsourcing, banks have also given the
responsibility of recovering bad debt to some private companies, which for each recovery,
get commission. More often than not the recovery agents and banks are not at the same
wavelength. These private companies often employ musclemen who threaten the customers
and their families. These musclemen insult the customers in public and forcibly take away the
properties for which the loan has been secured and also make anonymous calls. V arious
Courts and the Reserve Bank of India have, on several occasions, cautioned the banks and
their agents not to resort to such means to recover loan. The Reserve Bank of India has even
issued a set of guidelines asking banks and their agents, not to intimidate or harass people
in their efforts to recover bad debt. But all these measures have not been able to curb the
coercive methods by banks or their agents simply because these guidelines are ineffective in
the absence of any punishment for their violation. Therefore, it is high time that a law on the
subject may be framed to save the innocent customers taking loans from banks and financial
institutions from the harassment and insult.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT  PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI
November 22, 2011.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause  10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the use of coercive methods such as intimidation and harassment either verbal
or physical against any person or his family members for recovery of loans by banks,
or their agents, whether authorized or not, and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4169LS(S3)—14.03.2012.