THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2.  After article 16 of the Constitution, the following articles shall be inserted, namely:—
“16A. The State shall provide gainful employment to all legally eligible citizens:
Provided that if the State fails to provide employment to any such citizen, he
shall be paid such subsistence allowance on such terms and conditions, as may be
prescribed by law, till he gets gainful employment.
16AA. The State shall pay subsistence allowance on such terms and conditions,
as may be prescribed by law, to all citizens who are not provided with gainful
employment under article 16A on account of old age, sickness, disablement or any
other undeserved want.”.
Short title.
Insertion of
new articles
16A and
16AA.
Bill No. 16 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Right to
subsistence
allowance in
cases of old
age, etc.
Right to
Employment.
5
10

2
3.  For article 41 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
“41. The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development,
make effective provision for securing the right to education for all citizens.”.
Substitution
of new article
for article 41.
Right to
education.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The current age is that of globalization and privatization. As a result of rise of big
industrial houses, the small scale industries, which used to act as an employment generator,
are facing closure. Even agriculture is declining in the recent years and there is a widespread
migration of people from rural areas as a result of low wages. This has resulted in increasing
incidence of deaths due to malnutrition and stress especially in rural areas. This state of
affairs has not just social implications but law and order implications as well, as the affected
population may be easily lured into acts of anarchy by unscrupulous elements. Therefore, to
check this tendency, it is necessary that the right to work is made the fundamental right and
subsistence allowance is paid to those who are not provided with any work or those who are
not fit to work. This measure will go a long way in providing economic security to all the
citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SURAV ARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY
December 1, 2006.
3
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \ 211LS.PM65

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the State shall provide gainful employment to all
legally eligible citizens. Those who are not provided with employment or those who are not
fit for employment on account of old age, sickness, etc. shall be paid subsistence allowance.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crores will be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
* * * * * * *
41. The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make
effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in
cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved
want.
* * * * * * *
5
Right to
work, to
education and
to public
assistance in
certain cases.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—211LS(S-3)—14.02.2007.