THE DOMESTIC WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the fixation of wages of domestic workers and for the improvement
of their working conditions and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Domestic Workers (Conditions of Service) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(4) It shall apply to every individual employing one or more workers for domestic
work in his house.
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and
application.
Bill No.  16  of 2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "domestic work" includes cooking, house-cleaning and attending to all
other odd jobs connected with other house-hold chores;
(b) "Government" means the Central Government; and
(c) "worker" means any person employed for domestic work.
3. (1) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as in force for the time
being, shall, so far as applicable and subject to the modification specified in sub-section (2),
apply to, or in relation to workers as they apply to, or in relation to workmen within the
meaning of that Act.
(2) Section 25F of the aforesaid Act, in its application to workers shall be construed as
if in clause (a) thereof, for period of notice referred to therein in relation to the retrenchment
of a workman, the following periods of notice in relation to the retrenchment of a worker had
been substituted, namely:—
(a) three months in case of workers who have been in continuous service for a
period of not less than two years; and
(b) two months in case of other workers.
4. Where any worker has been in continuous service, whether before or after the
commencement of this Act, for not less than one year, and—
(i) his services are terminated by the employer for any reason whatsoever, or
(ii) he voluntarily resigns from service, or
(iii) he dies while in service,
the worker or, in the case of his death, his nominee or if there is no nomination in
force at the time of the death of the worker, his heirs, as the case may be, shall without
prejudice to any benefits or rights accruing under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, be paid,
on such termination, resignation or  death, by the employer gratuity which shall be equivalent
to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess
of six months.
5. (1) The Government may, in consultation with the representatives of the workers
from amongst the Unions or Associations of the Workers, by order,—
(a) fix rates of wages in respect of workers; and
(b) revise, from time-to-time, at such intervals as it may think fit, the rates of
wages fixed under this section.
(2) The rates of wages may be fixed or revised by the Government in respect of workers
working on time work basis or on piece work basis.
6. Every worker shall be entitled to be paid by his employer wages at the rates which
shall in no case be less than the rate of wages specified in the order referred to in section 5.
7. No worker shall be required or allowed to work for more than eight hours during the
day exclusive of the time for meals and leisure.
8. Every worker shall be allowed during a period of seven consecutive days, a rest for
a period of not less than twenty-four consecutive hours.
9. Every worker, who has put in a service for a period of not less than six months, shall
be entitled every year to the following leave, namely:—
Casual Leave — 12 days;
Sick Leave — 21 days; and
Earned Leave — 1/11th of the number of days spent on Duty.
Application of
the provisions
of the
Industrial
Disputes Act,
1947.
14 of 1947.
Payment of
gratuity to
workers.
Fixation of
wages by the
Government.
Right to
wages.
Hours of
work.
Period of rest.
Leave
entitlement.
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
10. Every employer of domestic workers shall prepare and maintain such registers,
records and muster-rolls in such manner as may be prescribed.
11.  (1) The State Governments or  the Union Territory Administrations, as the case
may be, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as they think fit
to be inspectors for the purpose of this Act and may define the local limits within which they
shall exercise their powers.
(2) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.
12. An Inspector may,—
(a) require any person to produce any register, muster-roll or other documents
relating to the employment of workers by him and examine such documents;
(b) take, on the spot or otherwise, the evidence of any person for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the provisions of this Act or any other Act made applicable to
the domestic workers are complied with notwithstanding any other authority who
may be empowered with same powers or any part thereof.
13. If any employer contravenes the provisions of this Act, he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees notwithstanding any other punishment
to which he may be liable for the contravention of any other law for the time being in force
governing the domestic workers.
14. (1) The Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, of a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or  successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Maintenance
of Registers
and records.
Appointment
of
Inspectors.
45 of 1860.
Powers of
Inspectors.
Punishment.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are millions of domestic servants working as maid-servants or male-servants to
attend to household and other personal work. The working conditions of these domestic
servants are miserable and primitive. There is no protection for these workers under any
statute. They are neither paid reasonable wages nor their hours of service determined. They
are required to work for almost eigthteen hours a day without any rest or leisure. These
workers are not entitled to any benefits such as gratuity, provident fund, bonus, leave with
wages, holidays, etc. Their services can also be terminated at any time without prior notice
and compensation by their masters.
The domestic servants have been agitating for better service conditions throughout
the country. It is, therefore, essential to regulate their service conditions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
February 13, 2008.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 of the Bill provides that the State Governments or the Union Territory
Administrations, as the case may be, may appoint such persons as they think fit to be
Inspectors for the purposes of this Act. The State Governments will incur expenditure from
their respective Consolidated Funds for payment of salaries and allowances, etc. to the
Inspectors and the Central Government would have to incur expenditure in respect of
Inspectors appointed by the Union Territory Administrations from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakh is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India  per annum.
It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this  Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the fixation of wages of domestic workers and for the improvement of their
working conditions and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—320LS(S5)—20.02.2008.