1
THE GOVERNMENT SERV ANTS (DECLARATION OF ASSETS AND
INVESTIGATION) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI PRADEEP TAMTA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for declaration and investigation of assets held by Government servants
employed in certain departments and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called the Government Servants (Declaration of Assets and
Investigation) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall apply to Government servants holding posts or appointments under the
Union Government or the Union territory Administration.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
application
and com-
mencement.
Bill No.  16 of  2011
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) "assets" includes all properties, movable and immovable, legal or benami,
held by the Government servants or by their dependants, within the country and/or
abroad;
(b) "Authority" means the Government Servants Assets Investigation Authority
constituted under section 3;
(c) "dependants" includes spouse, parents, sons and unmarried daughters;
(d) "Government servants" means persons employed in Government
departments specified in the Schedule to this Act and holding any post or appointment
under the Union Government or the Union territory Administration; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) There shall be constituted an authority to be called the Government Servants
Assets Investigation Authority.
(2) The Authority shall consist of such number of members not exceeding ten,
chosen from fields like finance, social welfare, education and other such fields, in such
manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson of the Authority shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court
or of a High Court and shall be appointed by the President.
4. The Authority shall look into and investigate such cases of assets disproportionate
to the known sources of income held by a Government servant, on its own or otherwise.
5. (1) Every Government servant employed in Government Departments as specified in
the Schedule shall, within a period of  one month from the date of coming into force of this
Act, declare the particulars of all the assets possessed by him and his dependants to the
Authority, in such manner and form, as may be prescribed.
(2) Every Government servant shall, throughout the term of his office, submit annual
return of the assets held or acquired by him and any of his dependants within one month of
the beginning of the next financial year to the Authority.
6. The details of the return filed by the Government servant and of the declaration
made by him under section 5 shall be maintained by the Authority in a Register to which any
member of the general public shall have access.
7. The Government servants found to be having assets disproportionate to the known
sources of their income shall be subject to such disciplinary action, as may be prescribed.
8. The Central  Government may, by order, add any other department of the Government
to the Schedule to this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters:—
(i) the manner in which members of the Authority shall be appointed;
(ii) the form in which declaration of assets shall be furnished;
(iii)  the manner in which the declaration shall be scrutinized;
2
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
Government
Servants
Assets
Investigation
Authority.
Power to make
rules.
Function of
Authority.
Declaration of
assets by
Government
servants.
Maintenance
of a Register
showing
returns filed
by
Government
servants.
Disciplinary
action.
Provision for
inclusion of
other
departments
in the
Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(iv) the procedure to be followed by the Authority for investigation of assets of
a Government servant;
(v) action to be taken in case declaration of assets furnished is false or
investigation of assets leads to the fact that the Government servant has assets
disproportionate to the known source of his income; and
(vi) any other matter that is necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the House agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or  be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10

THE  SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(d),  5(1) and  8]
1. Department of Revenue-tax, Customs and Central Excise.
2. Department of  Sales Tax.
3. Municipal Corporation.
4. Departments dealing with Public Utility Services like Water, Electricity, Civil Supplies,
etc.
5. Department dealing with Housing.
6. Police.
4

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a large scale corruption in certain departments of the Government
dealing with Income-Tax, Customs and Central Excise, Housing, Water, Electricity, Law and
Order as is evident from public outcry and reports in newspapers and electronic media. There
are allegations that persons working in these departments despite having very meager salary
live in a very lavish style with all modern facilities. So far, there has been no initiative by the
Government to look into the life style of these persons and take action against them. It is a
common fact that an ordinary man has to run from pillar to post to get his work done if he
does not bribe the persons concerned. Everyday, there are reports in the newspapers and
electronic media about the deep rooted and wide spread corruption in these Departments.
This is also highlighted by articles and letters published in newspapers. It is high time that
the Government took initiative to look into the high level corruption in these Departments
before the situation becomes explosive. The Bill seeks to achieve this purpose by providing
a deterrent to the effect that assets of Government employees shall be subject to continuous
scrutiny.
N
EW DELHI; PRADEEP  TAMTA
February 21, 2011.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an authority to be known as the
Government Servants Assets Investigation Authority by the Central Government. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely
to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—6964LS(S3)—11-03-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for declaration and investigation of assets held by Government servants
employed in certain departments and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Pradeep Tamta, M.P.)