THE ELECTRONIC WASTE (HANDLING AND DISPOSAL) BILL, 2015
By
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD), M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of electronic waste being generated by
discarded  electronic devices by prescribing norms and fixing  responsibilities
and duties on manufacturers, re-cyclers and consumers with regard
to disposal of electronic waste and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment held at Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take appropriate
steps for the protection and improvement of human environment;
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the decisions aforesaid to
protect the environment from the ill effects of non-biodegradable electronic waste;
AND WHEREAS article 48A of the Constitution enjoins upon the State to endeavour to
protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Electronic Waste (Handling and Disposal) Act, 2015.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 16 of 2015
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the  Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "consumer" means a person using products capable of generating electronic waste;
(c) "disposal" means disposal of electronic waste according to prescribed norms to
prevent contamination of ground water, surface water, ambient air quality and harmful effect
on human health;
(d)  "electronic waste" means waste generated from discarded television, personal
computer, floppy, audio-video CD, battery, cell phone, refrigerator, air conditioner, electronic
toys, telephone, washing machine, electronic switch and such other products;
(e)  "operator" means a person or establishment owning or operating a facility for
collection, transportation and disposal of electronic waste;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "re-cycler" means any person or establishment engaged in re-cycling or
re-processing of used electronic equipment or assembly of their component;
(h)  "storage" means the temporary containment of electronic waste in a manner so as
to prevent its littering and hazardous effects on human being; and
(i) "transportation" means carrying of electronic waste from one place to other place
hygienically through specially designed transport vehicle so as to prevent littering and
harmful effects on human being.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with Central Pollution Control
Board, prescribe the compliance criteria and procedure for handling and disposal of electronic
waste.
(2) The Central Pollution Control Board shall monitor the implementation of the
compliance criteria and procedure for handling and disposal of electronic waste.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that all the electronic waste generated
within its territorial jurisdiction is handled and disposed of in accordance with compliance
criteria and procedure prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 3.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide infrastructure facilities for collection,
storage, transportation and disposal of electronic waste.
(3) The appropriate Government may after due authorization, permit any operator to
collect, transport and dispose of the electronic waste in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. It shall be the duty of every manufacturer,—
(i) to ensure that every electronic product offered for sale in the Market
contains—
(a) the procedure for its handling and disposal; and
(b) the information about the parts which can be re-cycled and which
cannot be re-cycled;
(ii) to set-up adequate  number of collection centres for the hazardous electronic
waste; and
(iii) to create public awareness through advertisements, publications and other
electronic media about the hazardous substances in their products which may cause ill
effects on human body.
Definitions.
Compliance
criteria and
procedure for
disposal of
electronic
waste.
Appropriate
Government to
ensure disposal
of electronic
waste.
Duty of
manufacturer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6. It shall be the duty of every consumer to ensure that the electronic waste is not
disposed of in any manner except in the manner prescribed for the purpose.
7.  (1) Every re-cycler of the electronic product shall be registered with the appropriate
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every re-cycler shall re-cycle only those parts of an electronic product which have
been marked as re-cyclable by the manufacturer.
8.  Whoever violates the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which
may extend to five lakh rupees.
9. Where any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder is
contravened  by a company, every person who, at the time of contravention, was in charge
of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of commission of an offence under this Act and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section "company" means anybody
corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Duty of
consumer.
Registration
and
responsibility
of re-cycler.
Penalty.
Offence by a
company.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
3

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Electronic goods have become the household articles today. Every home has not one
but a number of electronic products. Once these electronic products become obsolete or
discarded, they are either thrown in the garbage bin or sold as scrap. The scrap dealers
dismantle these gadgets and keep what is useful and rest of it is rendered into garbage which
is then thrown in the landfills. This, of course, is not the proper way of disposal of electronic
waste. In this way millions of tonnes of electronic waste is generated in various metropolitan
cities of the country. A number of components in these electronic products are hazardous
and should be disposed of in a manner that does not harm the environment. Many of these
products contain toxic substances like lead, cadmium, mercury, hexavalent chromium, barium,
beryllium and carcinogenic agents like carbon black and heavy metals. These elements
cause serious health problems to the persons handling electronic waste and also damage the
environment.
In various countries, there are laws for proper disposal of electronic waste and the
procedure for disposal is also displayed on the product. It is also indicated on the product
what can be re-cycled and what cannot be re-cycled. But, in our country disposal of electronic
waste is nobody's responsibility. As of now, there is no law for the disposal of electronic
waste and no account is being maintained as how much electronic waste is being generated
and how much of it is being disposed of. It is, therefore, high time that matter may be
regulated before the situation becomes alarming.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; B C KHANDURI
December 23, 2014.
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide
infrastructure facilities for collection, storage, transportation and disposal of electronic waste.
The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the
respective States. However, the Central Government may also have to provide some financial
assistance to the States for this purpose. Also, the expenditure in respect of Union territories
shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
fifty crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of electronic waste being generated by
discarded  electronic devices by prescribing norms and fixing  responsibilities
and duties on manufacturers, re-cyclers and consumers with regard
to disposal of electronic waste and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Maj Gen B C Khanduri AVSM (Retd), M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4332LS(S-3)—09-02-2015.