1
Short title.
THE  EXTENSION OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
TO EVERY DISTRICT HEADQUARTER BILL, 2018
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide for extension of Central Government Health Scheme facilities to every
district headquarter in the country and linking the Central Government Health
Scheme card to Aadhaar number and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Extension of Central Government Health Scheme to
Every District Headquarters Bill, 2018.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “beneficiary” shall include the beneficiaries under the Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS) as notified by Ministry of Health vide O.M. dated 1.5.1954 and
as amended, from time to time;
(b) "CGHS" shall mean the Central Government Health Scheme as notified by
Ministry of Health vide O.M. dated 1.5.1954 and as amended, from time to time for the
healthcare benefits of beneficiaries; and
Bill  No. 16 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
10
5

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the Central Government to extend the benefits of
the CGHS to all the district headquarters in the country in such manner as may be
prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall, in absence of any Government Hospital or CGHS
Wellness Centre, may empanel such number of Private hospitals or diagnostic centres in
the district headquarter, as it may deem appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
5. Every beneficiary irrespective of his place of permanent residence shall be entitled
to avail the CGHS facilities in any of the CGHS wellness centres as per his entitlement and
rules prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government.
6. (1) For the purpose of availing medical facilities and reimbursement claims under
this Act, the CGHS Card of the beneficiaries shall be linked with the Aadhaar number as
defined under the (Aadhaar Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits
and Services) Act, 2016 in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The reimbursement claims shall be made to the bank account of the beneficiary or
in case of his death or being in comatose state to the bank account of any dependent
beneficiary with the consent of all other dependent beneficiaries in such manner as may be
prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
25
Extension of
CGHS to
district
headquarters.
Central
Government
to empanel
Private
Hospitals or
Diagnostic
Centres.
Beneficiary to
avail CGHS
facilities
irrespective
of his place of
residence.
CGHS card to
be linked with
the Aadhaar.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) is an ideal welfare measure available
to all Central Government servants, their dependents and retired personnel, etc. in CGHS
covered cities. In fact the scheme is most beneficial when one is advanced in age and ailing.
As of now CGHS clinics wellness centre are functioning only in the capital city of most
States. Non-availability of CGHS clinics or branch offices in every district makes it impossible
for beneficiaries to avail the facility. A retired or sick person cannot travel across the State
in his sick condition to avail the medical facility or to claim reimbursement. His health
condition may not permit such travel. Even after illness the person may not be able to afford
the travel to present his bills and seek reimbursement.
It is also necessary to link CGHS cards to Aadhaar number so that beneficiaries may
ba assured of treatment according to their eligibility and reimbursement to their bank accounts
when treatment becomes essential through private hospitals.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN
November 30, 2017.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for extension of the benefits of CGHS to all the district
headquarters in the country. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall, in absence
of any Government Hospital or CGHS Wellness Centre, may empanel such number of Private
hospitals or diagnostic centres in the district headquarter, as may be necessary, for carrying
out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
one thousand crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide for extension of Central Government Health Scheme facilities to every district
headquarter in the country and linking the Central Government Health Scheme card to
Aadhaar number and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3640LS(S3)—22-01-2018.