1
THE FREE AND COMPULSORY PRE-MARITAL GENETIC
TESTING BILL, 2019
By
DR. SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory pre-marital genetic testing for couples planning to get
married or start a family in order to identify common genetic blood disorders like
sickle cell, anemia and thalassemia and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Free and Compulsory Pre-Marital Genetic Testing
Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 170 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "couple" means a male above the age of twenty years and female above the
age of eighteen years or a person belonging to the third gender having valid identity
and birth certificate, planning to get married under any personal law as is applicable or
willing to start a family including those persons who are in a live-in relationship;
(c) "health centre" includes Government or private hospitals, pathology centres,
dispensaries, clinics, hospital on wheels and such other centres meant for pre-marital
genetic testing established by the appropriate Government;
(d) "pre-marital genetic test" means tests for detecting common genetic blood
disorders like sickle cell anemia and thalassemia primarily aimed at giving medical
consultation on the odds of transmitting these diseases to the other partner/spouse or
children including their lab investigation, consultation and counselling; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, after commencement of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a policy for compulsory pre-marital
genetic testing of couples intending to get married.
(2) The policy framed under sub-section (1) shall include the provision of pre-marital
genetic testing free of cost at health centres specified under this Act, in such manner as may
be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) appoint or hire required manpower and other materials or services, from
time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act; and
(b) ensure effective and timely advertisement and due publicity to the policy
framed under section 3.
5. It shall be the duty of every couple to—
(a) schedule a pre-marital genetic testing at least three months before the marriage
date;
(b) produce the pre-marital compatibility certificate issued under section 5 to the
Registrar of marriage before issuance of marriage certificate or such other documents.
6. Every health centre shall, after the pre-merital genetic test of couple, issue
pre-marital compatibility certificate in such form and manner as may be prescribed, which
shall be valid for only six months.
7. The medical and screening records of the couple or individuals shall be dealt with
extreme confidentiality and in compliance with Information Technology (Reasonable Security
Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011 framed
under the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Indian Medical Council (Professional
Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 framed under the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 or any other Act of privacy for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide, from time to time, adequate funds to the State Government for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Definitions.
Policy for
compulsory
pre-marital
genetic testing
of couples.
Responsibility
of
appropriate
Government.
Duty of
couples.
Pre-Marital
Compatibility
Certificate.
Confidentiality.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate fund.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10

3
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
11. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every  rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulments shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Marriage is the union of two souls, a fundamental building block of our society and the
cornerstone in building emotional and healthy family relationship. It is given prime importance
in Indian societies and a lot of efforts are put to ensure that the marriage results in a happy
and satisfactory life for the partakers. Usually in Indian circumstance, financial and social
aspects are scrutinized before selecting a matrimonial partner however health scrutiny is not
given as much importance, seldom-times resulting in exigent challenges for lifetime for the
betrothed. Thus the need of a healthy marriage arise to ensures that no family member suffer
from hereditary and infectious diseases.
India today, is confronting a unique problem of growing number of genetic blood
disorder cases like that of sickle cell anemia and thalassemia. Thalassemia is a genetic blood
disorder commonly characterized by the abnormal production of hemoglobin in the body.
The abnormality results in improper exgen transport and destruction of red blood cells. It has
wide-ranging effects on the human body like iron overload, bone deformities and in severe
cases heart disease also. The disease has no cure and people living with thalassemia major
require regular blood transfusions as an ef fective measure to prolong life. A thalassemia
major child is born out of the marriage of two thalassemia minor patients. Therefore, the only
way to prevent the spread of thalassemia major is to avoid the marriage of two thalassemia
minor patients.
Thalassemia has one of the highest incidents rates in India, with close to ten thosuand
to twelve thousand children being born with thalassemia (in India) per year. This makes India
officially the thalassemia capital of the world. India is estimated to have ten thousand patients
with a Beta thalassemia (
ß thalassemias) syndrome and around one lakh and fifty thousand
patients with sickle cell disease, but few among them are optimally managed. Allergenic stem
cell transplant is unaffordable for the majority of families. Thus, feasible option for control is
to intensify pre-marital screening of such diseases along with micro-mapping to assess the
true burden; develop adequate facilities for such diseases along with micro-mapping to
assess the true burden; adequate facilities for genetic counseling and pre-marital diagnosis
in public sector Institutions. At least one lakh rupees is the cost of treatment per patient
every year. The total burden of diseases born out of genetic disorder is estimated to stand at
fifty thousand crore annaully. A developing country like India cannot afford this burden and
thus it is the most opportune time to draft a national policy for a free and compulsory pre-
marital genetic screening for all residents irrespective of their financial or social background
as it cannot be left optional for long.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to:—
(a) mitigate the spread of genetic blood disorders like sickle cell, anemia and
thalassemia by providing free and compulsory pre-marital genetic testing for couples
who are planning to get married or start a family;
(b) promote awareness about the concept of the comprehensive healthy marriage;
(c) reduce pressure over health institutions and blood banks;
(d) aoid social and psychological problems for families whose children suffer;
and
(e) reduce the family and nation's financial burden of treating such children.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE
June 26, 2019.

FINANCIAL   MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for appointment of manpower, material and services for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. It also provides for due publicity of pre-marital genetic
testing policy by the appropriate Government. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government
shall provides adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crores will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,  the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory pre-marital genetic testing for couples planning to get
married or start a family in order to identify common genetic blood disorders like sickle
cell, anemia and thalassemia and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1372LS(S3)—15.07.2019.