5
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
Bill No.170 of 2022
THE VICTIMS OF RIOTS, COMMUNAL VIOLENCE AND VIOLENT 
PROTESTS (EQUAL COMPENSATION) BILL, 2022
By
Shri Ramesh Chand Bind, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to victims of riots, communal violence and violent 
protests and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—  
 1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Victims of Riots, Communal Violence and Violent 
Protests (Equal Compensation) Act, 2022. 
  ( 2)  It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
 2. In this Act, unless the contest otherwise requires, —
(a) ‘’appropriate government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “communal violence” means and includes unexpected and undesirable incident 
creating internal disturbance within any part of the State which threatens the secular 
fabric, unity, integrity or internal security of the country;
(c) “compensation” means financial assistance provided by the Central Government 
to the victim or his dependent;
(d) “Claims Tribunal” means a Claims tribunal constituted under section 7;
(e) “damage” means loss, injury, or deterioration, caused by any act or omission by 
any person to another person or property thereof;
(f) “dependent” means the parents, spouse, children or siblings of a victim;
(g) “Fund” means the Victims of Riots and Communal Violence Compensation 
Fund constituted under section 10;
(h) “mischief” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 425 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) “person” shall have the same meaning as in section 11 of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860;
(k) “private property” means a movable or an immovable property owned and 
controlled by any person or any religious body, society or trust or waqf, which is not 
public property, or firms over which their owners have exclusive and absolute legal 
right;
(l) “public property” means any property, whether movable or immovable and 
includes any machinery which is owned by, or in the possession of, or under the control 
of —
(i) Central Government; or
(ii) State Government; or
(iii) any local authority; or
(iv) any corporation or a company as defined under Companies Act,  
2013, established by or under a State Act; or
(v) any institution, concern or undertaking which the State Government may, 
by notification in the Gazette, specify in this behalf:
Provided that the State Government, shall not specify any other institution 
concern or undertaking under this sub-clause unless such institution, concern 
or undertaking is financed wholly or substantially by funds provided directly or 
Definitions.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
18 of 2014.
35

3
indirectly by the State Government or any other State Government or partially by 
the State Government and partially by the Central Government or any other State 
Government;
(m) “riot” means an unexpected and undesirable incident by a group of people 
resulting in injury or death of a person or persons or damage to public property or 
property belonging to private individuals;
(n) ‘’victim’’ means a person killed or injured during riots, communal violence or 
violent protests; and
(o) ‘’violent  protest’’ means the protest in which a group of person use violence, 
destruction or such other means to put a threat to life and profits of other person. 
 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the Central Government shall, after taking into consideration the loss or injury 
sustained, pay equal amount of compensation to the victims or their dependants in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
 4. On receipt of the report of concerned police station which is based on First 
Information Report of the incident and other information gathered in the meanwhile, the 
District Magistrate or Commissioner of Police or the Head of Office shall take immediate 
steps to file claim petition before the Claims Tribunal for compensation, preferably within 
three months of the date of causing of damage to public property.
 5. The District Collector or the Commissioner, as the case may be, shall review the 
conduct of claim cases filed for compensation on a quarterly basis and forward its report to 
the appropriate Government.  
 6. The owner of private property may, whose property has been damaged in a riot, 
communal violence or violent protest, after getting a copy of such report from the concerned 
authority file or claim petition for compensation in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 7. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Gazette, constitute 
one or more Claims Tribunal for such area as may be specified in the notification for 
the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for compensation in respect of damages to any 
public property or private property or both and to perform the functions assigned to it 
under this Act. 
  ( 2) The Claims Tribunal shall consist of such number of members as the 
appropriate Government may think fit to appoint and where it consists of two or more 
members, one of them shall be appointed as the Chairperson thereof.
  ( 3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as:—
(a) chairperson to a Claims Tribunal unless he has been a retired District 
Judge; and 
(b) Member of Claims Tribunal unless he is an officer of  rank Additional 
Commissioner. 
Equal 
Compensation 
to victims of 
riots, communal 
violence and 
violent protests.
Claim Petition 
for Public 
Property.
Review of 
Cases.
Claim Petition 
for Private 
Property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Constitution of 
Claim Tribunal.

4
  ( 4) Where two or more Claims Tribunals are constituted for any area, the appropriate 
Government, may by general or special order, regulate the distribution of business alongwith 
jurisdiction amongst them. 
 8. ( 1) It shall be the duty of the Claims Tribunal to determine the damages caused to 
a public or a private property in riots, communal violence and violent protests and to award 
suitable compensation related thereto. 
  ( 2) The Claims Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, appoint a Claims Commissioner 
to estimate the damages and investigate liability to assist it in holding the inquiry. 
  ( 3) The Claims Tribunal may, also appoint one Assessor in every district as 
the case may be to assist the Claims Commissioner who is technically qualified to 
asses such damage from the panel appointed by the appropriate Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
  ( 4) The remuneration, to be paid the person or persons under sub-sections 
(2) and (3) shall in every case be determined by the appropriate Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
  ( 5) The Claims Commissioner and the Assessor may seek instructions from the 
Claims Tribunal to summon the existing video or other recordings from private and public 
sources to find out the damage and establish relationship with the perpetrators of the damage 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
  ( 6) The Claims Commissioner shall make a report to the Claims Tribunal within a 
period of three months of within the extended time, if any, granted by the Claims Tribunal. 
  ( 7) The Claims Tribunal shall determine the liability after hearing the parties. 
  ( 8) The Claims Tribunals may, subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, 
follow such summary procedure as it thinks fit. 
  ( 9) The Claims Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil Court for the purpose 
of taking evidence on oath and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling 
the discovery and production of documents and material objects and for such other purposes 
as may be prescribed; and 
  ( 10) the Claims Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
 9. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
rules pertaining to the procedure of the Claims Tribunal.
 10. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Fund to be known as the Victims of Riots and Communal Violence 
Compensation Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
  ( 2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to 
the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
Procedure for 
Claim Tribunal.
Function and 
powers of 
the Claims 
Tribunal.
Constitution of 
Victims of Riots 
and Communal 
Violence 
Compensation 
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30    2 of 1974.
35

  ( 3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donations or contributions from 
domestic and international institutions shall also be credited to the Fund. 
 11. The Fund shall be administered by a Board to be known as the Victims of Riots and 
Communal Violence Compensation Board, consisting of:—
(i) The Prime Minister — Chairperson ex-officio;
(ii) The Chief Minister of every State and Lieutenant Governor or Chief 
Administrator of Union territories — Member, ex-officio; 
(iii) Leader of Opposition in the House of the People — Member ex-officio;
(iv) Chief Justice of India — Member ex-officio;
(v) two retired judges of Supreme Court to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(vi) Vice-Chairman, NITI AAYOG. 
 12. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a task force to implement the 
provisions of this Act within their jurisdiction. 
  ( 2) The task force shall consist of ten members to be appointed by the 
appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 
  ( 3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of members of the task force shall be such as may be prescribed. 
  ( 4) The task force shall —
(i) visit the riots, communal violence and violent protest site and collect 
information relating to the victims; 
(ii) submit the incident related information to the Victims of Riots and 
Communal Violence Compensation Board; 
(iii) ensure that the victims receive the compensation within time-limit 
prescribed under this Act; and 
(iv) undertake any other work that may be assigned to it by the Victims of Riots 
and Communal Violence Compensation Board.  
 13. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the Central 
Government may by a notified order, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the 
coming into force of this Act. 
 14. ( 1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 
Power to 
remove 
Difficulties.
5
Members of the 
Board for the 
fund.
Constitution of 
task force by 
the appropriate 
Government.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

  ( 2) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
  ( 3)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
6
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 India has a culturally diverse diaspora of population with citizens from different 
castes, creed and religious and linguistic backgrounds residing in the country. However, 
such differences which place India on the map for its diversity and harmonious religious 
congruence, often results into communal clashes and riots resulting in loss of life and 
property — both public and private. India holds a dismal 72nd rank in the Global Peace 
Index (GPI). The economic cost of violence is as much as 6% of its GDP as per the Global 
Peace Index Report. 
 The Constitution provides right to equality to every citizen as a Fundamental Right. 
Under articles 14 to 16, there is provision for equality and non-discrimination and for social 
equality under articles 17 and 18 of the Constitution. The Right to Equality provides that all 
the citizens of India should get equal protection under the law and should be treated equally 
in similar situations. 
 In case of riots, communal violence and violent protests which lead to loss of life and 
property, financial assistance must be provided as compensation to affected persons. In most 
of the situations, these victims have to knock the doors of court for equal compensation 
which is unfortunate. There is no clear policy aimed at providing equal compensation to all 
victims affected by riots or communal violence. Everything depends upon administrative 
decisions, which took long time and usually results into no compensation to the victims or 
his/her dependents. 
 The present Bill aims to constitute a fund administered by a Board for Compensation 
to be provided to victims of riots, communal violence and violent protests. The Bill further 
aims to establish Claims Tribunal for fast redressal of compensation claims of victims of 
such unfortunate events. The Bill is a method to provide justice and equality to victims 
of riots and help them regain their life and personal liberty as provided under article 21 of 
Constitution. 
 Hence this Bill.
   New Delhi;                                   RAMESH CHAND BIND 
7 July, 2022.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for payment of compensation to victims or their dependents. 
Clause 7 provides for Constitution of one or more Claims Tribunal. It further provides for 
appointment of Chairman and other Members of the Tribunal. Clause 8 of the Bill empowers 
the claim tribunal to appoint the Claims Commissioner and Assessors. Clause 10 provides for 
constitution of the victims of Riots and Communal Violence Compensation Fund. It further 
provides for contribution in the Fund by the Central Government and State Governments. 
Clause 12 provides for constitution of a task force by the appropriate Government.                  
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve as such no expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. However, it is estimated that recurring expenditure of about rupees one 
hundred crore would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to victims of riots, communal violence and violent 
protests and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Ramesh Chand Bind, M.P.)