As Intropucep In Lok SagHa ON

3.0 NOV 1392

Bill No. 170 of 1992

——
HE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION (TRANSFER OF
UNDERTAKING AND REPEAL) BILL, 1992

A
BILL

to provide for the transfer and vesting of the undertaking of the Indust-
rial Finance Corporation of India to and in the company to be formed
and registered as a Company under the Companies Act, 1956, and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto and also to
repeal the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—

1, (2) This Act may be called the Industrial Finance , Corporation
(Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 1992.

5 (2) It shall be deemed to jmave come into force on . the Ist day of
October, 1992.

2. in this Act, umless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appointed day” means such date as the Central Govern

ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint under sec-
19 tion 3;

Short
title

and com-
mence~
ment.

Defini-
tions,


Under-
taking
of the
Corpora-
tion to
vest in
the Com-
pany.

General
effect of
vesting
of under-
taking

in the
Company,

~ ६) “Company” means the Industrial Finance Corporation
India Limited to be formed and registered wader ie — Companies
1956;

(c) “Corporation” means the Industrial Finance Corporati |
India established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Ind
Finance Corporation Act, 1948.

3. On such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be transferred to, and vest in, t
Company the undertaking of the Corporation,

4. (1) Every shareholder of the Corporation immediately before
appointed day shall be deemed to be registered on and from the appoint
day as a shareholder of the Company to the extent of the face value of
the shares held by such shareholder. :

(2) The undertaking of the Corporation which is transferred to and
which vests in the Company under section 3 shall be deemed to ne
all business, asseis, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and
Properties, movable and immovable, real and personal, corporeal and in-
corporeal, in possession or reservation, present or contingent of whatever
nature and wheresoever situate including lands, buildings, vehicles, cash _
balances, deposits, foreign currencies, disclosed and undisclosed rese
teserve fund, special reserve fund, ben
fund, stocks, investments,

be
‘uments relating thereto and shall also
ings, liabilities and obligations of what-
a then subsisting of the Corporation in 39

accounts, registers, records and doc
be deemed to include all borrowi:
ever kind within or without Indi
relation to its undertaking.

5 (4) Any or cause of action pending or existin, immedi, |
2 1g lately
before the appointed day by or against the Corporation in relation to
its cers as from the appointed day, be continued and enfor-.



3

5. With effect from the appointed day, all fiseal and other concessions, Conces-
licences, benefits, privileges and exemptions granted to the Corporation sion, ete.,
in conection with the affairs and business of the Corporation under any {0 5
Jaw for the time being in force shall be deemed to have been granted tot have

5 the Cornpany. tees

granted

to the

Company.

6. 0) Where any exemption from, or any assessment with respect to, Tax
eny tak has been granted or made or any benefit by way of set off or exemp-
carry forward of any unabsorbed depreciation or investment allowance 988

or othet allowance or loss has been extended or is available to the Cor- jo tinue
961. 10 poration under the Income-tax Act, 1961, such exemption, assessment Or to have
penefit shall continue to have effect in relation to the Company. effect.
(2) Where any payment made by the Corporation is exempt from de-
(961. duction of tax a: source under any provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961,
such exemption will continue to be available as if the provisions of the

15 said Act made applicable to the Corporation were operative in relation
to the Company.

(3) ‘The transfer and vesting of the undertaking or any part thereof
in terms of section 3 shall not be construed as a transfer within the
1961. meaning of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the purposes of capital gains.

20.7. Any guarantee given for or in favour of the Corporation with res- Guarantee
pect to any loan, lease finance or other assistance shall continue to be to .be
operative in relation to the Company. operative.

8. (1) Every officer or other employee of the Corporation (except provisions

Director of the Board, Chairman or Managing Director) serving in its in respect
25 employment immediately before the appointed day shall, in so far as of officers
such officer or other employee is employed in connection with the under- and
taking which has vested in the Company by virtue of this Act, become, other
as from the appointed day, an officer or, as the case may be, other em- Smulovess
ployee of the Company and shall hold his office or service therein by the poration.
30 same tenure, at the same remuneration, upon the same terms and con-
ditions, with the same obligations and with the same rights and privile-
ges as to leave, leave fare concession, welfare scheme, medical benefit
scheme, insurance, provident fund, other funds, retirement, voluntary
retirement, gratuity and other benefits as he would have held under the
35 Corporation if its undertaking had not vested in the Company and shall
continue to do so as an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of
the Company or until the expiry of a period of six months from the
appointed day if such officer or other employee opts not to continue to
be the officer or other employee of the Company within such period.

40. (2) Where an officer or other employee of the Corporation opts under
sub-section (1) not to be in employment or service of the Company, such
officer or other employee shall be deemed to have resigned.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in: the Industrial Disputes
1947. Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of
* 45 the services of any officer or other employee of the Corporation to the


Act 18 of
1891 to
apply to
the
books of
the Com-
pany,

Shares,
bonds

and
debentures
tobe

deemed to
be appro~
ved secu-
Tities,
Repeals
and
savings,

4

Company shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compen-
sation under this Act or under any other law for the time

in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal
or other authority.

(4) The officers and other employees who have retired before the
appointed day from the service of the Corporation and are entitled to
any benefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same
benefits, rights or privileges from the Company,

(5) The trusts of the provident fund or the gratuity fund of the Cor-
oration and any other bodies created for the welfare of officers or em-
ployees would continue to discharge their functions in the Company as
was being done hitherto in the Corporation and any tax exemption gran-
ted to the provident fund or the gratuity fund would continue to. be
applied to the Company.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the Com-
panies Act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force or in
the regulations of the Corporation, no Director of the Board, Chairman,
Managing Director or any other person entitled to manage the whole or
substantial part of the business and affairs of the Corporation shall be
entitled to any compensation against the Corporation or the Company
for the loss of office or for the premature termination of any contract of
managetnent entered into by him with the Corporation.

9. The Company shall be deemed to be a bank for the purposes of the
Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891.

10. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the shares, bonds and debentures of the Company shall be
deemed to be approved securities for the purposes of the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882, the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.

व, (1) On the appointea day, the Industria] Finance Corporation Act,
1948 shall stand repealed.

(2) The, Industrial Finance Corporation (Transfer of Undertaking
and Repeal) Ordinance, 1992 is hereby repealed.

(3) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Industrial Finance Corporation
Act, 1948, the Company shall, so far as may be, comply with the provi-
sions of sections 33, 34, 344, 35 and 43 of the Act So repealed for any of
the purposes related to the annual accounts of the Corporation.

(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Industrial Finance Corporation
(Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Ordinance, 1992, anything done
or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have
been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

20

|
40 17011


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Continued decline in the availability of concessional funds from the
Government and the Reserve Bank of India over the years as also the
changes in the past several months in the financial sector have made it
obligatory for the Industrial Finance Corporation of India (IFCI) to raise
resources largely from the market. However, the Industrial Finance
Corporation Act, 1948 permits accessibility to the market only when it
is backed by a Government guarantee, and thereby prevepts it from
raising resources on competitive terms. Further, the Act also provides
for a very dominant role to its major shareholder. namely, the Industrial
Development Bank of India in the functioning of the IFCI, This is con-
sidered anomalous as the two institutions are competitors.

2. To deal with these problems and in particular, to ensure greater
flexibility and consequent ability of IFCI to respond to the needs of
the fast changing financial system, jt was thought necessary to establish
a new company under the Companies Act, 1956, to which the entire
undertaking, business and functions of IFCI as well as all the assets and
liabilities and the staff of IFCT will be transferred on such day 35 will
pe notified by the Central Government. Conversion of फटा into a
Company would also enable it to reshape its business strategies, provide
greater autonomy, enter the capital market for raising resources, faci-
litate expansion of its equity base in future, and create a more levelled
playing field across broadly similar financial institutions. The Industrial
Finance Corporation (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Ordinance,
1992 was, therefore, promulgated by the President on the Ist October, 1992.

3. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance and to achieve the
aforesaid objects.

New Deva; DALBIR SINGH.
The 18th November, 1992


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

A company known as the Industrial Finance Corporation
Limited is to be formed and registered under the Companies Act,
required in clause 2(b) of the Bill. For this purpose, Te;
other charges (including subscription money) likely to ii
by the Central Government are estimated at Rs, 81 lakhs approxi
as non-recurring expenditure.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the transfer and vesting of the undertaking of the Industrial
Finance Corporation of India to and in the company to be formed
and registered as a Company under the Companies Act, 1956,, and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto and also to repeal
the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948.

(Shri Dalbir Singh, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance.)