1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
GUJARAT BILL, 2014
By
SHRI C.R. PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Gujarat for promoting the
welfare of girl child, reduction of maternal and infant mortality rate and welfare of
agricultural labourers in the State.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Gujarat
Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  170  of 2014
Short title and
Commence-
ment.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Gujarat to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State for the purpose of:—
(i) implementation of schemes aimed at improving the health of girl child,
increasing sex-ratio, improving educational standards of the girl child;
(ii) implementation of schemes aimed at encouraging the education of girl
students belonging to families living below poverty line;
(iii) providing for welfare measures aimed at improving the condition of
agricultural labourers; and
(iv) providing for measures aimed at lowering of infant mortality rate, improving
the maternal health and promoting institutional delivery in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Gujarat.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Gujarat needs assistance from the Central Government for the successful
completion of various schemes being undertaken at present with an aim to improve the
standard of life of the people, improve the sex-ratio and level of education and health condition
of the girls, to encourage the girl students of families living below poverty line to pursue
higher education and also to provide incentives for people living below poverty line to
pursue higher education. Moreover the condition of agricultural labourers in the State is far
from satisfactory and their welfare and protection is of paramount importance. Central
assistance to the State is also needed for further reduction in the maternal and infant mortality
rates.
Hence the Bill seeks to provide special financial assistance to the State of Gujarat for
meeting the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; C.R. PA TIL
November 12, 2014.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of monies out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Gujarat to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State for the welfare of women and agricultural
labourers.
The Bills, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Gujarat. As the sums
of moneys which will be given to the State of Gujarat as special financial assistance by
appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be
implemented by the State Government are identified, it is not possible to give the estimates
of recurring or non-recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India at this stage.

GMGIPMRND—2987LS(S3)—04-12-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Gujarat for promoting the welfare
of girl child, reduction of maternal and infant mortality rate and welfare of agricultural
labourers in the State.
————
(Shri C.R. Patil, M.P .)