1
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 3B of the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“3C. There shall be established a University, which shall be a body corporate, to
be known as the Central University of Andhra Pradesh, having its territorial
jurisdiction extending to the whole of the State of Andhra Pradesh, as specified in the
First Schedule to this Act.
3D. There shall be established a Tribal University, which shall be a body
corporate, to be known as the Central Tribal University of Andhra Pradesh, having its
territorial jurisdiction extending to the whole of the State of Andhra Pradesh, as
specified in the First Schedule to this Act, to provide avenues of higher education and
research facilities primarily for the tribal population of India.”.
25 of 2009.
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new sections
3C and 3D.
Establishment
of Central
University of
Andhra Pradesh.
Establishment
of Central
Tribal
University of
Andhra Pradesh.
Bill No. 171 of  2018
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that the Tribal University established under section 3D shall take
additional measures for paying special attention to the tribal centric higher eduction
and research, including art, culture and customs.”.
4. For the First Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be
substituted, namely:—
“THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 3(4)]
Serial Name of Name of the University Territorial jurisdiction
No. the State
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Andhra Central University of Whole of the State of Andhra
Pradesh Andhra Pradesh Pradesh
2. Andhra Central Tribal University Whole of the State of Andhra
Pradesh of Andhra P radesh Pradesh
3. Bihar Central University of Territory in the South of the
South Bihar River Ganges in the State of
Bihar
4. Bihar Mahatma Gandhi T erritory in the north of the River
Central University Ganges in the State of Bihar
5. Gujarat Central University of Whole of the State of Gujarat
Gujarat
6. Haryana Central University of Whole of the State of Haryana
Haryana
7. Himachal Central University of Whole of the State of Himachal
Pradesh Himachal Pradesh Pradesh
8. Jammu and Central University of Kashmir Division of the State of
Kashmir Kashmir Jammu and Kashmir
9. Jammu and Central University of Jammu Division of the State of
Kashmir Jammu Jammu and Kashmir
10. Jharkhand Central University of Whole of the State of Jharkhand
Jharkhand
11. Karnataka Central University of Whole of the State of Karnataka
Karnataka
12. Kerala Central University of Whole of the State of Kerala
Kerala
13. Odisha Central University of Whole of the State of  Odisha
Odisha
14. Punjab Central University of Whole of the State of Punjab
Punjab
15. Rajasthan Central University of Whole of the State of Rajasthan
Rajasthan
16. Tamil Nadu Central University of Whole of the State of Tamil Nadu.”.
Tamil Nadu
Substitution of
new Schedule
for First
Schedule.
Amendment
of section 5.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Universities Act, 2009 was enacted to establish and incorporate universities
for teaching and research in various States and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
2. Establishment of one Central University and one Central Tribal University in the
State of Andhra Pradesh will increase access and quality of higher education and also
facilitate and promote avenues of higher education and research facilities for the people of
the State. Further, the Tribal University will promote advance knowledge by providing
instructional and research facilities in tribal art, culture and customs and advancement in
technology to the tribal population of India. A part from being focused to the tribal education,
the Central Tribal University shall carry out all educational and other activities like any other
Central University. At present, there is no Central University in the State of Andhra Pradesh
while all other States, except Goa, have one or more Central University. Moreover, the
establishment of a Central University and a Central Tribal University in the State of Andhra
Pradesh is obligatory under the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
3. Accordingly, it has been decided to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009 to
provide for the establishment of one University by the name of “Central University of
Andhra Pradesh” and one Tribal University by the name of “Central Tribal University of
Andhra Pradesh” in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PRAKASH  JAV ADEKAR.
The 3rd December,  2018.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 3C and 3D in the Central Universities
Act, 2009, so as to establish two new universities as the body corporates to be known as the
Central University of Andhra Pradesh and the Central Tribal University of Andhra Pradesh,
having its territorial jurisdiction extending to the whole of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
2. The infrastructure for the two universities shall be set up in two phases, with a cap on
expenditure, for four years for the period from 2018-19 to 2021-22 ending in March, 2022.
Approximately, fifty per cent. of the projected cost will be spent in phase I, with a cap of four
hundred fifty crore rupees for the Central University and four hundred twenty crore rupees
for the Tribal University, being the total cost for phase I for the two universities as eight
hundred seventy crore rupees. However, the expenditure would be met from the Consolidated
Fund of India, through the budgetary provisions of the Ministry of Human Resource
Development.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 2009
(25 OF 2009)
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 3(4)]
Sl. Name of     Name of the University T erritorial jurisdiction
No. the State
1. Bihar Central University of South Bihar Territory in the South of the River
Ganges in the State of Bihar
1A. Bihar Mahatma Gandhi Central T erritory in the North of the River
University Ganges in the State of Bihar
2. Gujarat Central University of Gujarat Whole of the State of Gujarat
3. Haryana Central University of Haryana Whole of the State of Haryana
4. Himachal Central University of Himachal Whole of the State of Himachal
Pradesh Pradesh Pradesh
5. Jammu and Central University of Kashmir Kashmir Division of the State of
Kashmir Jammu and Kashmir
5A. Jammu and Central University of Jammu Jammu Division of the State of
Kashmir Jammu and Kashmir
6. Jharkhand Central University of Jharkhand Whole of the State of Jharkhand
7. Karnataka Central University of Karnataka Whole of the State of Karnataka
8. Kerala Central University of Kerala Whole of the State of Kerala
9. Orissa Central University of Orissa Whole of the State of Orissa
10. Punjab Central University of Punjab Whole of the State of Punjab
11. Rajasthan Central University of Rajasthan Whole of the State of Rajasthan
12. Tamil Nadu Central University of Tamil Nadu Whole of the State of Tamil Nadu.
* * * * *

MGIPMRND—2257LS(S3)—10-12-2018.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
————
(Shri Prakash  Javadekar, Minister of Human Resource Development)