1
THE  FARMERS (PROTECTION, PREVENTION OF SUICIDES AND
WELFARE) BILL,  2014
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of farmers from exploitation by moneylenders, middlemen,
unscrupulous traders; increasing farm yield by improving farming practices by
modern  techniques and allied occupations, extending protective umbrella
against natural calamities by taking up of welfare measures to prevent
the distressed farmers from committing suicide and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the The Farmers (Protection, Prevention of Suicides and
Welfare) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 171 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural produce" include paddy, wheat, coarse cereals, pulses, sugarcane,
gram, cotton, oilseeds, vegetables, fruits, jute, coconut, tobacco, areca nuts and such
other agricultural produces which may be notified from time to time by the Central
Government and also seed as defined in the Seeds Act, 1966;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "bumper crop" means the excess yield of any agricultural produce not
commensurate with its cost of production;
(d) "farmer" means a person who owns land and cultivates or causes it to be
cultivated for agricultural or horticulture purposes and includes small and marginal
farmers as identified by the appropriate Government;
(e) "Fund" means the National Farmers Natural Calamity and Welfare Fund
established under section 3;
(f) "natural calamity" includes drought, flood, cyclone, hailstorm, extreme cold
and frost, winterkill, tsunami, storm, fire, excessive rains, snow, damages caused by
wild life, insect infestation of large scale magnitude, plant diseases and such other
natural phenomenon as may be notified from time to time, by the appropriate Government;
(g) "old age farmer" means a farmer who has completed sixty years of age; and
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months
from the commencement of this Act, constitute a National Farmers Natural Calamity and
Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore to be provided by the
Central Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in
such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) The fund shall also comprise moneys received from the general public, body
corporate and financial institutions, domestic as well as foreign ones, as donations.
(4) The fund shall be utilized for,—
(a) paying adequate compensation to farmers affected by natural calamity;
(b) payment of pension to old age farmers;
(c) implementing special assistance package to be formulated by the appropriate
Government for the children of farmers, physically challenged or old age farmers
and farmers affected by natural calamities;
(d) extending educational facilities to the children of farmers and assistance
for the marriage of their daughters;
(e) making provision for food, drinking water, fodder and other basic necessities
of day to day life in natural calamity affected rural areas;
(f) timely and adequate supply of quality seeds, manure, fertilizers and
insecticides to farmers;
(g) paying premiums of crop insurance of such poverty stricken farmers, as
the appropriate Government may specify;
(h) providing healthcare facilities to the farmers and their families;
Definitions.
54 of 1966
Constitution of
the National
Farmers
Natural
Calamity
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(i) providing institutional mechanism for efficient marketing and export of
farm produce; and
(j) such other purposes as the Central Government may deem necessary or
expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(5) The Fund shall be administered by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, in consultation with the  State
Governments, formulate a long-term action plan for the protection and welfare of farmers,
with special focus on natural calamity prone areas.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  provisions,
such action plan shall include,—
(a) comprehensive crop and livestock insurance scheme to make up the losses
of farmers due to natural calamity;
(b) compulsory market intervention in case of bumper crop;
(c) writing off loans and interest of the farmers affected by natural calamity;
(d) easy credit facility with interest free or nominal rate of interest from the Banks
and Financial Institutions;
(e) remunerative prices for the agricultural produces;
(f) necessary welfare measures as may be deemed necessary to protect the
exploited, indebted and poverty stricken farmers of the country;
5. The appropriate Government shall, in order to provide protective umbrella to the
distressed, exploited, indebted and poverty stricken farmers, take the following measures—
(a) compulsorily monitor the trend of agricultural production so as to have
estimate of  production, local consumption, purchases by Government agencies, surplus,
or any other incidental matter;
(b) make affordable transportation arrangements to carry the surplus produce
to identified areas where such produce is likely to be consumed and make marketing
and yard facilities for such surplus agricultural production;
(c) ensure that farmers do not resort to distress sale in order to rein in the
unscrupulous traders who exploit the farmers by not purchasing their yield by forming
cartel for this purpose;
(d) purchase the surplus produce through its agencies by extending compulsory
market intervention;
(e) fix the remunerative prices of agricultural produce from time to time;
(f) compulsory remove the middlemen operating in the wholesale and other markets
dealing with agricultural product;
(g) study the requirements of farmers for promoting agriculture through
agricultural education, research, training through modern Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Kisan
Call Centres and agricultural universities;
(h) promote agro based industries like food processing, dairying, poultry, rearing
of livestock, piggery and bee keeping to enhance farm income;
(i) promote cultivation of vegetables, spices, floriculture, pisciculture, sericulture
and  horticulture;
(j) ensure easy institutional loans to remove indebtedness amongst farmers; and
(k) extend such other protective measures to farmers as may be prescribed.
Central
Government
to formulate
long-term
action plan
for the
protection and
welfare of
farmers.
Protective
umbrella for
farmers by the
appropriate
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall formulate a special policy for regions of the country having
high incidence of s
uicides by farmers to alleviate the sufferings of the exploited, indebted
and poverty stricken farmers of such regions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provisions, the special policy
shall include—
(a) direction to all the banks, including Cooperative and Regional Rural Banks
and other financial institutions which disburse agricultural loans, to secure the interests
of affected farmers;
(b) waiving of loans or concessions to be given to the farmers by banks and
financial institutions in case, the farmers are unable to repay the amount;
(c) prohibition on moneylenders in lending money to the farmers;
(d) public employment to one of the dependents family member of a farmer who
dies during occurrence of a natural calamity;
(e) adequate financial assistance to the family of the farmer in case of suicide by
farmer; and
(f) such other measures, as may be necessary, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of the period of three years from
the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Special policy
for suicide
prone areas.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Act not to be
derogation of
any other laws
in force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Ours is predominantly an agrarian country and agriculture is the backbone of our
economy as it immensely contributes to Gross Domestic Product  (GDP) and generates
largest number of employment opportunities. The farmers sustain the country with food
security and supply the largest share of raw material to industrial sector. Its export share is
also considerable which brings precious foreign exchange in the Country. But, unfortunately,
the farmer is the most exploited, heavily indebted and poverty stricken. Many a time, when
the debt burden becomes unbearable and farmers, being unable to withstand this burden,
end their lives by committing suicide.
The National Farmers Commission has recently highlighted that nearly one lakh fifty
thousand farmers have committed suicides in  the country since 1990, incidentally a large
number of cases of suicides by farmers have taken place in those states where green revolution
has been a success story namely Punjab, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and some other States. In the State of
Maharashtra and in particular in the Vidarbha region alone, the figure of farmers who have
committed suicides touched one lakh thirty one thousand during 1993-2006 and the trend is
still continuing in the State. In fact, hardly any State has undertaken comprehensive
enumeration of suicide by farmers. The incidents of suicide of farmers in large number is a
blot on our democracy.
Acute poverty and indebtedness is another major factor for farmers for taking the
extreme step of committing suicide. According to National Sample Survey Organisation,
48.6 per cent. farmer households are reported to be indebted in the year 2005. The incidence
of indebtedness is the highest in the State of Andhra Pradesh, where 82 per cent. farmers are
indebted followed by the States of Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Kerala and Maharashtra. In short,
nearly 50 to 53 per cent. farmers in many States are facing indebtedness.
In the recent past, two decisions of the Central Government regarding release of
package of rupees 25,000 crore to families of farmers who had committed suicide debt waiver
scheme of 70,000 crore rupees for farmers show that the seriousness and dimensions of the
problem that  warrants a census survey of  farmers who have committed suicides.
Simultaneously, various welfare measures need to be taken by the Government to provide
immediate relief to the affected farmers. A National Farmers Natural Calamity Welfare Fund is
required to be established for removal of indebtedness and acute poverty among farmers.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
November 3, 2014

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution  of a National Farmers Natural
Calamity and Welfare Fund with initial corpus of fifty thousand crore rupees to be provided
by the Central Government. It further provides that the Central Government and the State
Governments shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed. Clause 5
provides for monitoring of trend of production, arrangement of transportation of surplus
agricultural production and certain other measures for welfare of farmers. Clause 7 provides
that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds to the State Governments for
carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune
of rupees sixty thousand crore will be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be incurred.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3391LS(S3)—08.12.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of farmers from exploitation by moneylenders, middlemen,
unscrupulous traders; increasing farm yield by improving farming practices by modern
techniques and allied occupations, extending protective umbrella against natural calamities
by taking up of welfare measures to prevent the distressed farmers from committing
suicide and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)