953.

5

10

As intropucep iv Lox SaBHa ON

3 ४ HOV 1936

Bill No, 171 of 1992
centre emer

THE INTEREST ON DELAYED PAYMENTS TO SMALL SCALE AND
ANCILLARY INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKINGS BILL, 1992

A
BILL

to provide for and regulate the payment of interest on delayed payments
to small scale and ancillary industrial undertakings and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Interest on Délayed Payments to
Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial] Undertakings Act, 1992.

(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.

(8) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd day of
September, 1992.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “ancillary industrial undertaking” has the meaning assign-
ed to it. by clause (aa) of section 3 of the Industries (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1951; :

(b) “appointed day” means the day following immediately after
the expiry of the period of thirty days from the day of acceptance oF
the day of deemed acceptance of any goods or any services by पक
buyer from a supplier; 1

Short
title,
extent,
and
comme-
ence-
ment

Defini-
tions.


Liability
of buyer
to make
payment,

Date
from
which
and rate
at which
interest
is
payable.

eae
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(6) “the day of acceptance” means, —

(@) the day of the actual delivery of goods or the ren
dering of services; or

(0) where any objection is made in writing by th
buyer regarding acceptance of goods or services wit
thirty days from the day of the delivery of goods or the
dering of services, the day on which such objection is
moved by the supplier;

(ii) “the day of deemed acceptance” means, where no ol
jection is made in writing by the buyer regarding acceptance
goods or services within thirty days from the day of the
very of goods or the rendering of services, the day of the actu:
delivery of goods or the rendering of services;

(०) “buyer” means whoever buys any goods or receives
services from a supplier for consideration;

(4) “goods” means every kind of movable property other
actionable claims and money;

(e) “small scale industrial undertaking” has the meaning gn-
ed to it by clause (j) of section 3 of the Industries (Develovment
and Regulation) Act, 1951;

(f) “supplier” means an ancillary industrial undertaking or
small scale industrial undertaking holding a permanent registra-
tion certificate issued by the Directorate of Industries ofa.
or Union territory. :

3. Where any supplier supplies any goods or renders any services to
any buyer, the buyer shall make payment therefor on or before the date
agreed upon between him and the supplier in writing or, where there
is no agreement in this behalf, before the appointed day.

4. Where any buyer fails to make payment of the amount to the sup- 3
plier, as required under section 3, the buyer shall, notwithstanding any-—
thing contained in any agreement between the buyer and the supplier
or in any law for the time being in force, be liable to pay interest to the
supplier on that amount from the appointed day or, as the case may be,
from the date immediately following the date agreed upon, at such 43

rate which is five per cent. points above the floor rate for comparable —
lending, ~ :

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “floor rate for com-
parable lending” means the highest of the minimum lending rates char-
ged: by scheduled banks (not being co-operative banks) on credit limits
in accordance with the directions given or issued to banking companies
generally by the Reserve- Bank of India under the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949, “जो,


3

5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any agreement between 8
supplier and a buyer or in any law for the time being in force, the buyer
shall be liable to pay compound interest (with monthly rests} at the
rate mentioned in section 4 on the amount due to the supplier.

5 6. The amount due from a buyer, together with the amount of in-
terest calculated in accordance with the provisions of sections 4 and 5,
shall be recoverable by the supplier from the buyer by way of ‘a suit
or. other proceeding under any law for the time being in force. ~

7. No appeal against any decree, award or other order shall be

10 entertained by any court or other authority unless the appellant (not

being a supplier) has deposited with it seventy-five per cent, of the

amount in terms of the decree, award or, as the case may be, other

order in the manner directed by such court or, as the case may be, such
authority.

15. 8. Where any buyer is required to get his annual accounts audited
under any law for the time being in force, such buyer shall specify the
amount together with the interest in his annual statement of accounts
as remains unpaid to any supplier at he end of each accounting year.

of 1961. 9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961.
20 the amount of interest payable or paid by any buyer, under or in ac-
cordance with the provisions of this Act, shalt not, for the purposes of
computation of income under the Income-tax Act, 1961, be allowed as
deduction, ' 4

10, The provisions of this Act shall  have* effect notwithstanding
35 anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.

‘of 1992. 11, (1) The Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and
Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Ordinance, 1992 is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
3 under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

Liability
of buyer
to pay
compound
interest.

Recovery
ot
amount
due.

Appeal.

Require-
ment to
specify
unpaid
amount
with
interest
inthe
annual
statement
of
accounts.

Interest
not to

be
allowed

as
deduction
from
income.

Over-
riding
effect.

Repeal
and
saving.


STATEMENT UF OBJECTS AND REASONS

-A policy statement on small scale industries was made by the Gov-
ernment in Parliament. It was.stated at that time that suitable legisla-
tion would be brought to ensure prompt payment of money by buyers to
the small industrial units.

2. Inadequate working capital in a small scale or an ancillary indus-
twial undertaking causes serious and endemic problems affecting the
health of such undertaking. Industries in this sector have also been
demanding that adequate measures be taken in this regard. The Small
Scale Industries Board, which is an apex advisory body on policies rela-

_ ting to small scale industrial units with representatives from all the
States, governmental bodies and the industrial sector, also expressed this
view. It was, therefore, felt that prompt payments of money by buyers
should be statutorily ensured and mandatory provisions for payment of
interest on the outstanding money, in case of default, should be made.
The buyers, if required under law to pay interest, would refrain from
withholding payments to small scale and ancillary industrial under-
takings, {

3. An Ordinance, namely, the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small
Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Ordinance, 1992, was,
‘therefore, promulgated by the President on the 28rd September, 1992.

-, 4 The Bill. seeks to replace the said Ordinance and to achieve the
, aforesaid. objects. 4

New Dern; : P. J. KURIEN.
'The 2th November, 1992



LOK SABHA e

A
BILL

to provide for and regulate the payment of interest on delayed payments
10 small scale and ancillary industrial undertakings and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto,

Prof. P. J. Kurien, Minister of State in the Ministr; of Industry,
(Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries)