1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019. Short title .
Bill No. 171 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Insertion of
new article
47A.
No person
shall
Procreate
more than two
living
children.
2. After article 47 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"47A. The State shall promote small family norm by encouraging and motivating
married couples to procreate not more than two living children so as to control the
rising population of the country.".
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A recent United Nations report projects India to overtake China as the most populous
country by around the year 2027. The report projects the world population to rise to some
9.7 billion, by the year 2050. The countries expected to show the biggest increase population
are India, Nigeria and Pakistan. We are today the second most populous country in the world
despite the fact that we were among the first countries to have enacted a national population
control policy. There have been movements of forced and compulsive sterlization in the
country, creating massive public unrest and panic finally abandoning the entire movement.
India's population today stands at around 1.36 billion, which is about eighteen per cent. of
the world population with the land share of just two per cent. of the entire world.
The rate of growth of a country's population is directly proportional to its development.
It impacts exploitation of it's natural resources including clean air, water, land, woods etc.; it's
social and financial infrastructure; placing huge pressure on it's sustainability. In a relatively
young and developing economy like ours where human capital is its biggest asset, it is high
time that we put serious check on our ever inflating population. It is an irony to note that
despite of the need of an immediate population control a central law to population control
was never given due consideration. An effective law to control population, if enacted, would
solve many problems faced by our country including poverty, corruption, violence against
women and children and many other challenges.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to put an obligation on
the State to encourage and motivate married couples to opt for not more than two living
children to control the rising population of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE
June 26, 2019.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1426LS(S3)—15.07.2019.