THE HIGH COURTS (ALTERATION OF NAMES) BILL,  2016
A
BILL
to alter the names of the High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the High Courts (Alteration of Names) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appointed day’’ means the date appointed under sub-section ( 2) of
section 1 for the coming into force of this Act;
(b) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means, as respects a law relating to a matter
enumerated in List I—Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the
Central Government, and as respects any other law, the State Government;
Short title
and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 171 of  2016
5
10

2
(c) ‘‘law’’ includes any enactment, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation,
notification, scheme or other instrument having the force of law under the respective
jurisdictions of the High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
3. As from the appointed day, the High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras shall
be known as the High Courts of Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai, respectively.
4. (1) For the purposes of giving effect to the alteration of the names of  the High
Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras by section 3, the appropriate Government may,
before the expiration of one year from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations
and modifications of any law made before the appointed day, whether by way of repeal or
amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have
effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent Legislature or
other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the
appropriate Government under the said sub-section.
5. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made under
section 4 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law, may construe the law in such manner,
without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before
the court, tribunal or authority.
6. Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are pending to
which the High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras are parties, the High Courts of
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai shall respectively be deemed to have been substituted for the
High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras in those proceedings.
Alteration of
names of High
Courts of
Bombay,
Calcutta and
Madras.
Power to
adapt laws.
Power to
construe laws.
Legal
proceedings.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras were established in pursuance of
Letters Patent issued by the Queen in terms of the Indian High Courts Act, 1861 passed by
the British Parliament. The High Court of Judicature at Madras was established by Letters
Patent on 26th June, 1862, while the High Court of Judicature at Calcutta and High Court of
Judicature at Bombay were established by Letters Patent on 28th December, 1865. After the
Constitution of India came into force, these High Courts have continued to exist and exercise
their jurisdiction in terms of article 225 of the Constitution.
2. The High Courts were named after the cities in which they were located. Consequence
to the change in the names of these cities, there has been demands for change in the names
of High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras as High Courts of Mumbai, Kolkata and
Chennai respectively.   At present, there is no central law under which the proposal to change
the names of these High Courts can be addressed. The proposed legislation is to address
this requirement. It is appropriate and logical that the names of these High Courts are also
changed as per the request of the State Governments.
3. In view of the above, it has been decided to change the names of the High Courts of
Judicature at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras as the High Court of Judicature at Mumbai,
Kolkata and Chennai, respectively.
4. The High Courts (Alteration of Names) Bill, 2016 will bring uniformity between the
names of the cities and the names of the High Courts. It will also fulfil the aspiration of the
people of the concerned States.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
RAVI SHANKER PRASAD
N
EW DELHI;
The 15th July, 2016
3

GMGIPMRND—1539LS—15-07-2016.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to alter the names of the High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
————
(Shri Ravi Shanker Prasad, Minister of Law and Justice and
 Electronics and Information Technology)