Aඌ  ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 172  of  2022
THE GOVERNMENT SERVICES (REGULATION OF SERVICE 
RULES AT WORKPLACE IN APPOINTMENTS OF 
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES)  BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Kඎඇඐൺඋ Pඎඌඁඉൾඇൽඋൺ Sංඇ඀ඁ Cඁൺඇൽൾඅ,  M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for  special  measures  and  for regulation of service rules  at workplace  in 
appointments of persons with disabilities in Government services under 
the Central Government and for matters connected therewith.  
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—     
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government Services (Regulation of Service Rules at 
Workplace in Appointments of Persons with Disabilities)  Act, 2022.
  (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) It shall apply to Government Services under the control of Central Government.
Short title, commencement and application.

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
     ( a) ''Government'' means the Central Government;   
     ( b)  ''Government servant'' means a person with disability (either at the time of his 
appointment or has become so during the course of his employment) but does not include 
a person who was appointed on daily wage or casual or apprentice or on ad hoc basis or 
contract or re-employment basis;
     ( c) ''Government service'' means any service to any Ministry, organisation, 
undertaking, autonomous body or society or any establishment for which funds are provided 
by the Central Government or where majority of shares are held by the Central Government; 
    ( d) ''Persons with disabilities'' means a person with a long-term physical, mental, 
intellectual or sensory impairment that prevents full and effective participation in society in 
the face of obstacles equitably with other persons; and
       ( e) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
    3 . (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, rule, order, bye-laws, 
notification or judgment or order of any court for the time being in force,  the Central 
Government shall take special measures for the Government servant who is a person with 
disability either at the time of his appointment or has become so during the course of his 
Government service owing to some accident or otherwise. 
   ( 2) Without prejudice to anything contained in sub-section (1), the special measure 
shall include:—  
 ( a) that  the  Government  servant  is  posted  at  a  place conveniently located  
  from his usual place of residence;
    ( b) that the Government servant  is  posted  in  the office side  for  a  desk job  
  and not on field work:
          Provided  that  the   field   work   may   be   assigned  to  the  Government  
  servant only with his consent;
    ( c) that   there   shall    be    no    bar    in    his    appearing   for  departmental  
  promotion examinations to the Government servant;
    ( d) provision  of  posting  at  same  place  of  work even after promotion; and
    ( e) such other measures which the Government deems fit.
    4.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may be necessary for removing the difficulty:
       Provided  that  no  such  order  shall  be  made after the expiry of three years from  
the date of commencement of this Act.
   ( 2)  Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament.
    5 . (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
   ( 2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
Deﬁnitions.

expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 A large number of persons with disabilities are appointed in the central services in the 
country. Post 2014, constant measures are being taken by the Central Government for the 
welfare of the disabled persons with a lot of sensitivity; the positive results of which are 
also being noticed. However, in these services, there is still need for a closer observation 
of the practical problems being faced by persons with disabilities in their work and at 
workplace in the Central Government services. 
 In this sequence, first of all the persons with disabilities should be posted at or near 
their original place of residence and current permanent residence so that they do not have 
to face problems related to transportation and accommodation. Along with this, as far as 
possible instead of being given field work, the persons with disabilities should be given desk 
work at the office. Most importantly, in any situation disability should not be a hindrance 
to the promotion. At present, internal examinations are conducted by various departments 
for promotion in central government services; but it is often seen that especially persons 
with disabilities in group "C" are discouraged from appearing in these examinations for 
promotion to Group 'B', the main basis is  that officials are required to do 'Field Work,' 
whereas Group 'B' also has many positions at the workplace in which the persons with 
disabilities can be accommodated. The present Central Government is committed towards 
non-discrimination between the employees of general category and the  employees falling 
under the category of persons with disabilities. 
 Therefore, it is necessary to sort out the practical problems faced by persons with 
disabilities at the workplace with sensitivity. 
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;        KUNWAR  PUSHPENDRA  SINGH  CHANDEL      
4 July,  2022.

 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
                               

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide  for  special  measures  and  for regulation of service rules  at workplace  in 
appointments of persons with disabilities in Government services under 
the Central Government and for matters connected therewith.  
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)