THE ABOLITION OF BEGGING AND REHABILITATION OF
BEGGARS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI SHIVAJI ADHALRAO  PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and rehabilitation of beggars
and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Abolition of Begging and Rehabilitation of Beggars
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
Bill No. 172 of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) ‘‘beggar’’ means a person who indulges in begging.
(c) ‘‘begging’’ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( a) of
sub-section (4), section 363A of the Indian Penal Code.
(d) ‘‘Fund’’ means Beggars Welfare Fund established under section 6.
(e) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(f) "rescue home or social security institution" means a home established under
this Act where any person taken into custody on the ground of begging shall be kept
till the time he is rehabilitated.
3. Begging by any person, irrespective of age and gender, in any manner is hereby
abolished.
4. (1) Any person who forces another person of more than eighteen years of age, into
begging shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than seven years.
(2) Any person who forces a child of any gender, who is less than eighteen years of
age, into begging shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less then ten
years.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to sensitize the society
about the repercussions of the forced begging and the multiple evil that enjoin in such anti-
social activities threatening the peace and harmony of the society.
5. (1) Any person found begging shall be taken into custody by the Police and sent to
the nearest rescue home or social security institution, to be established in each District by
the appropriate Government, as the case may be, wherein such person shall be provided with
facilities for rehabilitation, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the sole responsibility of the in-charge of the rescue home or the social
security institution to ensure that the rescued beggar(s) brought by the Police, do not leave
the rescue home or the social security institutions without the proper approval or permission
of the authorities so empowered by the rules made under this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government  shall constitute a Fund to be called the Beggars
Welfare Fund for the welfare of beggars.
(2) The Fund shall be utilised by the Central Government  as and when required for
the welfare and rehabilitation of beggars.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate dedicated schemes for schooling
of the children so rescued from begging.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to ensure that the
rescued children are adequately rehabilitated by providing requisite education and
employment opportunities for their livelihood.
8. The Central Government shall lay a report before both Houses of Parliament every
year on the progress of the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect as the case may be: so, however, that any such modification or annulment, shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Abolition of
begging.
Punishment
for forced
begging and
sensitization
of public.
Custody and
rehabilitation
of persons
found begging.
Beggars'
Welfare Fund.
Formulation
of Schemes
for beggars.
Laying of
report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Powers to
make rules.
45
45 of 1860.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even after seventy-one years of Independence, begging continues to be a formidable
problem facing the country. Ever since, we embarked upon a welfare State, several social
security safeguards have been put in place to rehabilitate the beggars, many of  whom are
young children. However, increasing incidents of begging across the country demonstrate a
stark failure of the existing social security system, thus necessitating concerted remedial
measures. India's urban centres, especially the metro cities, have been facing this problem of
begging and the organised crime syndicates are using the beggars and children to promote
their sinister designs. In many cases, it has also been seen that the organs of children
begging at the signalled crossings on the roads are traded by illegal organ traders. Many
orphan children secure their livelihood by begging. This has contributed to India's burden of
illiterates and out of school children. At a time, when the country is being seen as an
important destination for foreign direct investment, international tourists inflow, etc., begging
at the signalled crossings on the roads portray a negative picture of the country's profile and
reputation as a democracy wedded to the ideals of promoting human rights and values
enshrined in the Constitution. In the 21st century India, begging is a scar which the country
can not afford to keep it at its own peril.
It is, therefore, imperative that legislation should be brought forward to abolish begging
and to provide for adequate rehabilitation of beggars through a robust mechanism of social
security institutions.
Hence, the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PA TIL
November  28, 2018.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of  “rescue homes” in each district by
the appropriate Government. Clause 6 provides for setting up of Beggars' Welfare Fund.
Clause 7 provides for formulation of schemes for schooling of children by appropriate
Government so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a
recurring expenditure of rupess five thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and rehabilitation of beggars
and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2124LS(S3)—11-12-2018.