1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2.  In article 15 of the Constitution, after clause ( 2), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(2A) No citizen shall, on ground of caste or sex, be denied access to any place
of religious worship opened for general public.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, the expression 'place of religious
worship' means a temple, mosque, gurudwara, church, monastery or any other place of
public religious worship of any religious denomination or any section thereof, by
whatever name called.".
Bill No. 173 of  2016
Short title.
Amendment
of article 15.5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There have been numerous cases where persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes are denied access to places of worship on the ground of the castes
they belong to. Recently, women have also been denied access to places of worship for
unconvincing reasons. Such practices are derogatory to human values. Therefore, it is
propose to make specific provisions in the Constitution that no citizen shall be denied
access to any place of worship opened to the general public on the ground of caste or
gender.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT RAJ
July 5, 2016

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general
public.
* * * *
3
Prohibition
of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1456LS(S3)—20.07.2016.