=
vd

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SaBtia

छा No. 173 ०2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By

‘Suri V Aiko, M.P.

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-First Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
5 2. For article 120 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—

“120, The business in Parliament shall be transacted in any of the languages
specified in the Eighth Schedule or in English.”.

3. For article 343 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
10 namely:—

343. (1) The official languages of the Union shall be the languages specified
in the Eighth Schedule.

°

Short title and
commencement.

Substitution of
new article for
article 120.

Languages in
which business
in Parliament to
be transacted.

Substitution of
new article for
article 343.

Official
languages of
the Union.


Amendment
of article 344,

Substitution
of new article
for article
351.

Directive for
development
of languages
specified in
Eighth
Schedule

2

(2) The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the
international form of Indian numerals.

(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (/), English language may be used for
official purposes wherever necessary to facilitate communication.”.

4. In article 344 of the Constitution, —

(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “language”, the word “languages” shall be

substituted; दर

(ii) in clause (1), the words “at the expiration of five years from the commencement of
this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such commencement”
shall be omitted;

(iii) in clause (2),

(a) in sub-clause (a), for the words “Hindi language”, the words “languages specified
in the Eighth Schedule” shall be substituted;

(b) in sub-clause (e), for the words “as regards the official language” the words “as
regards the official languages” shall be substituted:

(iv) in clause (3), for the words “belonging to the non-Hindi speaking areas” the
words “whose language is not specified in the Eighth Schedule” shall be substituted.

5. For article 351 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—

“351, It shall be the duty of the Union to promote all the languages specified in the
Eighth Schedule and to develop them so that they may bring out the best elements of the
composite culture of India and thus be a unifying force.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The amendment seeks|to provide equal status to all the Indian languages by
declaring them as the official languages of the Union of IndiaSince India is a cauldron of
cultures having plural society, people have a longing to express their feelings and thoughts
in their mother-tongues. As languages are rooted in their respective culture, both, the
culture and the language remain dovetailed and therefore, promotion and preservation of
the language is essential to promote and preserve the culture of each section of our society.
Such a step will rejuvenate the psyche of the people and create a sense of belonging,
particularly to the distraught youth of the country. The proposed amendments, in letter and
spirit, shall reinforce our unassailable faith in ‘unity in diversity’.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut;
8 November, 2000 VAIKO


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the business in Parliament shall be transacted in any
Of the languages specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. Clause 3 provides
that official languages of the Union shall be the languages specified in the Eighth
Schedule, Clause 5 provides that the Union shall promote and develop all the languages
Specified in the Eighth Schedule. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. Itis estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five
crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

PART—V
CHAPTER—II

120. Language to be used in Parliament. — (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVI,
but subject to the provisions of Article 348, business in Parliament shall be transacted in
Hindi or in English.

Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of
the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who
cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or English to Address the House in his
mothertongue.

(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after the
expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution,
have effect as if the words “or in English” were omitted therefrom.

PART—XVII
CHAPTER—I

343. Official Language of the Union:— (i) The official language of the Union shall be
Hindi in Devanagari script.

"The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the
international from of Indian numerals.

(i) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), 8 period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall continue to be used for all
the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before such
commencement:

Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order authorize the
use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language and of the Devanagari
form of numerals in addition to the international form of Indian numerals for any of the
official purposes of the Union.

(ii) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law provide for the
use, after the said period fifteen years, of —

(a) the English language, or
(0) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
* * * * *
344. (1) The President shall, at the expiration of five years from the commencement of
this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such commencement, by
order constitute a Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and such other members

representing the different languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the President may
appoint, and the order shall define the procedure to he followed by the Commission.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as
to—

(@) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official purposes of the
Union;

* * * * *

Commission
and
Committee of
Parliament or
official
Janguage.


6

(2) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President as regards the official
language of the Union and the language for communication between the Union and a State
or between one State and another and their use.

(3) In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission shalll have due
regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of Indja, and the just claims and
the interest of persons belonging to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to public
services,

* * * * *

PART—XVII
CHAPTER—IV

351. Directive for development of the Hindi language.— It shall be the duty of the
Union to promote the spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so that it may serve as a
medium of expression for all the elements of the composite culture of India and to secure its
enrichment by assimilating without interfering with its genius, the forms, style and
expressions used in Hindustani and in the other languages of India specified in the Eighth
Schedule, and by drawing, wherever necessary or desirable, for its vocabulary, primarily on
Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.


LOK SABHA

A
छाप
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Vaiko, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4626L S—21-11-2000.