5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 173 of 2024
THE VEGETABLE PRODUCTS (REMUNERATIVE  
SUPPORT PRICE AND INSURANCE) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for fixation of minimum remunerative support price and  
insurance of vegetable products and for  
matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Vegetable Products (Remunerative Support Price and 
Insurance) Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and 
extent.

 2 . In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
 ( a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
 ( b) “insurance” means insurance against loss or damage or destruction of vegetable 
product due to-
 ( i) any natural calamity such as flood, drought, storm, frost, cyclone, flash flood, 
hailstorm or any other calamity as may be specified by the Central Government, 
from time to time; and
 ( ii) loss or damage or destruction of vegetable produce due to poor quality of 
fertilizers, pesticides and seeds.
 ( c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central 
Government or State Government, as the case may be; and 
 ( d) “vegetable products” means vegetables used for human consumption and includes 
beetroot, bitter gourd, brinjal, cabbage, carrot, cauliflower, okra, onion, pulses, potato, 
radish, tomato, turnip and banana leaf. 
 3. The appropriate Government shall announce the minimum remunerative support 
price of vegetable products in such manner and at such intervals as may be prescribed: 
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different States and different seasons.
 4.  The appropriate Government, while announcing the Minimum Remunerative Support 
Prices of vegetable products, shall take into account all relevant factors which shall include:–
 ( a) expenditure on inputs like seeds, fertilizers and pesticides;
 ( b) average labour cost;
 ( c) rent expenses for land and tractor;
 ( d) interest payable to banks on loans taken for growing vegetables;
 ( e) electricity and water charges;
 ( f) expenditure on storage of vegetable produce; and
 ( g) expenditure incurred on transportation of vegetable products to the market.
 5. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a comprehensive insurance scheme 
for vegetable growers.
 ( 2) The expenditure incurred on payment of premium for insurance of vegetable 
products under sub-section (1) shall be fully borne by the Central Government.
 6.  (1) The appropriate Government shall assess the losses suffered by the vegetable 
growers on account of natural calamity or substandard quality of fertilizers, pesticides and 
seeds and send an ad hoc report to the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
 ( 2) On receipt of the report from the appropriate Government under sub-section (2), 
the Central Government shall direct the concerned insurance company to pay the 
insured amount to the vegetable growers within such time and in such manner as may 
be prescribed.
 7. The Central Government shall, provide after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provides requisite funds for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.
2
Definitions
Minimum 
Remunerative 
Support Price 
of vegetable 
products.
Relevant factors 
to be taken into 
account while 
announcing 
the Minimum 
Remunerative 
Support Prices 
of vegetable 
products.
Comprehensive 
insurance 
scheme for 
vegetable 
products.
10
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
Insurance 
of vegetable 
products.
Central 
Government to 
provide requisite 
funds.

 8.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both  Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
3
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules.
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Minimum Remunerative Support Prices are announced from time to time for many 
agricultural products, but there is no provision for fixation of Minimum Remunerative 
Support Price for vegetable products. In the absence of Minimum Remunerative Support 
Price, vegetable growers are harassed and cheated by middlemen and multinational retail 
companies. They are forced to sell their produce at throwaway prices, causing huge losses 
to them. Apart from this, the crop insurance scheme does not cover vegetable produce. 
Further, the crop insurance scheme provides for insurance only in case of severe natural 
calamities, however, substandard quality fertilizers, spurious pesticides and spurious seeds 
also cause crop damage, which is not currently covered under any crop insurance. For 
example, banana leaves, banana plants and unripe bananas are damaged and destroyed due 
to cyclones. About forty per cent of the vegetables are damaged by the time they reach the 
mandis and markets from the fields. Due to lack of proper management of cold storage 
and transportation, farmers have to throw their produce on the roads. Therefore, there is 
no coverage for such losses to farmers. So, there is a need to bring crops damaged due to 
spurious fertilizers, pesticides and poor quality of seeds under the ambit of insurance and 
broadening the definition of natural calamities.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                     BIDYUT BARAN MAHA TO  
November 7, 2024.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides for formulation of a comprehensive insurance scheme for 
vegetable produce. Clause 6 provides for payment of insurance amount to vegetable growers 
in case of natural calamity or loss due to poor quality of fertilizers, pesticides and seeds. 
Clause 7 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes 
of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore 
would be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be 
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding for 
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules may be 
made will relate details only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character.
6

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for fixation of minimum remunerative support price and  
insurance of vegetable products and for  
matters  connected therewith.
(Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato, M.P .) 