1
THE PROTECTION OF MEDICAL AND HEALTH SERVICE
PROFESSIONALS FROM ASSAULT, CRIMINAL FORCE
AND INTIMIDATION BILL, 2019
By
SHRI GAUTAM GAMBHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of Medical and health service professionals against assault,
use of criminal force and intimidation and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Medical and Health Service  Professionals
from Assault, Criminal Force and Intimidation Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 173 of 2019
Short title
and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "medical and health service institution" means an institution providing
medical and health services to people in the recognized system of medicine under the
control of the Central Government or a State Government or an undertaking of the
Central Government or a State Government or under local bodies and includes an
institution or clinical establishment or hospital, maternity home, medical laboratory,
nursing home and physiotherapy establishments owned by a private individual or
entity or trust, or society;
(b) "medical and health service professional" in relation to medical and health
service institution shall include:—
(i) registered medical practitioners;
(ii) qualified nurses;
(iii) qualified midwives;
(iv) medical students; and
(v) nursing students;
(c) "medical student" means a student undergoing graduate or post graduate
course in the recognized system of medicine from a recognized medical and health
service college or institution;
(d) "nursing student" means a student undergoing diploma or degree courses
in nursing midwifery from a recognized medical and health service college or institution;
(e) "recognized system of medicine" means the following system of medicine
namely:—
(i) modern scientific system of medicine (allopathic) within the meaning
of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956:
(ii) homoeopathic and biochemic system of medicine within the meaning
of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973;
(iii ) ayurvedic system, unani system and naturopathy system of
medicines; and
(iv) any other recognized system of treatment recognized as such under
any law for the time being in force;
(f) "recognized medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner qualified in
recognized system of medicine and is duly enrolled in the State Medical Register of
such system of medicine and includes provisional registered medical practitioner.
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act but not defined shall have the same
meaning as assigned to them in the respective laws enacted by Parliament of India in that
regard.
3. Any act of assault, criminal force and intimidation to a medical and health service
professional during or incidental to the discharge of his lawful duties pertinent to medical
and health care delivery within premises of any medical and service institution or in a mobile
clinic or in an ambulance shall be deemed to be an offence punishable under this Act.
4. Whoever voluntarily commits any act in contravention of the provisions of
section 3 shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall
not be less than one year but which may extend up to seven years and/or with fine which
may extend up to fifty thousand rupees.
5. Any offence committed under this Act shall be a non-bailable offence.
Definitions.
Prohibition of
assault,
criminal force
and
intimidation.
Punishment.
Offence to be
non-bailable.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. No court inferior to that of a Court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try
any offence under this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of  the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Cognizance of
offence.
Act not in
derogation to
any other law.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding.
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A Doctor is considered equivalent to god as provider of second life to the dying
person, but he is also a human being. Many times the relatives, attendants or friends of a
patient assault and/or use criminal force against medical and health service professionals
for delay in attending patient or other petty reasons intimidate medical and health service
professionals to face severe consequences, if they fail in curing the patient from illness.
Every day such incidents of assault, using criminal force or intimidation against medical
and health service professionals take place in many Government hospitals, private hospitals,
clinics and nursing homes, etc.
At present there is no legislation to curb the acts of assault, use of criminal force or
intimidation against medical and health service professionals in medical or service
institutions, etc.
In the wake of repetitive incidents of assault, criminal force or intimidation against
medical and health service professionals, it is the need of hour to enact a specific legislation
for protection of medical and other health care service persons from any form of assault,
criminal force or intimidation by any person and making such acts as a punishable offence,
so as to create a deterrence among offenders.
N
EW DELHI; GAUTAM GAMBHIR
June 19, 2019.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—947LS(S3)—15-07-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of medical and health service professionals against assault,
use of criminal force and intimidation and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gautam Gambhir,  M.P.)