Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 173  of  2022
THE  BHARATIYA  ROZGAR  SAMHITA, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Fൾඋඈඓൾ Vൺඋඎඇ Gൺඇൽඁං,  M.P.
A
BILL
to  outline  the  modalities  for  providing  employment  to  Indian  citizens  across  various 
departments of the Central Government and undertakings and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
CHAPTER I
Pඋൾඅංආංඇൺඋඒ
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Rozgaar Samhita, 2022.
    (2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, extent  and commencement.

  2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
 ( a) ''candidate'' or ''applicant'' shall mean any citizen of India above eighteen years 
of age;
(b) “department” means a department of the Central Government;
(c) “notification date” means the date on which the list of vacancies shall be 
declared in public and applications invited for filling the said vacancies;
(d)  ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “selection date” means the date on which the results of the particular examination 
shall be declared and the list of successful candidates is made public; and
(f) “zero date” means the date on which the said Bill is passed in the House of the 
People.
CHAPTER II
Iൽൾඇඍංൿංർൺඍංඈඇ ൺඇൽ Aඇඇඈඎඇർൾආൾඇඍ ඈൿ Vൺർൺඇർංൾඌ 
  3.  ( 1) Each Ministry under the Central Government shall request the various 
departments under it to prepare and submit the list of existing vacancies in their respective 
Departments along with their details, including but not limited to, the designation, salary, 
location and duration for which the said post has been vacant within three days from the 
zero date in such manner as may be prescribed. 
   ( 2)  Each department shall prepare the requested list under sub-section (1) within 
ten days from the day such request was made by the respective Ministry or within thirteen 
days of the zero date, whichever is earlier in such manner as may be prescribed.
   ( 3) The Ministry shall be permitted to add additional vacancies to the list prepared 
by the various departments and approve the same for making it public within five days from 
the preparation of such list or eighteen days from zero date, whichever is earlier.
   ( 4) The departments concerned shall advertise the approved list of existing 
vacancies under sub-section (2) and (3) within seven days of the approval of list or twenty 
five days from zero date whichever is earlier.
  4.  It shall be the responsibility of every department to make the information regarding 
vacancies public by,—
(i) uploading the list in the websites of the respective departments;
(ii)  publishing the list in one national newspaper and two vernacular newspapers;
(iii) informing interested candidates through Email and SMS for all jobseeker 
citizens registered in various employment exchanges; and
(iv) uploading the list in the verified social media accounts of each department or 
Ministry, as applicable.
  5.    If any department fails to publish the approved list of vacancies under section 3 
after forty-five days from the zero date, the Secretary of the respective department shall 
present the reasons for such delay in the House of the People or failing which, he may be 
liable for a joint-party enquiry. 
Deﬁnitions.

CHAPTER III
Sൾඅൾർඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Cൺඇൽංൽൺඍൾඌ
  6 .  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a body to be known as the Expert Committee for Model Examination Code 
to reform and standardize the existing process for conducting all recruitment related 
examinations in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Expert Committee shall consist of :—
     (i)    an IAS official from the Prime Minister Office;
(ii)   elected student representatives from Central and State universities and 
Institutes of National Importance; and
(iii) three eminent academicians and three eminent labour market economists 
with at least twenty years of experience in teaching academia  and practise to be 
appointed by members defined in clause (i) and (ii) in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
(3) The Expert Committee shall be assisted by an Audit Committee to be 
constituted by the Central Government.
(4) The Audit Committee shall examine the processes followed by various recruitment 
boards and Government departments for examinations, identify deficiencies or loopholes 
and suggest reform thereto.
(5) The Audit Committee shall be headed by a retired Judge of the Supreme 
Court and five other members, consisting of officials from Comptroller & Auditor 
General (CAG) of India, the Union Ministry of Education,  Finance and Labour and 
Employment to be appointed by the Central government in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(6) The Expert Committee shall,— 
(a) coordinate with the various Government Departments and Recruitment Boards;
(b) coordinate examination schedules across the country ensuring minimal overlap;
(c) review for one time (only for current financial year) revision of the Notification 
Date under section 7; and
(d) finalize roadmap for reducing contractual employment in Government ranks, 
including conversion of contractual employment in Government ranks to permanent 
Government employment.
  7.   (1) Each department shall ensure that applications from the deserving candidates 
are invited within a period of seven days from the date of publishing the approved list of 
existing vacancies, in such manner as may be prescribed.
   ( 2) The applications under sub-section (1) shall be invited in both online and 
offline modes, with prompt acknowledgement of receipt of application and one time error 
rectification, if any, within the stipulated period of seven days.
  8. (1) After receipt of applications under section 7, the departments shall issue admit 
cards to all candidates and conduct preliminary examinations within five days of receipt of 
applications.

   ( 2) Admit cards under sub-section (1) shall be issued via electronic means to 
candidates and followed by SMS intimation.
   ( 3) The department shall ensure that the centre for the examination is within one 
hundred kilometer  radius of the correspondence address or residence, as the case may be, 
of the applicant, unless requested otherwise by the applicant during application process:
         Provided that if the examination centre is more than or hundred kilometers away 
from the applicant’s correspondence address or residence, as the case may be, the respective 
department shall pay the applicant a lumpsum cost of rupees one thousand to cover any 
travel and lodging expenses via direct transfer to applicant's Bank Account within fifteen 
days from the issuance of admit cards, failing which a late penalty shall be levied at 
eight per cent. per annum.
   ( 4) No application fees shall be charged on the applicant and the application fees 
or any additional fees incidental thereto for conducting preliminary examinations shall be 
borne by the department.
   ( 5) The preliminary examinations shall within twenty-seven days from the 
Notification Date under sub-section (1) of section 7, be conducted online in examination 
centres equipped with provisions as contained in the Schedule.
   ( 6) The answer key and answer sheet of the preliminary examination  conducted 
under sub-section (5) shall be released within thirty two days from the Notification Date: 
     Provided that in case of any error in answer key, additional two days shall be 
provided for desired corrections in the answer key and case of any error in question(s), the 
marks for the incorrect question shall be awarded in full to all applicants.
   ( 7) The expenditure for rechecking of answer key, in case of any discrepancy, shall 
be borne by the department.
   ( 8) The results of the preliminary examinations conducted under sub-section (5) 
shall be declared within thirty five days from the Notification date in such manner as may 
be prescribed.
  9 .  ( 1) Within five days of the announcement of results for preliminary examinations 
under sub-section (8) of section 8, the admit card for the mains examination shall be issued 
by the respective department.
   ( 2) The mains examinations, including physical or typing test or any other associated 
skill set test as applicable, shall be conducted within fifteen days from the issuance of admit 
cards for mains examinations under sub-section (1).
   ( 3) All other provisions of including allotting centres, providing lumpsum amount 
to candidates for travel and lodging, conducting exams,  releasing  answer key and answer 
sheets as applicable to preliminary examinations under sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) 
of section 8 shall also be applicable for conducting mains examinations under this section.
   ( 4) After release of answer key, the medical examinations of applicants, if required, 
shall be completed within ten days of relevant answer key. 
   ( 5) Final results shall be announced within seventy-five days from the Notification 
Date and shall be termed as “Selection Date”.
   ( 6) In case any cancellation of examinations due to any foreseen or unforeseen 
events, compensatory attempts shall be provided to all applicants by relaxation of age 
norms, if any, in eligibility criteria.

CHAPTER IV
Fංඇൺඅ Rൾർඋඎංඍආൾඇඍ ඈൿ Sඎർർൾඌඌൿඎඅ Cൺඇൽංൽൺඍൾඌ
  10 .  (1) After announcement of final results on Selection Date under sub-section (5) of 
section 9, the respective department shall provide the successful candidates with their Letter 
of Joining, indicating designation, location, joining date, salary breakup and other general 
terms and conditions of employment in such manner as may be prescribed.
   ( 2) The joining date shall be maximum forty-five days from the Selection Date: 
Provided that in case of any delay in joining, the successful candidate shall 
be eligible for monetary compensation at fifty per cent. of the total gross salary of 
the post for which the candidate has been finally selected:
           Provided further that the candidate shall also be eligible for a thirty day extension 
in joining date on account of any exigencies and shall inform the concerned department in 
writing at least five days in advance to the joining date for any extension thereof in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V 
Gඋංൾඏൺඇർൾ Rൾൽඋൾඌඌൺඅ ൺඇൽ Pൾඇൺඅඍංൾඌ 
  11 .  (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to establish a Grievance 
Redressal Cell to address the grievances faced by the candidates during the entire 
process from Notification Date till Joining Date.
   ( 2) Each Recruitment Board under a department shall establish a separate Grievance 
Cell for any examination under their purview:
           Provided  that  in  case the Grievance Redressal Cell already exists, then the same  
 shall be deemed as the Grievance Redressal Cell established under this Act. 
   (3)  Each Grievance Redressal Cell shall be equipped with:—
 ( a) a 24x7 operational helpline number which shall be notified in public 
before the applications for the vacancies are invited;
(b) adequate manpower trained and capable to respond in official and 
scheduled languages of India to ensure that waiting time in having assistance 
from a representative is less than ten minutes; and
(c) adequate infrastructure such that call drop rate shall be less than 
five per cent.
   ( 4) The Grievance Redressal Cell in each department shall be headed by an officer 
of IAS Rank not below the rank of Additional Secretary of the respective department:
Provided that in case the Grievance Redressal Cell is newly constituted and in 
absence of any relevant Recruitment Board, the head of the Grievance Redressal Cell 
shall be selected by the Principal Secretary of the Prime Minister Office. 
  12 .  The Central Government shall set up fast track courts in each district to 
examine cases related to recruitment examinations. 
  13 . (1) In addition to penalties for any malpractices defined in the Indian Penal Code, 
1860, all such offences pertaining to malpractices, especially leaking of question papers, 
shall be considered as  non-bailable offences for the purpose of this Act.
   ( 2) If any person contravenes the provision of this Act, he shall be liable to a penalty 
of rupees five lakhs, failing which the person shall serve six months imprisonment and shall 
not be eligible for any Government job.

  14. (1) Each department shall, by notification constitute a fund to which the fines 
collected under sub-section (2) of section 13 shall be credited.
   ( 2) The Fund shall be utilised to pay compensation to the applicants under 
sections 8 and 9.
  15. If any difficulty arises in implementing the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government shall have power to issue such orders not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act by notification in the Official Gazette as are required to remove such difficulty:
     Provided that no such order shall be issued after three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.
  16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette, make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. 
   ( 2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a 
total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
  
   

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 8(5)]
 Facilities in Examination Center—
The examination centres for preliminary and main examination shall be equipped with 
the following facilities and/or be capable to discharge any services, incidental thereto:
(a) All online based examinations centres to have adequate number of computers and be 
conducted by the National Testing Agency (NTA). 
(b) The examination software for online examinations shall be audited by independent 
third-party auditors and certified by the National Testing Agency and the Expert Committee 
for Model Examination Code. 
(c) All examination centres to have,—
(i)  basic lighting and fans to ensure proper comfort for applicants; 
(ii)  cloak room for depositing bags, mobile phones and other electronic equipment;
(iii)  biometric attendance system for both invigilators and candidates;
(iv)  functional CCTV cameras to reduce chances of malpractices, including 
cheating; and  
(v)  Security to ensure no one apart from invigilator and candidates are present in 
the examination area.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The idea for the Bharatiya Rozgaar Samhita stems from a multitude of 
socio-economic realities pertaining to India’s demographic dividend, employment scenario 
and the role of various Government institutions in reshaping the same for better and 
sustainable outcomes.  
 The reality remains that millions are leaving the job market, despite record 
increase in youth population. India’s Labour Force Participation Rate (LFPR) fell to 
39.5 per cent. in March 22, which is lower even than the LFPR in second wave of COVID 
(June 21 at 39.6 per cent.), despite easing of lockdown and no restrictions on movement. In 
absolute terms, our total labour force now stands at 428 million people, lowest in 8 months 
(since June 21) with a shrinkage of 3.8 million people in March 22 itself. This means that 
millions are leaving the labour markets and have stopped even looking for employment, 
possibly too disappointed with their failure to get a job and under the belief that there 
were no jobs available. Within the job-market, non-agricultural jobs remain the worst 
hit. While labour force shrank by 3.8 million people, the employment fell by 1.4 million 
people. Of this net impact, the non-agricultural jobs fell by 16.7 million, comprising mainly 
of, Industrial jobs (fell by 7.6 million), manufacturing jobs (fell by 4.1 million) signs of 
manufacturing revival, construction jobs (fell by 2.9 million) which have stagnated at 64 
million jobs compared to 70 million jobs pre-lockdown. This reduction was cushioned 
by increase in the number of people under agriculture (increase of 15.3 million), possibly 
driven by seasonal employment due to rabi season.
 Within a falling LFPR and employment scenario, the Government also has scope 
for improvement. During the last year, the Central Government hiring in FY 21 stood 
at 87423 jobs – a drop of 27 per cent. over the past year when it provided 119000 jobs. 
The reduced employment generation is not a one-year trend but has been continuing 
for the past few years. Since 2017-18, Government employment is falling continuously, 
with Central share falling faster than States. The Central Government provided 11000 
jobs per month in 2017-18 but has steadily and consistently declined to now providing 
7300 jobs per month in FY 21 (drop of 34 per cent.). State Governments provided 45200 
jobs per month in 2017-18 but have reduced to providing 32400 jobs per month in FY 21 
(drop of 28 per cent.). Cumulatively, these signal a loss of 16000 jobs per month since 
2017-18. At these prevalent rates of giving employment, only 4 per cent. of people entering 
workforce every month (1 million) get Government employment. 
 Meanwhile, the demand for Government employment is strong and continues 
to rise. Our pace of provisioning employment has been slow, with an estimated 60 lakh 
vacancies in Government across various levels in July 2021. Whatever vacancies are 
being filled up, they are being done through contractual employment with Government 
departments reducing permanent positions, mainly to reduce costs and compliance. This 
also disincentivizes the employees from speaking against all possible ills within the system. 
While various ministries and departments are hiring contractual staff, there is no central 
record of the same. Secondly, where vacancies are being filled, they are notably skewed 
towards contractual jobs. In 2014, 43 per cent. of Government employees (i.e. 12.3 million) 

had non-permanent or contractual jobs, with 6.9 million working in key flagship welfare 
schemes (e.g. Anganwadi workers), while having low wages (in some cases, lower than the 
minimum wage) and little if any social security cover (as per Indian Staffing Federation 
Research 2014). By 2018, the percentage of Government employees in this category had 
risen to 59 per cent. (as per Indian Staffing Federation). For Central Public Sector Enterprises 
(CPSEs), the percentage of contractual (and non-permanent) employees has increased from 
19 per cent. to 37 per cent. (reaching 498807 in March 2020), with permanent employees 
dropping in share by 25 per cent. Consider select PSUs – ONGC had contractual employees 
(43397) from 81 per cent. of its staff in March 2020. Some States have sought to take this 
further - in 2020, while the pandemic led to mass unemployment, the State Government 
in Uttar Pradesh sought to amend recruitment for Group B and C employees (of which 
there were 9 lakh in 2020 in UP), with a push for increasing contractual employment (for a 
five year period), with such employees not offered allowances and typical benefits.
 Last year, the Central Government has witnessed a rise in its tax collections, with 
direct tax collections rising by 49 per cent. and indirect taxes by 30 per cent., leading 
to gross tax collections rising to 27 lakh crore, against an estimated tax collections of 
25.16 lakh crore. The Tax to GDP ratio for FY 22 at record high of 11.7 per cent., while 
tax buoyancy (index to measure the growth in tax revenues as compared to GDP growth) 
clocked at a healthy figure of 1.9. In April 22 itself, GST collections clocked 1.67 lakh 
crore – an increase of 0.25 lakh crore over March number of 1.42 lakh crore (uptick of 
18 per cent. in one month), with highest collections from Maharashtra (27000 cr.), 
Gujarat, Karnataka (11000 cr. each) and UP, Haryana (8000 cr. each). This indicates to 
a healthy tax collection scenario for last year and is expected to continue into the next 
financial years as well and should be capitalized to achieve dual objectives of providing 
employment to Indian youth and bolstering public services. 
 Hence this Bill.
        Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                      FEROZE  V ARUN  GANDHI      
4 July, 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute an Expert 
Committee for Model Examination Code. Clause 10 provides for payment of monetary 
compensation to selected candidates in case of delay in joining. Clause 11 provides for 
establishment of Grievance Redressal Cell. Clause 12 provides for the establishment of Fast 
Track Courts. Clause 14 provides for constitution of a fund for payment of compensation 
to applicants.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from  the  Consolidated  
Fund  of  India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure  of  about one lakh ten thousand 
crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be 
involved. 

 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
  Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
                               

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  outline  the  modalities  for  providing  employment  to  Indian  citizens  across  various 
departments of the Central Government and undertakings and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P .)