1
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI POONAM MAHAJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force as on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After section 38 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"38A. (1) In case of any person being acquitted by the Special Court, the Court
shall set forth detailed reasoning as to the following: —
(a) whether the accused has been acquitted because of the reason of
innocence or because of the prosecution having failed to meet the burden of
proof to prove the guilt; or
Bill No. 173 of  2017
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
38A.
5
10
32 of 2012.
Acquittal by
Special Court.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
5
10
(b) in case of the prosecution having failed to meet the burden of proof to
prove the guilt, the Court shall identify and name all the persons responsible for
such lapses including the public prosecutor or the police officers involved, if
any.
(2) In case the accused is acquitted by reason of the prosecution having failed to meet
the burden of proof and such accused person is also related to the child, it is clarified that
such acquittal shall not automatically entitle the accused to—
(i) claim custody or visitation rights to such child; or
(ii) have any kind of access to the child, except through an order of a family
court, which shall hold an independent inquiry to determine the guilt of the accused
through preponderance of probabilities.".

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Union Ministry of Women and Child Development in its study on child abuse
conducted in 2007 stated that out of fifty three per cent. of children reporting child sex abuse,
fifty per cent. had suffered intra-familial abuse.
India is obligated to evolve adequate measures to protect child sex abuse victims from
their offending parents which aligns with the right against discrimination and the right to
health and dignity contained in articles 15 and 21 of the Constitution, respectively. Coupled
with society's denial of incest, an offending father despite the said prohibition accompanying
bail, can influence the child through lawfully awarded interim visitation rights thereby stalling
prosecution efforts against him. No explicit legislative prohibition exists against the granting
of custody or visitation rights to fathers committing a sexual offence pending conviction in
a criminal trial. Experts caution against the granting of monitored visitation to offending
parents because their very presence may trigger in the child traumatic memories of abuse,
feelings of being unsupported and lead to recanting of allegations against the offender
thereby resulting in compromising criminal trial against the parent.
The rationale behind Government preparing guidelines from custodial and visitation
claims by offending fathers is aimed at ensuring that the child should not be forced to meet
him. The child's relationship with mother should be strengthened by recognising her as the
sole guardian. Unless absolutely necessary, the court should not issue orders repeatedly for
mediation, custody or visitation in the families involved. Moreover, orders granting visiting
rights to an offending father should be issued only after consultations with mental health
experts clearly find such visitation to be in the child's best interests. Finally, acquittal in a
criminal trial should not automatically absolve the father of liability. Either the family court or
the special court should initiate an independent inquiry using the standard of preponderance
of probabilities to be certain of innocence.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; POONAM MAHAJAN
July 25, 2017.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
————
(Shrimati Poonam Mahajan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2091LS(S3)—13-10-2017.