1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PROHIBITION OF DEFECATION IN OPEN PLACES
BILL,  2019
By
SHRI NARANBHAI KACHHADIYA,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of defecation and urinating in open places in order to keep
open places clean and disease free.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Defecation in Open Places Act, 2019.
(2)  It extends to the  Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 174 of  2019
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "local authority" includes a municipal committee, corporation and council,
by whatever name called, district board, cantonment board or any authority for the
time being authorised by or under any law with the control and administration of any
matter within a specified local area; and
(b) "defecation in open places" refer to the practice whereby people go out for
defecation or urinating in fields, bushes, forests, open bodies of water or other open
places instead of using toilets.
3. Notwithstanding anything containing in any other law for the time being in force,
defecation in open places, in case of urinating in open, is hereby prohibited.
4. (1) Whoever violates the provisions of section 3 shall be liable to pay a fine of not
less than five hundred rupees and, in case of defecation in open, a fine of not less than one
thousand rupees.
(2) Notwithstanding the punishment provided in sub-section ( 1), a person violating
the provisions of section 3 shall also be liable to perform for one day such community
service, as may be decided by the local authority.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Prohibition of
defecation in
open places.
Penalty.
Definitions.
Overriding
effects of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, defecation in open places is a well-established traditional practice deeply in-
grained from early childhoold. Sanitation is not a socially acceptable topic, and as a result,
people do not discuss it. Consequently, open defecation has persisted as a norm for many
Indians. In addition to tradition and the communication taboo, the practice still exists due to
poverty; many of the poorest people will not prioritise use of toilets and besides, many are
living in rented homes without toilets.
A significant gap also exists between knowledge and practice. Even when people are
aware of the health risks related to poor sanitation (Specifically of not using a toilet and
practicing good hygiene), they continue with unhealthy practices.
The practice of defecation in open areas is rampant in India and the country is home to the
world's largest population of people who defecate in the open and excrete close to 65,000
tonnes of faeces into the environment each day. Around 524 million people, which is nearly
half the population of India, defecate in the open. India accounts for 90 per cent of the people
in south Asia and 59 per cent of the 1.1 billion people in the world who practice defecation in
open areas.
Defecation in open areas poses a serious threat to the health of children in India and is the
main reason of highest number of diarrhoeal deaths among children under five in our
country. Every year, diarrhoea kills 1,17,285 children under five years in India. Children
weakened by frequent diarrhoea episodes are more vulnerable to malnutrition, stunting and
opportunistic infections such as pneumonia. About 38 per cent of children in India suffer
from some degree of malnutrition. Diarrhoea and worm infection are two major health condi-
tions that affect school-age children impacting their learning abilities. Defecation in open
areas also puts at risk the dignity of women in India. Women feel constrained to relieve
themselves only under the cover of darkness for reasons of privacy to protect their dignity.
Defecation in open areas exposes women to the danger of physical attacks and encoun-
ters such as snake bites. Poor sanitation also cripples national development i.e. workers
produce less, live shorter lives, save and invest less and are less able to send their childen to
school.
Keeping in mind, the Swachh Bharat Mission, it is pivotal that we bring change in our
daily lives and manners to make sure that the country could progress in the right direction.
It is therefore, proposed to prohibit defection and urinating in open places and making its
violation an offence.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NARANBHAI KACHHADIYA
June 20, 2019.
3

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of defecation and urinating in open places in order to keep
open places clean and disease free.
————
(Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1287LS(S3)—16.07.2019.