As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

ay 200)

Bill No. 174 of 2000

THE STATES REORGANISATION COMMISSION BILL, 2000
By
Suri Susope Mourte, M.P.

A
BILL
[0 provide for the constitution of a States Reorganisation Commission for

recommending reorganisation of the States of the country."

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first. Year of the Republic of India as
|

1. (J) This Act may be called the States Reorganisation Commission Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Commission” means the States Reorganisation Commission constituted
under section 3;

(b) “State” includes Union territory; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (1) The President of India shall constitute a States Reorganisation Commission
consisting of a Chairperson and four other members to consider and prepare a report
on the reorganisation of the States of Country.

Short title
and
‘commencement.

Constitution
of State

Reorganisation
Commission.


2
* (2) The conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members of the Commission
shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Commission such officers
and staff, as may be deemed fit, to assist it in the discharge of its functions.

Répont:‘uf 4. (1) The Commission shall, within a period of six months from the date of its
the constitution, submit its report to the President of India, who shall cause the same to be laid
Commission. before each House of Parliament.

(2) The Commission's recommendations will be based on the following:—

(i) the area and population of a State;

(ii) the availability of infrastructure fai ies like power, roads, and
communication state of agriculture, industries available in different areas of the
State and state of education;

(iii) the resources available in the State;
(iv) the general index of growth of the State;

(०) the total revenue collection in different areas of the State.

Central 5. The Central Government shall, with such modification and alteration in the report
Government of the Commission, as it may deem fit, implement the recommendations made in the
‘eptemene TSPOrtof the Commission, within such time as may be recommended by the Commission.

the report of
Commission.

Power to 6. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
make rules. for carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A commission comprising three members was co stituted six years after
independence for the reorganisation of States of India. The division of States was made on
linguistic basis in the light of the recommendations of the said Commission. Since then
vast changes have taken place in all sphere of activities and development in the country.
There have been demands from various parts of the country for creation of separate States.
These demands are culmination of the experience undergone by the people since the
@reation of the States on linguistic basis. Such demands for creation of new States should be
given due consideration before the situation becomes explosive. It is, therefore, necessary
that a Commission is constituted to report on the reorganisation of the States. The
Commission should take into consideration all relevant facts before making its
recommendations regarding creation of new States.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; SUBODH MOHITE
November 6, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the President of India shall constitute a States
Reorganisation Commission consisting of a Chairperson and four other members to consider
and report on the reorganisation of the States of the country. It further provides that the
Central Government shall make available such officers and staff, as may be prescribed, to
assist it in the discharge of its functions. Since the salaries and allowances to be paid to the
members of the Commission and to the officers and staff appointed to assist the Commission
in the discharge of its functions are to be prescribed by the rules made under the Act, it is
not possible to give an exact amount of expenditure that will be incurred in case the
provisions of the Bill are brought into force.

However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty lakh
is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Pund of India.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

10 provide for the constitution of a States Reorganisation Commission for
recommending reorganisation of the States of the country.

+ (Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4661LS—23-11-2000. ‘