5

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

198 su, 20

Bill No. 101 of 2000

THE DESTITUTE WOMEN WOLTARE BILL, 2000
. By
Suri RAMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide For the welfare of destitute women and for matters connected therewith.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Destitute Women Welfare Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “destitute woman” means any
female citizen of India who is a widow or a divorcee and who has no independent source
of livelihood or who has nobody to support her.

3. The Central Government shall establish, in every district of the country, an
Authority to be known as the “Destitute Women Welfare Authority.”

4, It shall be the duty of every Authority,—
(i to register all destitute women residing in its respective jurisdiction;

Short title and
extent.

Definition.

Establishment
of Destitute
Women
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.


2

(४) to work out plans and formulate schemes for the welfare of destitute

women.
Facilities to 5. The Central Government shall provide to every destitute woman, who is
aig registered under section 4, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) gainful employment;
(0) free education including higher education;
(c) free medical aid; and
(d) such other ‘acilities, as may be necessary, for her proper development,
welfare and maintenance:
Provided that if a destitute woman gets re-married, all the facilities provided under
this Act, shall be withdrawn.
Power to make 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
rules.

for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

after fifty-one years of independence, a large number of widows and divorced
are still deprived of Government aid or facility. Most of them are unemployed and
ot get nutritious food and suffer from various ailments and dic prematurely. It is the
responsibility of the Government to ensure that they should be given all
ities and facilities so that they could live in an healthy atmosphere and they
also be protected from all kinds of exploitation.

"It is, therefore, necessary that a legislation for the welfare and protection of these
1012 women be enacted immediately.

Hence this Bill,
DELAT, RAMDAS ATHAWALE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of “Destitute Women Welf
Authority” in every district by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides that ¢
Destitute Women Welfare Authority shall work out plans and formulate schemes for
welfare of the destitute women and shall also register all the destitute women resi
its respective jurisdiction. Clause 5 provides for providing of gainful emplo
education including higher education, etc. to all destitute women by the
Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Con

Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
lakhs per annum.

Itis also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees four ]


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will Telate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL 7
to picyide for the welfare of destitute women and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—1414LS—23-08-2000,