1
THE  RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES COMMISSION BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Commission to exploit renewable energy resources in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
        BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Renewable Energy Resources Commission  Act,
2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
Short title, extent
and
commencement.
Bill No. 174 of  2017
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) “Commission” means the Renewable Energy Resources Commission set up
under section 3;
(iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(iv) “renewable energy” means energy obtained from non-conventional sources
such as sunlight, wind, ethanol, jatropha, urban waste, geothermal sources, tides,
waves or any other such source.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
Commission to be known as the Renewable Energy Resources Commission for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having such
qualification as may be prescribed;
(ii) one representative each from every State/Union territory to be
nominated by the State Government/Union territory Administration concerned;
and
(iii) one representative each from the NITI Ayog, Union Ministries of Power,
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Rural Development,
Urban Development, Finance and Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(3) The Secretary, Union Ministry of New and Renewable Energy shall be ex-officio
Secretary to the Commission.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
the service of the Chairperson and members of the Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
4. (1) Every State Government/Union territory Administration shall, by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute a Renewable Energy Resources Commission for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State/Union territory Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and such
number of other members as the State Government/Union territory Administration may
deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. Every State/Union territory Commission shall, as soon as possible, but not later
than one year from the date of commencement of this Act, identify the exploitable sources
of renewable energy in their respective jurisdictions and send a report thereon to the
Commission.
6. ( 1) The Commission shall, on receipt of report from the State/Union
territory Commission, depute a team of experts to the State/Union territory to
verify and assess the possibility of exploiting renewable energy resources.
(2) The team of experts shall submit a report to the Commission at the earliest in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall, on the basis of the report submitted by the team of
experts, work out the estimated expenditure on the projects relating to exploitation of
renewable energy and sent a report thereon to the Central Government.
7. The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute
towards the expenditure incurred on the projects relating to exploitation of
renewable energy in such ratio as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government shall contribute not less than fifty
per cent. of the total expenditure.
Renewable
Energy
Resources
Commission.
Every State
Government/
Union territory
Administration
to constitute
Renewable
Energy
Resources
Commission.
State
Government to
send detailed
report to the
Commissioner.
Commission to
depute a team
of experts to
the State/Union
territory.
Central
Government
and State
Government to
contribute
towards the
expenditure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. (1) The projects relating to exploitation of renewable energy shall be completed in
a time bound manner.
(2) The Central Government shall release funds for the implementation of projects
relating to exploitation of renewable energy after making such enquiry about the progress
of projects, as it may deem fit.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Projects to be
completed in a
time bound
manner.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
India has vast reserves of natural resources—both renewable and non-renewable. In
the last few decades, the over dependence on fossil fuels for meeting our energy needs
have resulted in many ecological and climatological issues including globle warming. All
over the world there is a shift towards greater use of renewable energy sources as they are
not only available in abundance but also considered to be non-polluting in comparison to
fossil fuels. All over world, more than twenty per cent. of energy requirements are being
met through renewable energy sources. In our country, the dependence on fossil fuels is
not at all good for our economy as we have to import more than fifty per cent. of our
petroleum requirements. In the coming years, with the acceleration of industrialization
and rising demand of energy from our people, demand for power is going to increase
manifold and the situation may worsen if immediate steps are not taken to promote
exploitation of renewable energy resources. It is proposed to constitute a Renewable Energy
Resources Commission with a view to give fillup to the exploitation of renewable energy
resources.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
July 10, 2017.
4
S 3 \F\BILL 2017\LS\2198LS(E)

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause  3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Renewable Energy Resources
Commission. Clause 4 provides that similar Commissions shall be constituted in every State
and the Union territory. Clause 6 provides that the Commission shall send a team of experts
to the States and the Union territories with a view to verify the report sent by them and
assess the possibility of exploitation of renewable energy resources. While the expenditure
relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States, the
expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall contribute to the expenditure
incurred on the projects relating to exploitation of renewable energy in such ratio as may be
prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten
thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
S 3 \F\BILL 2017\LS\2198LS(E)
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
S 3 \F\BILL 2017\LS\2198LS(E)

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Commission to exploit renewable energy resources in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2198LS(S3)—13-10-2017.