1
Bill No. 174 of  2016
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-s eventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2
2. In article 324 of the Constitution,—
     (a) for clause (2), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner
and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the president, may, in
consultation with the Committee of Appointments, from time to time, fix.
(2A) The appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election
Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by
Parliament, be made by the President on the recommendations of the Committee of
Appointments.
(2B) There shall be a Committee of Appointments consisting of—
(i) the Prime Minister— Chairperson;
(ii) The Speaker of the House of the People— Member;
(iii) the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States— Member;
(iv) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People—Member;
(v) the Chief Election Commissioner of India— Member; and
(vi) one retired judge of Supreme Court of India to be
nominated by the Chief Justice of India— Member.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “the Leader of the Opposition
in the House of the People” or “the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States”
shall, when no such leader has been so recognized, include the Leader of the single
largest group in Opposition of the Government in the House of the People or the
Council of States, as the case may be.
(2C) The Committee of Appointments shall recommend to the President the
name of person for appointment as the Chief Election Commissioner, the Election
Commissioner or the Regional Commissioner."; and
(b) in clause (4), for the words, "after consultation with Election Commission", the
words "on the recommendation of the Committee of Appointments" shall be substituted.
Amendment of
article 324.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND   REASONS
The success of Indian democracy is considered to be its ability to conduct elections in
a free and fair manner in a country which is divided on linguistic, racial and religious basis. It
was with this idea that Election Commission of India was formed as an autonomous body to
look over the violation in Representation of People Act, 1950 and to conduct free and fair
elections.
Participating in the Constitutional Assembly Debates, Dr. Ambedkar, the Chairman of
the Drafting Committee, on Election Commission said: It has been brought to the notice of
both the drafting committee as well as Central Government that in these provinces the
executive Government is instructing or managing things in such a manner that those
people who do not belong to them either racially, culturally or linguistically, are being
excluded from being brought on the electoral rolls. The House will realize that franchise is
a most fundamental thing in a democracy. No person who is entitled to be brought into the
electoral rolls on grounds which we have already mentioned in our Constitution, namely,
an adult of 21 years of age should be excluded merely as a result of the prejudice of a Local
Government, or whim of an officer. That would cut at the very root of democratic
Government.
The appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners through
an autonomous body which includes representatives from Judiciary, Executive, Politics and
Election body itself will provide for an impartial appointment of the Commissioners without
due interference from the sitting Government.
The reported weightage given to various high profile politicians or politicians in power
as compared to the political parties in oppostions and other politicians, in the matter of
appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, is one of
the  issues raised by political parties and reflects upon the politicisation of Election Body.
As elections are supposed to be completely impartial in nature, the very guardians of
this impartiality i.e. Election Commission of India should also be chosen on the principle of
independence from political influence.
Thus a body which will have representation from across the aisle and various pillars of
democracy will allow for independent appointments and thus raising the stature of the
Election Commission of India itself.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE V ARUN GANDHI
July 5, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for appointment of a retired judge of the Supreme Court as
Member of the Committee of Appointments. It will involve nominal expenditure on account
of Payment of TA/DA and other remuneration to the retired judge as and when the meetings
of the Committee of Appointments all held. Since it is not possible to estimate the TA/DA and
remuneration which shall be paid when the meetings are held, it is, therefore, at this stage,
not possible to estimate the exact amount which will be involved from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
No other expenditure will be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
PART XV
ELECTIONS
324. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner and
such number of other Election Commissioners. If any, as the President may from time to time
fix and the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners
shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, be made by the
President.
(3) * * * * *
(4) Before each general election to the House of the People and to the Legislative
Assembly of each State, and before the first general election and thereafter before each
biennial election to the Legislative Council of each State having such Council, the President
may also appoint after consultation with the Election Commission such Regional
Commissioners as he may consider necessary to assist the election Commission in the
performance of the functions conferred on the Commission by clause (1).
* * * * *
5
Superin-
tendence,
direction and
control of
elections to
be vested in
an Election
Commission.

GMGIPMRND—1572LS(S3)—20-07-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P.)