Short title and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
 Bill No. 174 of 2022
THE ANTI-DROUGHT MEASURE AND MITIGA TION BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Aඇඎඋൺ඀ Sඁൺඋආൺ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Drought Suggestion Committee to suggest  measures 
and take appropriate action in mitigation against drought and  for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anti-Drought Measure and Mitigation Act, 2022.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

 2.  In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,– 
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State or a Union territory 
having legislature, the concerned State Government or the Union territory 
Administration, as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Committee’’ means the Drought Suggestion Committee constituted under 
section 4;
(c) “drought” means a deficiency of precipitation over an extended period of time 
(usually a season or more), resulting in a water shortage in a  particular area; 
(d) “Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI)’’ refers to the regional drought index 
used for monitoring drought events and study aerial extent and severity of drought in 
an area; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall map the area of land under their 
jurisdiction based on Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) into three categories, 
namely;
(a)  Green Area having -2 and less to -1.99 index;
(b)  Yellow Area 0 to 0.99 index; and
(c)  Red Area 1 to 2.0 + index.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Committee to be known as the Drought Suggestion Committee for the 
yellow and red areas in such a manner as may be prescribed;
(2) The Committee shall consist of–
(a) a Chairperson who has been the judge of the High Court of the State concerned;
(b) the first class Magistrate of the area concerned; and
(c) the Superintendent of Police of the area concerned.
(3) The Committee shall encourage the following measures in Yellow Areas and Red 
Areas including:–
(a) water harvesting, protecting water sources against contamination, devel-
oping water sources such as micro dams, ponds and wells, use of reserve sources of 
groundwater and water rationing and allocation;
(b) restoring pastures and balancing land and water resources;
(c) recovering the water holding capacity of soils through tree planting (including 
fruit trees) and the protection of riverbanks and wetlands;
Deﬁnitions.
Mapping of 
Drought.
Conﬆitution of 
Drought 
Suggeﬆion  
Committee.

(d) implementing Integrated Water Resources Management,  including miti-
gating upstream-downstream user conflicts and coordinating between water users, 
communities and sectors;
(e) shifting to drought-tolerant crops;
(f) managing livestock production within the landscape, including the relocation of 
herds, nomadic migrations and use of special reserved areas; and
(g) such other measures as it deems fit for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
5.  The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1)  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government, may by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2)  Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid 
before each House of Parliament.
7. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds.
Power to 
remove 
diﬃculties.
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The economy of India is an agrarian economy and a larger population is dependent 
on agriculture. Inspite of having rivers as sources of water, many regions in the country is 
still having a serious water deficit. The common problem of agriculture in the nation is that 
it has been suffering from inadequate and untimely rainfall which has adversely affected 
agricultural production, the only source of livelihood for many.
The need is also to protect water sources from damage caused by wildfire; improve 
ecosystem health, resilience, and other watershed and habitat conditions; improve, maintain, 
or restore water yield or quality; adapt the forest landscape to an increased threat of drought.
This Bill seeks to provide for the Constitution of a Drought Suggestion Committee 
which shall suggest measures to take appropriate action in mitigation against drought.
Hence this Bill.  
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                        ANURAG SHARMA
1 July, 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provide for mapping of land under its jurisdiction into Green Area, 
Yellow Area and Red Area on the basis of Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI). Clause 4 
provides for the Constitution of Drought Suggestion Committee. Clause 5 provides that the 
Central Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve as such no expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is estimated that recurring expenditure of about 
rupees fifty crore would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Drought Suggestion Committee to suggest  
measures and take appropriate action in mitigation against drought and  
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
_______ 
(Shri Anurag Sharma,  M.P .) 