Short title and
commencement.
THE COMPULSORY PRE-MARRIAGE MEDICAL
INVESTIGATION  BILL, 2016
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to make medical investigation of intending couples compulsory before marriage
so as to diagnose, manage and monitor diseases in individuals and to prevent
further spreading of diseases in children born to such couples.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Pre-marriage Medical Investigation Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 175  of 2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "medical investigation" means a medical procedure or test performed to
detect, diagnose or monitor diseases, disease processes or susceptibility to diseases
and to determine a course of treatment; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Every male and female shall, before marriage, undergo such medical investigations,
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the medical
investigations referred to in sub-section (1), shall include—
(a) test for HIV and other STDs;
(b) test for blood group to rule out incompatibility of blood group or  rhesus
isoimmunization;
(c) test for sickle cell genes; and
(d) test of fertility.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Medical Council of India,
within six months of the coming into force of this Act, formulate medical investigation policy
prescribing norms to be followed.
(2) The Central Government shall issue guidelines and directions to the State
Governments with regard to medical investigation of intending couples before their marriage.
5. For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate Government shall—
(a) provide free medical investigation facilities to individuals once in every six months
in State run hospitals; and
(b) ensure that medical investigation facilities are also provided to individuals in
private hospitals at such concessional rates as may be prescribed.
6. (1) Every person shall maintain his health data report in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of every person to disclose, before marriage, his health data
report, to the other party to the marriage.
7.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
8.  Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term  which may extend upto six months and with fine which may extend upto rupees ten
thousand.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
Definitions.
Formulation
of medical
investigation
policy.
2
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Penalty.
Medical
investigations
of male and
female.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free medical
investigation
facilities.
Maintenance
of health data
report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, diabetic population of India is estimated to be around 62 million. Besides,
India has 2.1 million people living with HIV. Also, there are about 2 million registered cancer
patients in India with majority of population unregistered or unaware. Blood pressure related
issues are also on the rise. A large number of cases are either not detected or remain under-
diagnosed. Moreover, deaths due to various illnesses are not registered thus making the
situation more alarming.
Some of these diseases are transmitted through sexual contact. It is, therefore, the
need of the hour to make medical investigation of every individual mandatory before marriage
so that these fatal diseases are not further transmitted or passed on to the coming generations.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
July 4, 2016

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall provide free medical
investigation facilities to individuals once in every six months in State run hospitals.
Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds to the State
Government for carrying out the purposes of  this Act. The expenditure relating to States
shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the States concerned. However, the
expenditure relating to Union territories shall be borne out for the Consolidated Fund of
India. The Bill, therefore, enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred
crore would be involved from the Consolidated fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the  rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to make medical investigation of intending couples compulsory before marriage
so as to diagnose, manage and monitor diseases in individuals, prevent
further spreading of diseases in children born to such couples.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1432LS(S3)—22.07.2016.