1
THE ABOLITION OF BEGGING BILL, 2014
By
SHRI C.R. PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Abolition of Begging  Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “begging” shall have the same meaning as is assigned to it in clause ( a) of
sub-section (4) of section 363A of the Indian Penal Code 1860; and
Bill No.  175  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
45 of 1860.
5

2
(ii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Begging by any person in any manner is hereby abolished.
4. Any person who forces another person into begging shall be punished with
imprisonment which shall not be less than five years.
5. (1) Any person found begging shall be taken into custody by the police and sent to
the nearest rescue home, to be established in each District and by the Union Government or
the State Government, as the case may be, wherein such person shall be provided with
facilities for rehabilitation.
(2) The expenditure in respect of eastablishing rescue homes under section (1), shall
be borne by the Central Government and the State Governments in such ratio as may be
prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
7. The Central Government shall lay a report in both Houses of Parliament every year
on the progress of the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
Punishment
for forcing
others into
begging.
Power to
make rules.
Abolition of
begging.
Establishment
of rescue
homes for
rehabilitation
of beggars.
Report to be
laid in
Parliament.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In spite of various measures taken by the Government and various social organisations
to help the downtrodden and handicapped, begging has not stopped in the country. The
number of beggars has been increasing in big cities everyday. Sometimes, young boys and
girls are forced by their parents to take to begging. Even after sixty-seven years of
independence, the problem of begging is increasing day by day. It has, therefore, become
necessary that legislation should be brought forward to abolish begging and to provide for
rehabilitation of beggars.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; C.R. PA TIL
November 12, 2014.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of rescue homes in each district by the
Union Government or the State Government, as the case may be, wherein beggars will be
provided with facilities for their rehabilitation. Moreover, the expenditure in respect of
establishing rescue homes shall be borne by the Central Government and the State
Governments in such ratio as may be prescribed. The Central Government would have to
incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for establishment of rescue homes in
respect of Union territories. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred
crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3175LS(S-3)—04.12.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri C.R. Patil, M.P.)