1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF DISASTER MANAGEMENT
EDUCATION IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI NARANBHAI KACHHADIYA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of disaster management education in all
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Disaster Management
Education in Educational Institutions Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Advisory Council” means the Advisory Council for Disaster Management
Education constituted under section 6;
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No. 175 of  2019
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “disaster” means any occurrence that cause damage, ecological disruption,
loss of human life deterioration of health and health services on a scale sufficient to
warrant an extraordinary response from outside the affected community or area;
(d) “Disaster Management” means discipline dealing with and avoiding risks
that involves preparing for disaster before it occurs, disaster response including
emergency evacuation, quarantine and mass decontamination as well as supporting
and rebuilding society after occurrence of natural or human-made disasters;
(e) “educational institution” means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a
senior secondary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name
such institution is called but does not include a minority educational institution; and
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the disaster management shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all
educational institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central
Government on the recommendation of the Advisory Council.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of disaster management in all
educational institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such matters as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching disaster management in educational institutions.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
the Compulsory Teaching of Disaster Management in Educational Institutions Act, 2019,
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Disaster
Management Education.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of Disaster Management, as the Central
Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of disaster management
education for each class upto senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the
disaster management shall be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching disaster management;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in disaster management for the purpose of
their appointment in educational institutions;
(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
Compulsory
teaching of
Disaster
Management
in educational
institutions.
Functions of
Advisory
Council for
Disaster
Management
Education.
Appointment
of Disaster
Management
Teachers.
Constitution
of Advisory
Council for
Disaster
Management.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
Disaster
Management
in educational
institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize educational institutions, which
does not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Derecognition
of educational
institutions
for non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effects of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
We are not able to prevent the earth from shaking, the wind from blowing or the rain
from falling. However, with assessment and planning, physical and environmental protection
and response preparedness, we can prevent these events from becoming disasters. Since
schools are our universal institutions for sharing knowledge and skills, the expectations for
schools to be role models in disaster prevention and management is high. Successful
disaster mitigation is one of the ultimate tests of the success of the education we provide
our generations.
Enthusiasm in disaster management preparedness generally fades once an emergency
phase is past. Schools offers a good entry point for keeping communities alert and making
disaster risk more sustainable. Highly educated teachers, trained students and well informed
parents and family members can play an important role in disseminating knowledge and
keeping their communities well-prepared. Teachers, students and their family members being
responsible citizens of our country should be a part and parcel of disaster preparedness
drive taken up in. It is not possible to plan for every eventuality that might occur; however,
preparation is key to saving lives if a disaster strikes.
Current education system in schools lays emphasis on imparting quality education.
However, our current education is missing out on disaster management education and is,
therefore, incomplete without it.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for making disaster management education
compulsory in all educational institutions right from primary school level to senior secondary
level in order to make it a part of school curriculum.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NARANBHAI KACHHADIYA
June 20, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of disaster management education
teachers in all schools. Clause 6 provides for constitution of Advisory Council for disaster
management education by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of
adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purpose of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is
not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, which
will be involved from the consolidated Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted into a law.
However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore will
be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of disaster management education in all
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—945LS(S3)—16-07-2019.