Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 175 of  2022
THE AGNIPATH SCHEME BILL, 2022
By
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for framing of Agnipath Scheme for recruitment of soldiers in the armed forces 
of the Union and for matters connected therwith.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—     
 1 . ( 1) This Act may be called the Agnipath Scheme Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall also apply to citizens recruited under the Agnipath Scheme introduced 
by the Central Government on 14th June, 2022.
  ( 3) It shall, in case of citizens recruited under this Act, come into force at once and 
in respect of recruits appointed under the Central Government Agnipath Scheme, be deemed 
to have come into force w.e.f. the date of commencement of the Central Scheme.
Short title, 
application and 
commencement.

  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.
(a) “Agnipath Scheme” means Agnipath Scheme framed under section 3;
(b) “Agniveer” means the candidate selected and enrolled under the Agnipath Scheme 
under this Act; and 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
  3 . The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a Scheme 
to be known as the Agnipath Scheme and maintain a corp under the scheme to be named 
as Agnipath to provide academic, military and physical training in a moral-ethical military 
environment.
  4. The Central Government may constitute one or more units of Agnipath in 
Indian Army, Navy and Air force as it deems fit.
  5.  ( 1) Under the Agnipath Scheme framed under section 3, Indian citizens between 
the age of seventeen and half and twenty three years with requisite qualification, may be 
enrolled as Agniveer in Indian Army, Navy, Air force in such manner as may be prescribed:
   Provided that the enrolment of Agniveer under the Agnipath Scheme shall be in 
addition to the existing personnel under the Indian Army, Navy and Airforce.
   ( 2) Each Agniveer shall be enrolled through central transparent rigors system by 
ensuring proportionate representation of candidates from each States and Union territories 
in such manner as may be prescribed.
  6 . The tenure of service of Agniveer enrolled under the Agnipath Scheme formulated 
under section 3 shall be four years.
  7 .  Each Agniveer shall—
  ( a) be liable for active military service; 
  ( b) serve the nation from terrain to mountain to deserts on land, sea or air; and
  ( c) be liable to perform such duties as may be prescribed.
 8. The pay and allowances of Agniveer shall not be less than that of the soldier, 
sailor or airman of the similar period of service in Indian Army, Navy and Air force, as 
the case may be.
 9. The disability and death compensation of Agniveer shall not be less than that of 
the soldier, sailor or airman of the similar period of service in Indian Army, Navy and 
Air force.
 10. The benefits welfare of Agniveer and the family of the Agniveer shall not be 
less than that of soldier, sailor or airman of the same period of service in Indian Army, 
Navy and Air force.
 11.  Each Agniveer shall have option to continue in the service of Indian Army, Navy 
and Air force as the case may be:
  Provided that no Agniveer shall continue in Indian Army, Navy and Air force, as 
the case may be, after successful completion of four years of service under he has given his 
consent in writing to that effect.
 12. ( 1) Every Agniveer enrolled under this Act shall retire on expiration of the 
period of four years for which he was enrolled as an Agniveer and shall be entitled to 
every retirement benefit except the case in which he has consented to continue in the 
service of Indian Army, Navy, Air force, as the case may be.
Deﬁnitions.
Agnipath 
Scheme.
Enrolment as 
Agniveer.
Duties of 
Agniveer.
Pay and 
Allowances of 
Agniveer.
Disability 
and Death 
Compensation 
of Agniveer.  
Beneﬁts and 
Family Beneﬁts 
of Agniveer.
Retirement  
Beneﬁt.
Units of 
Agnipath and 
Recruitment of 
Agniveer

  ( 2) Every Agniveer retired from Agnipath without opting continuous service 
in Indian Army or Navy or Air force shall be entitled financial benefit of an amount 
of rupees not less than fifty lakhs, skill gained certificate and certificate of academic 
qualification in such  manner as may be prescribed.
 13. The Central Government may provide for the appointment of officers in or for 
the Unit of Agniveer from amongst the officers of the Army, Navy and Air force as the 
case may be.
 14. If any Agniveer contravenes any provision of this Act he may be liable to such 
punishment and in such manner as may be prescribed.
15. There shall be three divisions of  Agnipath namely—
  ( 1) Army Division : Recruitment of Agniveer for training and service under Indian
 Army.
  ( 2) Navy Division : Recruitment of Agniveer for training and service under Indian
 Navy; and
  ( 3) Air force Division : Recruitment of Agniveer for training and service under
 Indian Air force.
 16. (1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of advising it on all matters 
of policy connected with the Constitution and administration of the Agnipath Scheme, 
appoint a Central Advisory Committee consisting of the following persons namely:—
  ( a) Union Minister of Defence, who shall be the Chairperson of the Committee;
  ( b) the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Defence — Member;
  ( c) the Chief of the Defence Staff — Member;
  ( d) the Chief of the Army Staff — Member;
  ( e) the Chief of the Naval Staff — Member;
  ( f) the Chief of the Air Staff — Member; and
  ( g) five Members of Parliament of whom three shall be elected by the House of the 
 People and two by the Council of States — in such manner as may be prescribed— 
 Members.
  ( 2) A member elected under clause (g) of sub-section (1) shall hold office for a 
period of three years from the date of his election or until he ceases to be a Member of the 
House from which he has been elected  whichever is earlier.
  ( 3) The Committee shall meet at least once in three months.
 17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  make 
rules for carrying out the objects of this Act.
  ( 2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power
such rules may—
  ( a) prescribe the conditions subject to which Army, Navy and Air force shall be
 allowed to raise units under this Act;
  ( b) prescribe the persons who may be eligible for enrollment as Agniveer;
  ( c) prescribe the manner in which, the period for which and the conditions subject
 to which any person or class of persons may be enrolled under this Act;
Appointment of 
Oﬃcers.
Punishment for 
oﬀences under 
this Act.
Divisions of 
Agnipath.
Power to 
appoint 
Advisory 
Committees.
Power to make 
rules.

  ( d) provide for the medical examination of persons offering themselves for
 enrollment under this Act;
  ( e) prescribe periodical military training for any person for class of persons subject
 to this Act;
  ( f) prescribe the military or other obligations to which members of the Agnipath
 shall be liable when undergoing military training and provide generally for the
 maintenance of discipline amongst members of the Corps;
  ( g) prescribe the duties, powers and functions of officers appointed under this Act;
  ( h) prescribe the allowances or other remuneration payable to persons subject to
 this Act;
  ( i) provide for the removal or discharge of any person subject to this Act;
  ( j) prescribe the offences for which any person subject to this Act may be tried and
 provide for the trial thereof;
 ( 3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of thirty days as aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be made without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under the rule.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 To provide academic, military and physical training in a moral ethical military 
environment to prepare and motivate Indian youth between age of Seventeen and half and 
Twenty Three for the enrolment in Army, Navy and Air force, it is necessary to constitute 
a scheme. Modern training under the supervision of the Defence Force is necessary for the 
recruits in Army, Navy and Air force.  At the very same the service of the candidates enrolled 
in the scheme is utilized for the Defence force.   It is necessary to protect the interest of the 
candidates enrolled named Agniveer in the scheme Agnipath. Hence statutory recognition is 
necessary for the scheme.
 The scheme announced by the Government is causing unrest among the Indian youth. 
It is not just and proper to recruit and enroll candidate on contract basis in the Defence 
services. Hence modification of the scheme is also required. In the present situation statutory 
recognition and modification is necessary for the scheme.
 Hence this Bill.
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                     N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
4 July, 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of Units of Agnipath in Indian Army, Navy 
and Air force. Clause 8 provides for pay and allowances of Agniveer. Clause 9 provides for 
disability and death compensation of Agniveer. Clause 10 provides for benefits and family 
benefits of Agniveer. Clause 12 provides for retirement benefits of Agniveer.  The Bill, if 
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
a sum of rupees ten thousand crore per annum is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
 A non -recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten thousand crore  is also likely to be 
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and State Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
ൺ
BILL
to provide for framing of Agnipath Scheme for recruitment of soldiers in the armed forces 
of the Union and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran,  M.P .)