1
THE  RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2017
By
SHRIMATI POONAM MAHAJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 175 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 21 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,
2009,—
"(a) in sub-section (1), for the third proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided also that two-thirds of Members of such Committee shall be women.";
(b) in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(ca) undertake measures including assessing performance of the teachers
and taking suitable action to ensure imparting of good quality education
conforming to the standards and norms specified in the Schedule.".
35 of 2009.Amendment
of section 21.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The School Management Committee is a critical accountability structure in the Right
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009. However, this Committee currently
lacks sufficient ability to hold schools and especially teachers, accountable for the full and
proper education of children. The need is to provide sufficient representation to women
particularly to mothers of students in these Committees and to incentivise parents to enroll
their wards in Government schools with a view to perform their assigned role more efficiently
in managing these schools.
In its current structure, the School Management Committee does not have the power
or authority to ensure accountability of teachers. Parents are up against teachers, and their
powerful unions, and their only hope is very weak School Management Committee structures
that are supposed to hold these teachers accountable. Moreover, with only the poorest of
the poor sending their children to Government schools and teachers enjoying the benefits
of Seventh Pay Commission, the parents most often find themselves at disadvantageous
position in keeping teachers accountable. Therefore, parents have hardly any voice to play
their due role in compelling these schools to impart quality education.
The incentives designed by the Government for the parents who are sending their
children to these schools are not meeting the designed objectives of the principal Act. V ery
limited access to what is taught in the classroom, absence of English as medium of instruction,
inability to track assessments and their child's progress, lack of co-scholastic activities,
further dis-incentivises parents to engage with the Government school system.
Mothers, especially those who have been deprived of proper educational attainment,
dedicated towards educational upliftment of their children can play a very positive role
towards ensuring imparting of quality education. Their active participation in the School
Management Committee will ensure accountability of schools as well as to air their genuine
concerns regarding academic progress of the students and their overall welfare in a proper
manner.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; POONAM  MAHAJAN
July 5, 2017.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009
(35 OF 2009)
* * * * *
21. (1) A school, other than a school specified in sub-clause (iv) of clause (n) of
section 2, shall constitute a School Management Committee consisting of the elected
representatives of the local authority, parents or guardians of children admitted in such
schools and teachers:
Provided that at least three-fourth of members of such Committee shall be parents or
guardians:
Provided further that proportionate representation shall be given to the parents or
guardians of children belonging to disadvantaged group and weaker section:
Provided also that fifty per cent. of Members of such Committee shall be women.
(2) The School Management Committee shall perform the following functions,
namely:—
(a) monitor the working of the school;
(b) prepare and recommend school development plan;
(c) monitor the utilisation of the grants received from the appropriate Government
or local authority or any other source; and
* * * * *
School
Management
Committee.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Shrimati Poonam Mahajan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2106LS(S3)—13-10-2017.