1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In article 51A to the Constitution, after clause (k), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(l) who is eligible to vote, to cast his vote at elections to the House of the
People, Legislative Assemblies of States and institutions of local self-Government.”
Short title.
Bill No. 176 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article
51A.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the largest democracy in the world. It has a strong parliamentary system. Since
1951, free and fair elections to the Houses of Parliament, State Legislatures and local bodies
have been held at regular intervals. Indian elections are benchmark for many other countries.
At present a candidate is declared as elected even if he secures seventeen per cent. of
the votes polled. Though he has won the seat, yet he may not have the support of even half
of the electors. In the true sense, he is not representing the majority of voters in the
constituency from which he has been elected.
The percentage of votes polled at every election is very less which shows that people
are not willing to participate in the election process. Sometimes in some of the constituencies,
as low as thirty per cent. of the total votes are polled. This is not a healthy sign for democracy.
Casting a vote at an election is one of the duty of community service mentioned in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Introducing an obligation to vote will help in
strengthening the democracy and, electing a Government with more stability, legitimacy and
genuine mandate. Compulsory voting system can confer a high degree of political legitimacy
because it results in high voter turnout. High level of participation decreases the risk of
political instability.
The compulsory voting is a system in which electors are obliged to cast their votes in
elections.
Therefore, it is proposed to make it a fundamental duty of every eligible citizen to cast
vote at elections to the House of the People, Legislative Assemblies and institutions of local
Self Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P . P.  CHAUDHARY
July 6, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE CONSTITUTION  OF INDIA
* * * * *
PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) * * * * *
* * * * *
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as
the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
* * * * *
3
Fundamental
duties.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P. P. Chaudhary, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1456LS(S3)—21.07.2015.