we 10

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill

lo. 176 of 2000.

THE PROVISION OF FREE MEDICAL AND ENGINEERING
EDUCATION TO MERITORIOUS AND ECONOMICALLY WEAKER
STUDENTS BILL, 2000
By
Suri RAMDAs ATHAWALE, M.P.

A
BILL

[to provide for free medical and engineering education to meritorious and economically

students Wwho cannot afford the expensive medical and engineering
education, despite being talented and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first. Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1. (/) This Act may be called the Provision of Free Medical and Engineering
Education to Meritorious and Economically Weaker Students Act, 2000,

(2) Iextends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government" means the State Government in the case of a
State and Central Government in other cases;

Shon title,
extent and
commence-
‘ment.

Definitions.


Provision of
free medical
and engineer-
ing education
to meritorious
and economi-
cally weaker
students.

Provisions of
the Act not to
be in deroga-
tion of any
other law for
the time being
in force.

Power to make

2

(b) “economically weaker students” means such student whose family income
from all sources is not more than fupees two thousand per month; and

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (J) The appropriate Government shall provide free medical and engineering
education to every such meritorious and economically weaker student who has obtained

such marks or has passed the examination with such distinction as may be prescribed
from time to time.

(2) The appropriate Government shall provide to every economically weaker
student admitted in any medical or engineering college or institution including non-
Governmental medical or engineering college the following facilities under this Act:-—

(a) all expenses to be incurred on admission or tu

fees;
(6) free material like books, note books, writing material;
(c) free hostel facilities, wherever necessary; and

(d) scholarships, in such cases, as may be prescribed.

4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters provided in this Act.

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Most of the parents aspire to make their sons or daughters either a doctor or an
engineer and most of the youths studying in the schools also have this desire. However,
there are many extraordinarily brilliant students whose dreams are not realised only due
to poverty even though they have the capacity to clear all the obstacles. Medical and
engineering education. is so expensive that even middle class families cannot afford to
provide this education to their children or those living below the poverty line. For this
reason, a large number of meritorious students are not able to get admission in medical or
engineering colleges.

Since our country is a welfare State, it is our duty to provide opportunity to such
poor but meritorious students to continue the course of their interest and fulfill their life's
ambition. The appropriate Government should bear all the expenses to be incurred on the
studies of the students in the engineering or medical colleges in such cases.

New Detnt;
November 6, 2000. RAMDAS ATHAWALE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free medical and engineering education by the
appropriate Government for meritorious and economically weaker students admitted in a
Privately owned medical or engineering college. This clause also provides for scholarships
including certain other facilities to poor students. As regards the expenditure involved in
Biving effect to the provisions of the Bills in States, it shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Funds of the respective States, However, in case of Union territories, the expenditure shall
be met Gut of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty
crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
the provisions of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

10 provide for free medical and engineering education to meritorious and economically
weaker students and for matters connected therewith,

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4758LS—23.1 1.2000.