5
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 3RD AUGUST, 2022
RAJY A SABHA ON 8TH AUGUST, 2022)
Bill No. 176-F of 2022
ASSENTED  TO ON 16TH AUGUST , 2022
ACT  N O. 17 OF 2022

1
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2022
(AS PASSED BY THE H OUSES OF PARLIAMENT )
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
   BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 2, after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
   ‘(ja) “Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya” means the University established under
section 3F;’.
Short title and
commencement.
25 of 2009. Amendment of
section 2.
Bill No. 176-F of  2022

2
3. After section 3E of the principal  Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“3F. (1) The National Rail and Transportation Institute, V adodara, Gujarat,
declared as a deemed to be University under section 3 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956, shall be established as a body corporate under this Act by the
name Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya.
(2) The territorial jurisdiction of Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya shall extend to the
whole of India, as specified in the First Schedule to this Act.
(3) The Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya shall be sponsored and funded by the
Central Government in the Ministry of Railways.”.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,––
(i) in clause (e), for the words “whichever is earlier; and”, the words “whichever
is earlier;” shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
“(g) any reference to the National Rail and Transportation Institute,
V adodara, in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to
Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya established under this Act;
(h) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the National
Rail and Transportation Institute, Vadodara, shall vest in Gati Shakti
Vishwavidyalaya established under this Act;
(i) all rights and liabilities of the National Rail  and Transportation Institute,
V adodara, shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of Gati Shakti
Vishwavidyalaya established under this Act;
(j) every person employed by the National Rail and Transportation
Institute, V adodara, immediately before the commencement of the Central
Universities (Amendment) Act, 2022 shall hold his office or service in Gati
Shakti Vishwavidyalaya established under this Act with the same tenure, at the
same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same
rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other
matters as he would have held the same if the Central Universities (Amendment)
Act, 2022 had not been enacted and shall continue to do so unless and until his
employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and
conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee,
his employment may be terminated by the University in accordance with the
terms of the contract with the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this
behalf, on payment, to him by the University, of compensation equivalent to
three months’ remuneration in case of permanent employees and one month’s
remuneration in the case of other employees;
(k) any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Vice-Chancellor and
Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the National Rail  and Transportation Institute, Vadodara,
in any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or other document,
shall be construed as reference to the Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor
of Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya; and
(l) the incumbent Vice-Chancellor of the National Rail  and Transportation
Institute, V adodara, shall hold office for a period of six months from the date of
coming into force of the  Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2022  or till
such time the first Vice-Chancellor of Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya is appointed
under section 44, whichever is earlier.”.
Insertion of
new section
3F.
Establishment
of Gati Shakti
Vishwavidyalaya
in Gujarat. 3 of 1956.
Amendment
of section 4.

3
5. In section 5 of the principal Act, after the proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:––
“Provided further that the Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya established as an
University under section 3F shall take additional measures for providing high quality
teaching, research and skill development in diverse disciplines related to
transportation, technology and management including establishing centres in India
and abroad, as may be required in the opinion of the said University.”.
6. In the First Schedule to the principal Act, after serial number 5 and the entries
relating thereto, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely:––
“5A. Gujarat       Gati Shakti  Vishwavidyalaya       Whole of India.”.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of First
Schedule.

A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—978RS(S3)—30-08-2022.