1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI DUSHYANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Code of  Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in sub-section (2), after the
word "informant", the words "and on demand to the accused or his authorized representative"
shall be inserted.
Bill No. 176 of  2017
Amendment
of section
154.
5
2 of 1974.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
When an information regarding the commission of cognizable offence, commonly
known as First Information Report (FIR), is given under section 154 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (Cr. P.C), sub-section (2) of the same mandates the police authorities that a
copy of such information should be supplied to the informant as well free of cost. However,
the Code lacks any provision which bestows the same right upon an accused/suspect or his
authorized representative in order to get the copy of FIR after its registration with or without
any cost.
Although section 207 of Cr. P.C. requires the concerned Magistrate to furnish a copy
of the FIR to the accused but the provisions of section 207 come into play only after the filing
of charge sheet under section 173 Cr. P.C. Similarly, a combined reading of sub-sections (5)
and (7) of section 173 of the Cr. P.C. also shows that after filing of the charge sheet, the police
may also supply copy of the FIR to the accused person along with other papers of the charge
sheet. However, the expression under sub-section (7) of section 173 Cr. P.C. "....the police
officer investigating the case finds it convenient so to do, he may furnish to the accused
copies...." also conveys a mere directory order to the investigative authorities to provide the
copy of the FIR to the accused or his representative, thereby again leaving discretion in their
hands and the accused/suspect at their mercy. On a plain reading of the statute, it is clear that
the provisions of sections 207 and 173 of the Cr. P.C. are attracted only after filing of the
charge sheet by the police. There is no specific provision in the Cr. P.C. requiring the supply
of the FIR to the accused person or his authorized representative before the filing of the
charge sheet and after the registration of FIR.
The above lacuna in the statute, has led to various untoward circumstances where the
Police Officials have summoned or in many cases even arrested the suspect/accused at the
Police Station and kept them locked or bound within the Police Station on the pretense that
there has been an FIR filed against them, but seldom do they disclose the contents of that
FIR. This leads to unnecessary harassment of the public and disproportionate allocation of
power in the hands of the investigative agency leading to corruption and persecution.
There are several judgment of various High Courts holding that FIR is a "public
document" within the meaning of section 74 of the Evidence Act, 1872. Therefore, as required
under the provisions of section 76 of the that Act, certified copy of the FIR has to be given
to the accused person on his request on payment of the applicable legal fees by every public
officer (such as the officer in charge of the police station) having the custody of such
document. In this regard, there is decision of the Allahabad High Court in Shyam Lal vs. State
of U.P., 1998 Cri. L.J. 2879 which said that "... First Information Report is a public document
and any person is entitled to have its certified copy either from the police authorities and/or
from any court where it is lying if a person files an application and prepared to pay the proper
court fee. In such an event no authority can refuse supplying the certified copy of the first
information report...." And other similar judgments from the High Courts of different States
like decision of the Karnataka High Court in Chnnappa Andanappa Siddareddy vs. State,
1980 Crl. L.J. 1022; decision of the Bombay High Court in Mohammed Khalid Shaikh v. State
of Maharashtra [Criminal Application No. 709 of 2010 decided on 4 March 2010]; decision of
the Delhi High Court in Court on its own motion through Mr. Ajay Choudhary vs. State [WP
(Crl.) No. 468/2010 decided on 6 December 2010].
However, no such provision has been provided explicitly in any statute and there is no
decision of the Supreme Court available completely adjudicating on this issue leading to a
divided opinion of various investigative agencies and lower courts in different States adding
upto the adversities of an accused. Moreover even if the High Court of a certain State has
provided a judgment  in favour of such issue, execution of such judgment without any
2

3
written provision becomes a difficult task for the common public especially those who are
poor and illiterate if the police authorities and lower courts do not provide them any assistance.
This is again leaving the common man at the mercy of the authorities adding to his woes.
Moreover the payment of required legal fees under section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, further acts as a burden to an accused or his authorized representative who cannot
afford to pay such fees. In the present scenario, the only option which is available with the
accused or his authorized representative to get a copy of FIR is either to bribe the police
officials in order to get a copy or pay some fees (bribe) to the staff working in the Court of
Magistrate. Therefore, such a change in the justice system is the demand of the time to also
bring the much needed "transparency in administration of criminal justice".
Recently the Supreme Court, in a judgment arising out of Public Interest Litigation filed
by the Uttarakhand based Youth Bar Association of India on the same issue, has accepted
the fact that "it is vitally necessary that an accused person should be granted a copy of the
first information at the earliest possible state in order that he may get the benefit of legal
advice." and directed all the States to upload the FIRs on the official police websites of
different States within 24 hours of their registration but again the execution of such direction
in different states is yet to be followed especially in small and poor States who hardly have
the staff and resources. Moreover, in a country where majority of the population is illiterate
and poor, the availability of FIRs online hardly seems to be a workable solution since it won't
be accessible to all and therefore requires a statutory provision.
According to a news report carried on by the National Social Watch, a network of Civil
Society Organization in 2013, about three fourths of the total prisoners in Indian Prisons are
under-trials and according to the National Crime Records Bureau report for 2015, the
occupancy rate at the all India level in Indian prisons at the end of 2015 was 114.4 per cent
and almost seventy per cent of the convicts were illiterate. In a scenario like this it is clear that
majority of the prison inmates have no clue as to why they are in the prisons and they have
been languishing in there for years, some of them even convicted, without even knowing
and understanding the charges against them which goes against the spirit of fundamental
rights of the accused.
In 1997, a Judgment in the case of D.K. Basu vs. State of West Bengal changed the
course of Indian Criminal Justice system by providing certain basic rights to the accused so
that they are not tormented by the system and this Bill aims to seek the same remarkable feat
by allowing the accused or his authorized representative access to FIR on demand as a right
which is a valuable document in respect of information not just for the complainant but for
the accused as well since it allows him to prepare for a more informed defence which is
essential for a fair trial.
India being a developing country, majority of its population still consist of people who
are illiterate and poor. In case, if any such common man is accused of a crime and is deprived
of the basic and document FIR which would inform him of what he has been accused of and
prepare him for the upcoming actions, it amounts to a clear victimization of the common man
at the hands of the justice system and leads to violate the human rights of an accused.
In order to improve the above mentioned conditions, We need to rectify and
accommodate the term 'FIR' with due precision in section 154(2) of Cr. P.C. which adherently
gives right to the accused or his authorized representative to get a copy of FIR on demand
without any delay and before the stage of filing the charge sheet which will make the due
process of law easier and fairer even on behalf of the accused.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
July 07,  2017.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(ACT NO. 2 OF 1974)
* * * * *
154. (1) * * * * *
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (1) shall be given forthwith,
free of cost, to the informant.
(3) * * * * *
Information
in cognizable
cases.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2140LS(S3)—13-10-2017.