As Inrropucep in Lox Sasa on

20577 0 027

a : Bill_No, 176 of 1992
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE /(AMENDMENT)
Bill, 1992
A
BILL p
» je) further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950,

“° Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year, of the
Republic of India as follows:—

i, (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People

(Amendment) Act, 1992. Short ti-
- 5 le and
5. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central’Govern- पा

ment may, by notification in the, Official Gazette, appoint.

“” 2. In section 7 of the Represeniation of the People Act, 1950 (here- oa
inafter referred to as the principal Act),— Tiere?
section 7

(०) in sub-section (1), for the words, brackets, figures and*

10 letters “sub-sections (1A) and (JB)”, the words, brackets, figures

and letters “sub-sections (JA), (1B) and (1C)” shal be substituted;

(b) after sub-section (JB), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(C) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section

15 (1), twenty seais shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in

the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura o be consti-

tuted at any time after the commencement of the Representation of the
People (Amendment) Act, 1992”.


2

Insertion. 3, After section 9A of the principal Act and before the sub-heading:
of new “The State Legislative Councils”, the following section shali be inserted,
pone namely: —
9B.
Bower of “9B. (1) As soon as may be after the coming into force of the
Election Representation of — the People (Amendment) Act, 1992, the 5
Commis- Election Commission shall, having regard to the provisions of the
sion to Constitution and the principle specified in clause (d) of sub-section
ee (7) of section 9 of the Delimitation Act, 1972, determine the three
Se. assembly constituencies in the State of Tripura in which the three
ee additional seats for Scheduled Tribes, as increased by sub-section 10°
to be (1C) of section 7, shall be reserved. 1
reserved
for Sche- (2) The Election Commission shali,—
duled
‘Tribes int (@ publish its proposals under sub-section (1) in the Official
x eu Gazette and also in such other manner as it thinks fit;

A :
‘Tripura,

(0) specify a date on or after which the proposals will be 15
further considered by it;

(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may haye
been received by it before the date $0 specified;

(०) hold, for the Purpose of such consideration, if it thinks
fit so to do, one or more public suitings at such place or places in 20
the State as it thinks fit; 4

(९) after considering all objections and suggestions which
may have been received by it before the date so specified, deter-
mine, by order, the three assembly constituencies in the State
in which the said three additional seats shall be reserved for the 75
Scheduled Tribes and cause such order to be published in the
Official Gazette; and, upon such publication, the order shall have
the full force of law and shall not be called in question in any
court and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Order, 1976, shall be deemed to have been amend- 0
ed accordingly.

(3) Every. order made under sub-section (2) shall, as soon as may
be after it is published under that sub-section, be laid before the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura,”. :


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

The Bill is a sequel o the amendment proposed to be made in article
332 of the Constitution by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment)
Bill, 1991, for the purpose of providing for reservation of seats for the
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of Tripura.

paserran

_. 2, Section 7 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 is proposed.
to be amended to provide that instead of seventeen seats (as at present)
twenty seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legisla-
tive Assembly of Tripura to be constituted at any ‘time after the coming
into force by the proposed amendment. Further, it is also proposed to
insert a new section 9B in the Representation of the People Act, 1950!
by clause 3 of the Bill to empower the Election Commission to deter-
mine, having regard to the provisions of the Constitution and Section
9(1) (9) of the Delimitation Act, 1972, the three Assembly constituencies
in the State of Tripura in which the three additional seats shall be resery-
ed for ‘the Scheduled Tribes.

3, The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Deu; H. R. BHARDWAT.
The 16th November, 1992.


Total
number
of seats
in Legis_
lative As-
semblies

bly consti-
tuencies,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROMTHE REPRESENTATION OF ‘THE PROBLE ACH, 1950
ls (43 oF 1950)

ak ca * Z * *
The State Legistatwe
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1A) and i€
total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State
in the Second Schedule, to he filled by persons chosen
from assembly constituencies. and the number of Seats, if any,

reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tri
State. shall be as shown in that Schedule:

Provided that for the period referred to in clause (2) of a
the total number of seats allotted to the Legislative Assembly
State of Nagaland and shall be fifty-two, of which— m 4

(6) twelve seats shall be allocated io the Tuensang dist
shall be filled by persons chosen by the members of the
council, referred (0 in that article from amor them:
manner as the Governor, after consulting that: counell tha
cation in the Official Gazette, Specify, and

ibes

- +, .(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by persons:
by direct election from assembly constituencies in the rest.
State. ‘ 4

* = + * *


A
BILL

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950,

|
(Shri H. R. Bhardwaj, Minister of State in the Ministry of Law,
Justice & Company Affairs) |