THE MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI P. K ARUNAKARAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 5 of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, in sub-section (3), for the words
"twelve weeks", the words "twenty four weeks" shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 176 of 2014
Amendment of
section 5.
53 of 1961. 5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Provision of proper care to the mother and infant is fundamental to the growth and
well being of the society. An infant requires as much attention and care of the mother as may
be possible. The maternity leave of twelve weeks currently available to working women
needs to be extended to twenty four weeks in order to provide an infant wholesome care and
proper nourishment for his overall growth. The Sixth Pay Commission had recommended for
extension of maternity leave for Central Government women employees upto six months and
the same has been implemented by the Central Government. Further, the World Health
Organisation as well as Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have issued guidelines
stating inter alia that a baby needs to be nursed by the mother for a minimum period of
six months.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 with a view to
enhance maternity leave for women employees from twelve weeks to twenty four weeks.
N
EW D ELHI; P. KARUNAKARAN
November 7, 2014
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for enhancement of maternity leave for women employees
from twelve weeks to twenty four weeks. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees five hundred crore will be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961
(53 OF 1961)
* * * * *
5. (1) * * * * *
(2) * * * * *
(3) The maximum period for which any woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit
shall be twelve weeks of which not more than six weeks shall precede the date of the
expected delivery:
Provided that where a woman dies during this period, the maternity benefit shall
be payable only for the days up to and including the day of her death:
* * * * *
* * * * *
Right to
payment of
maternity
benefits.
4

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961
————
(Shri P. Karunakaran, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2939LS(S-3)—04-12-2014.