5

10

As ए्रशम्रफएटाफ In Lox SaBHa

3 6 NOV 392

= Bill No. 177 of 1992
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992
A
BILL
further to amend the Delhi Development Act, 1957.

Bp it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. (0) This Act may be called the Delhi Development (Amendment)
Act, 1992.

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day of
September, 1992.

2, In section 29 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957,—

(a) in sub-section (2), for viause (b), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—

“(b) with simple imprisonment which may extend to six
months or with fine which shall not be Jess than fifty thousand
rupees, but which may extend to an amount equivalent to the
market value of the area developed, or with both in any case.
other than those referred to in clause (a)”;

Short
title end
com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section
29 of Act
61 of 1957.


2

(0) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be added at the
end, namely:—

“Provided that where any person uses any land or building,
intended to be used for residential purposes, for commercial pur-
Poses, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less 5
than fifty thousand Tupees, but which may extend to an amount
equivalent to the market value of the area used in such contraven-

ह tion, on the date of conviction, and in the case of a continuing
offence, with further fine equivalent to ten per cent. of such
market value for every day during which such offence continues
after conviction for the first commission of the offence.

Explanation.—For the Purposes of this section market value
of the land shall be the value, of the land calculated in accordance

with the commercial land tates notified by the Central Govern-
ment, from time to time.’,

15 |
|
Repeal 3. (1) The Delhi Development (Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 is here- Ord. |
and by repealed. of 1992.
saving. :

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be,
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended 20
by this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Delhi Development Act, 1957 provided for a fine of five thousand
rupees for development of any jand in contravention of master plan or
zonal development plan without the permission, approval or sanction of
the Delhi Development Authority or in contravention of conditions pres-
cribed by the regulation subject to which such permission, approval or
sanction has been granted. Similarly, the use of land or building in
contravention of any provision of the Act or in contravention of any
terms and conditions prescribed by the regulations is punishable with
a fine up to five thousand rupees.

2. During the past three decades there has been a steep increase in the
jand value and rental value of premises in Delhi, This has resulted in
the monetary fine of five thousand rupees becoming totally ineffective
and incapable of acting as a deterrent against illegal constructions. As
a result, there has been enormous increase in unauthorised develop-
ment and misuse of residential premises for commercial purposes. In
a recent Writ Petition filed by Kailash Colony Women Association
(Civil Writ Petition No, 3416 of 89—Kailash Colony Women Association
versus MCD), the Delhi High Court voiced its apprehension that unless
quick and stringent steps are taken immediately, it may be too late
for the Civic Authorities and Government to control the situation. In
order to take immediate action to check further growth of unauthorised
development of land and misuse of residential premises, the President
promulgated the Delhi Development (Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 on
the 24th September, 1992 raising the fine to fifty thousand rupees.

3. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance,

New DELHI; SHEILA KAUL.
The 20th November, 1992.


ANNEXURE

ExTRAcr From 7Hm DELHr DEVELOPMENT Act, 1957

(61 or 1957)

* i * * *

Penalties. 28. (1) Any person who whether at his own instance or at the inst-

ante of any other person or any body (including a department of Gov-
ernment) undertakes or carries out development of any Iand in contra-
vention of the master glen or zonal dey

elopment plan or without the
Permission, approval or sanetion referred

to in sgetion 12 or in contra-
vention of any condition subject to which

such permission, approval or
senction has been granted, shall be punishable—

Xe % * * *

(6) with simple imprisonment w!
or with fine which may
in.any case, other tha:

*

‘hich may extend to six months,
extend to five thousand Tupees, or with both,
m those referred to in clause (a).

रू * =


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Delhi Development Act, 1957.

(Smt, Sheila Kaul, Minister of Urban Development.)