1
Short title and
extent.
THE  MILK  AND MILK PRODUCTS (REMUNERATIVE SUPPORT PRICE)
BILL, 2019
By
SHRI DEVJI M. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for fixation of minimum remunerative support price of  milk and
milk products and for matters connected therewith .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Milk and Milk Products (Remunerative Support Price)
Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 177 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) "milk product" means a product obtained by processing of milk, which may
contain food additives and other ingredients functionally necessary for the milk product,
and shall include the following, namely:—
(i) cheese;
(ii) chhana, skimmed—milk chhana, paneer;
(iii) condensed milk—sweetened and unsweetened;
(iv) condensed skimmed milk—sweetened and unsweetened;
(v) cream;
(vi) curd, skimmed milk curd, dahi;
(vii) ghee, butter oil;
(viii) ice-cream;
(ix) infant milk food;
(x) khoa;
(xi) malai;
(xii) milk derivatives such as whey proteins, casein, lactose etc.;
(xiii) milk ices, milk lollies, kulfi;
(xiv) milk powder, skimmed milk powder, partly skimmed milk powder;
(xv) processed cheese;
(xvi) table butter and white butter; and
(xvii) yoghurt
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be.
3. The appropriate Government shall announce minimum remunerative support price
of milk and milk products in such manner and at such intervals, as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall, while announcing the minimum remunerative
support price of milk and milk products, will take into account all relevant factors, which shall
include,—
(i) interest payable to banks on loans taken for dairy;
(ii) electrictiy and water charges;
(iii) average labour charges;
(iv) availability of land and pasture;
(v) expenditure on collection, preservation and packaging of milk and milk
products;
(vi) expenditure incurred on transportation of milk and milk products to market;
and
(vii) expenditure incurred on ailment and care of milch animals.
Definitions
Fixation of
minimum
remunerative
support price
of milk and
milk
products.
Factors for
determination
of minimum
remunerative
support price
of milk and
milk
products.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments  for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
6. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be  of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3)  Every rule made under this Act by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
3
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the largest producer of milk in the world with 10.2 crore ton of annual production
of milk. This production is much more than crop and it is an important source of income of
the farmers. Milk production has played a remarkable role in providing security to the
farmers affected by adverse weather and damage of crops. According to the report of
National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), the incidents of suicide by farmers are less in
those areas, where milk production is a source of regular income in generating employment.
Approximately seven crore rural families are engaged in milk production. Approximately
seventy per cent. cattle are with small, medium and marginal farmers, who get major portion
of their family income through selling of milk. Mostly the small and landless farmers are
engaged in milk production and women play a very important role in it. There are a few
shortcomings in the milk production business which make it less attractive. The first drawback
is the price of the milk and the farmers do not get the actual benefit. The milk producers get
only rupees fifteen to twenty per litre, while the milk is sold at the rate of rupees thirty-eight
to forty-eight per litre in the towns and metropolitan cities. Prices of milk have increased
recently and cow milk is being sold at the rate of rupees thirty-eight per litre and buffalo milk
is at rupees forty-eight per litre in Delhi. According to dairy officials, there has been an
increase in the cost of collection, warehousing, processing, marketing, management and
transportation of milk which has necessitated the increase in the prices of milk. Farmers
spend more than twenty per cent. of their income from milk on fodder and cattle food,
treatment of cattle diseases and rearing of cattle, etc. Co-operative Committees and dairies
refuse to buy milk from farmers during the winter season due to over-production of milk. It
results in decreasing of the profit of both the parties, which adversely affects dairy business.
Small and medium farmers are facing a lot of difficulties due to lack of land, lack of facilities
for water bodies, shade construction, processing of milk, lack of  better facilities for godowns,
transportation and continuous fluctuation in the prices of milk in carrying out dairy business.
A large number of farmers are engaged in dairy business as also the cattle rearers are not
taking interest in this business, because the pasture land is diminishing which is creating
shortage of fodder and they are being forced to wind up their dairy business.
The need is, therefore, to fix minimum remunerative support prices of milk and milk
products so as to ensure effective livelihood to the persons involved in dairy.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DEVJI M. PATEL
June 6, 2019.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the
purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure  of  about  rupees
 one thousand crore per annum.
No recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for fixation of minimum remunerative support price of milk and
milk products and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Devji M. Patel, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1428LS(S3)—16.07.2019.