1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
2. In article 309 of the Constitution, after the existing proviso, the following proviso
shall be added at the end, namely:—
"Provided further that every rule made in respect of services and posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
forty-five days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
Short title.
Bill No. 177 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
article 309.5

2
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule."
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 309 of the Constitution provides for recruitment and conditions of service of
persons serving the Union or State. Timely changes in recruitment and service conditions
are indicator of progressive organisation which makes it flexible by changing the service
conditions as per the need of the hour and makes it more useful. Whenever an Act provides
for framing of rules for carrying out the purposes of that Act, there is also a provision in the
Act for laying of those rules before each House of Parliament and such rules are subject to
modification or annulment by Parliament. However, the rules made under article 309, due to
lack of laying provisions, are not laid on the Table of the Houses. Consequently, such rules
escape the scrutiny of the Parliament.
The Bill, therefore, proposes to amend article 309 of the Constitution to include the
provision for laying of rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons
serving in connection with the affairs of the Union before each House of Parliament.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA   SINGH CHANDEL
November  19, 2018.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
309.  Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the appropriate Legislature
may regulate the recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed, to public
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State:
Provided that it shall be competent for the President or such person as he may direct in
the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, and for the
Governor of a State or such person as he may direct in the case of services and posts in
connection with the affairs of the State, to make rules regulating the recruitment, and the
conditions of service of persons appointed, to such services and posts until provision in
that behalf is made by or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under this article, and
any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such Act.
* * * * *
Recruitment
and conditions
of service of
persons serving
the Union or a
State.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2125LS(S3)—11.12.2018.