Bill No. 177  of  2014
THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
ABUSE (SURVEY) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI P. D. RAI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for conducting an yearly survey of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances abuse with a view to ascertain the extent, pattern and trend
of drug abuse and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Abuse
(Survey) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "Committee" means the Advisory Committee constituted under section 3;
(c) "drug abuse" refers to other than medicinal use by any person of a narcotic
drug or a psychotropic substance;
(d) "Fund" means the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Abuse
Survey Fund constituted under section 5;
(e) "narcotic drug" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (xiv) of
section 2 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, and includes
alcohol, tobacco and other than medicinal use of a drug prescribed by a registered
medical practitioner;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) "psychotropic substance" shall have the meaning assigned to it in
clause (xiv) of section 2 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments,
constitute an Advisory Committee to conduct yearly survey on drug abuse.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of members
including experts, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Committee shall have its headquarter at Delhi and may establish its offices at
such places as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff, as may
be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Committee.
4. The Committee shall—
(i) collect and maintain year-wise information on the extent and pattern of drug
abuse, including risk-based classification of population segments, at both national
and State levels;
(ii) assess the social, cultural, economic, geographical and behavioural
characteristics associated with drug abuse;
(iii) study the community knowledge, attitudes and perceptions towards drug
abuse;
(iv) suggest measures to address drug abuse in consultation with the
State Governments and Union territory Administrations;
(v) submit periodical reports to the Central Government on extent, trend and
pattern of drug abuse in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, to the
Central Government; and
(vi) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the
Central Government for the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Survey Fund.
(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Chairperson of the Committee to meet the
expenditure in connection with any work relating to yearly survey under this Act.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, credit such sums into the Fund, as may be necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
Constitution
of Advisory
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Constitution
of the
Narcotic
Drugs and
Psychotropic
Substances
Survey Fund.
Central
Government
to credit
monies into
the Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
61 of 1985.
61 of 1985.

3
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, each House of the State Legislature,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive session aforesaid, Parliament or, as the case may be,
the State Legislature agrees in making any modification in the rule or agrees that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
Make Rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Alcoholism and drug abuse is a multifaceted problem and is a major cause of concern
among all age groups and social strata, including women and children. The geographical
location of the country further makes it highly vulnerable to the problem of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances abuse.
As per the National Survey Report on the extent, pattern and trends of drug abuse in
India, sponsored by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Regional Office South Asia, published in 2004, alcohol, cannabis,
opium and heroin were the major substances of abuse in India. The survey reported regional
differences, with high prevalence of drug abuse particularly in the border States and
North-Eastern region.
Experts suggest that the trends and patterns of drug abuse are dynamic and change
frequently. There is a need to undertake continuous assessment to determine the changing
prevalence, incidence and nature of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances abuse in
the country and to suggest measures to deal with the problem in a befitting manner. Therefore,
it is proposed to conduct an yearly survey to understand the extent, pattern and trend of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances abuse, in order to assess the impact of current
policy interventions and suggest appropriate measures to address the issue.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.D. RAI
November 12, 2014.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for Constitution of an Advisory Committee to conduct an
yearly survey on narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances abuse in the country,
Clause 5 provides for constitution of a Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Survey
Fund to meet expenditure in connection with any work relating to yearly survey. Clause 6
provides for supply of funds to the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Survey
Fund by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India.  It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
one hundred crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.

6
MEMORANDUM   REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rule relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2869LS(S3)—04.12.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for conducting an yearly survey of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances abuse with a view to ascertain the extent, pattern and trend
of drug abuse and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri P.D. Rai, M.P .)