1
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 178 of 2014
THE CIVILIAN AW ARDS (RECOMMENDATION COMMITTEE)
BILL,  2014
By
SHRI ASHOK MAHADEORAO NETE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Committee to recommend conferring of civilian awards
on persons having outstanding contributions in different fields.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Civilian Awards (Recommendation Committee) Act,
2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "civilian award" includes Bharat Ratna, Padma Vibhushan, Padam Bhusan,
Padam Shri, Arjun Award and such other award for outstanding contribution in such
fields, as the Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, specify,
but does not include Gallantry Awards conferred on personnel of Armed Forces;
(b) "Committee" means the Civilian Awards Recommendation Committee
constituted under section 3; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the coming
into force of this Act, constitute a Committee to be known as the Civilian Awards
Recommendation Committee for the purpose of selecting the names of persons to be
conferred with civilian awards.
(2) The Chairperson of the Committee shall be nominated by the Central Government
in such manner, as may be prescribed, from amongst persons of eminence having adequate
knowledge and experience in social work, administration, public affairs, health, science
or law.
(3) The Committee shall have one representative from each State and Union territory
as member, who shall be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the
concerned State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the case may be.
(4) The Chairperson and the members of the Committee shall hold office for a period
of three years.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Central Government shall provide such number of Officers and staff to the
Committee, as may be necessary, for its efficient functioning.
4. (1) The Committee shall recommend to the Central Government the names of persons
to be considered for conferring a civilian award.
(2) The Committee shall, while recommending a name under sub-section (1), take into
consideration the outstanding contribution of a person in the field of music and fine arts,
social service, medicine, science, teaching, sports, politics or any other discipline as it may
deem fit.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, while finalising names of persons for conferring
a civilian award, give due consideration to the names recommended by the Committee.
(2) The Central Government may consider name of any person other than those
recommended by the Committee for conferring a civilian award.
6. A person conferred with a civilian award shall be entitled to such facilities and
cash award as may prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of the
Civilian
Awards
Recommendation
Committee.
Committee to
recommend
the names for
civilian award.
Central
Government
to give due
consideration
to the
recommendation
of the
committee.
Certain
facilities and
cash award to
person
conferred with
a civilian
award.
Power to make
rules.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Awards are sign of pride and honour. Civilian awards are given to common people for
their extraordinary deeds in different fields every year. However, there is no mechanism to
search the most eligible persons and highlight their extraordinary deeds while considering
the names for conferring civilian awards. There have been complaints from several quarters
for non-inclusion of names of eligible persons for their exceptional work in public service or
for advancement of art, literature, science, etc. One such person, Pandit Tukdoji in the State
of Maharashtra has made an immense contribution in social reforms among rural population,
but he has not been conferred any suitable award so far.
The present Bill seeks to provide for constitution of a Committee to recommend
conferring of civilian awards on persons of outstanding contribution in different fields of
society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ASHOK MAHADEORAO NETE
November 12, 2014.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Committee to be known as the
Civilian Awards Recommendation Committee for the purpose of selecting the names of
persons to be conferred with Civilian Award. Clause 6 provides for certain facilities and
cash award for persons conferred with civilian award. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about
rupees one crore will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakh is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matters will relates to detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Committee to recommend conferring of civilian awards on
persons having outstanding contributions in different fields.
————
(Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3176LS(S3)—04-12-2014.