1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF LEGAL EDUCATION IN
EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI  S UDHEER  G UPTA , M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of legal education in educational institutions and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Legal Education in Educational
Institutions Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 178 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council for Law Education
constituted under section 6;
(b) "Appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the
Government of State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "educational Institutions" means a primary or a middle or a secondary
or a senior secondary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name
such institution is called, but does not include a minority educational institution;
(d) "legal education" means teaching of law; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the legal education shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational
institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on
the recommendation of Advisory Council constituted under section 6.
4. The appropriate Government shall immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of legal education in all educational
institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching legal education in educational institutions.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
the Compulsory Teaching of Legal Education in Educational Institutions Act, 2019, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for law education.
(2) The Advisory council shall consist of such numbers of persons, having
special knowledge or practical experience in the field of law, as the Central Government
may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of legal education
for each class upto senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards
the legal education is to be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers
to be appointed in educational institutions for teaching legal education;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may
be given recognition for training teachers in legal education for the purpose of
their appointment in educational institutions; and
(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
Difinitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
legal education
in Educational
Institutions.
Appropriate
Government to
issue directions
for compulsory
teaching of
legal education
in educational
institutions.
Constitution
of Advisory
Council.
Functions of
Advisory
Council for
Law
Education.
Appointment
of Law
Teachers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize such schools, which do not comply
with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institutions a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purpose of this act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Derecognition
of schools for
non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
Overriding
effects of the
Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been generally believed among different sections and groups of the society
that legal education is only for the law students, lawyers etc. But no one ever thought that
how important role can basic legal education plays in our daily life. It is very necessary for
every person to have certain basic knowledge of law, otherwise it would become very
difficult for him to tackle several problems, from consumer protection to fundamental rights.
There are certain laws and regulation, basic knowledge of which is very necessary for a
person, even if doesn't belong to a group which is related to legal field. Lack of knowledge
is the main reason that certain rights of a person get violated so easily.
The main reason why a normal person do not take the violation of his rights seriously,
is that he lives under a belief that he would have to pay certain amount to the concerned
lawyer. Moreover, he is scared of the legal process and the judicial system of the country.
And, indeed he is not wrong. But there is another way which can be used to know how your
rights can be protected from getting violated.
It has been said that "Knowledge is the Power", and indeed it is not wrong. It is
responsibility of education system to make a common man aware of his legal rights and how
these legal rights can be saved. Current education system in schools lays emphasis on
imparting quality education. However, it is missing out on legal education and is, therefore,
complete without it.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for making legal education compulsory in all
educational institutions right from primary school level to senior secondary level in order to
make it a part of school curriculum.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUDHEER GUPTA
 June 20, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of law education teachers in all schools.
Clause 6 provides for constitution of advisory Council for Legal Education by the Central
Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds to the State for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure,
both recurring and non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India, if the Bill is enacted into a law. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of
about rupees one hundred crores will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of legal education in educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Sudheer Gupta, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1504LS(S3)—16.07.2019.