1
THE RAINWATER (COMPULSORY HARVESTING) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater by every household, business
establishment and Government building, in order to ensure availability of
water and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rainwater (Compulsory Harvesting) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in public interest that the Union Government
undertake measures to preserve and harvest rainwater in the country for augmenting drinking
water availability in the country.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “business establishment” includes any building which is used as an office
or a factory in connection with any trade or business;
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 178 of  2016
5 Declaration.
Definitions.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “Government” means the Central Government or the Union territory
Administration, as the case may be;
(c) “Government building” includes the offices of the Ministries, departments,
public sector enterprises, statutory bodies or bodies owned or administered by the
Government and autonomous bodies, local self Government bodies and residential
areas of Government employees provided by the Government;
(d) “household” means a dwelling unit of any description; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contain in any other law for the time being in force, the
Government shall construct and provide necessary infrastructure for rainwater harvesting
in the buildings owned by it in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every household and business establishment shall compulsorily adopt measures for
rooftop rainwater harvesting in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be duty of the head or Karta of that household, to implement the provisions
of sub-section (1).
6. It shall be the duty of the Government to construct or repair conventional water
bodies such as wells, tanks, ponds, creeks and watersheds and other water bodies to
preserve the rainwater so as to recharge the levels of ground water.
7. The Government shall, as soon as possible, prepare an action plan to educate the
masses about the technology and the benefits of rooftop rainwater harvesting and also
associate non-Governmental organisations and such other agencies or institutions, as it
may deem fit for the purpose, in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. Any person violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with a fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh or with both.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting in
Government
buildings.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting by
households
and business
establishments.
Power to make
rules.
Duty of
Government
to protect
water bodies.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Action plan to
educate the
masses about
rainwater
harvesting.
Punishment.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is estimated that our country receives rainfall of about four thousand billion cubic
metres every year and major part of this rainwater goes waste as it falls into the sea through
the rivers of our country. This huge wastage of rainwater is taking place inspite of the fact
that there is severe shortage of drinking water throughout the country. Water is a scarce
resource and its availability for drinking and other household purposes in the country as a
whole is hardly as per requirement-more so in the desert and drought prone areas. The only
way to overcome this problem is to prevent the wastage of rainwater by conserving it
through harvesting and recharging the ground water levels.
Identification of the areas not receiving normal rainfall with the help of reconnaissance
of each and every hamlet of the country, for success of this programme is the need of the
hour. The private sector as well as the non-governmental organisations have to play a major
role in physical and financial terms, in order to achieve the goal of rainwater harvesting. To
save the planet earth, we have to make rooftop rainwater harvesting a movement of the
masses, in which, the Government, corporates and every household would participate and
preserve the rainwater which is the purest form of water. This will increase the level of
ground water which can be used for drinking and other purposes. Hence, it has become
necessary to make rooftop rainwater harvesting mandatory throughout the country to
overcome the water scarcity which otherwise will worsen further in near future if we do not
act now.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA
July 4, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for creating infrastructure for compulsory rainwater
harvesting in Government buildings. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall
construct and repair of water bodies. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government
shall give publicity to benefits of rainwater harvesting and provide assistance to
Non-Governmental Organisations and private sector for the purpose of creation of rainwater
harvesting infrastructure. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore is likely
to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to
be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater by every household, business
establishment and Government building, in order to ensure availability of
water and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1590LS(S3)—22-07-2016.