As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

9 7 JUL 2001

Bill No. 178 of 2000
THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURE CQMMISSION BILL, 2000
By
Apv. Urramrao DHikALe, M.P.
A
BILL

(to provide for the constitution of a National Agriculture Commission with the objective
to increase agricultural productivity in the country;”)

Be it enacted by Parliament in the fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as fol-
lows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the National Agriculture Commission Act, 2000. Short title,
it id
(2) Itextends to the whole of India, 0 आह 5

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 10क्‍ट4-.. ™"
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, Unless the context otherwise requires;— Definitions.

(@) “agricultural products” includes food grains, spices, horticultural products, fruits,
vegetables, commercial crops, dairy products and also includes processed products;

(b) “Chairman” means Chairman of the Commission;

(c) ‘‘Commission’’ means the National Agriculture Commission;

(d) ‘‘Co-opted member’? means a member co-opted on the Commission;
(०) ‘‘Member’’ means a member of the Commission; and

(f) “Prescribed"’ means as prescribed by rules and regulations made under this Act,


Constitution
of National
Agriculture
Commission.

Constitution
of State Aj
culture Board.

Chairman and
members of
the Commis-
sion,

President and
other
members of
State
Agriculture
Board,

‘Tenure of the
Chairman
and members
of Commis-
sion and State
Agriculture
Board.

Chairman of
the Commis-
sion as Chief
Executive
Authority.

Authority
vests in the
Commission.

2

3. There shall be constituted by the Central Government a National Agriculture

Commission for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

4. There shall be constituted by the Central Government a State Agriculture

Board for each State which shall work under the National Agriculture Commission
to assist it in discharging its functions.

5, The Commission shall consist of —

(a) a Chairman to be nominated by the Central Government;

(0) nine other members to be nominated by the Central Government in the
following manner, namely:—

(i) three representatives of agriculturists;
(ii) one Vice-Chancellor of an agricultural univeristy;

(iii) one person having experience in dairying and animal husbandry
management;

(iv) two persons from financial institutions of whom at least one shall
be from a credit co-operative institutions;

(0) one representative from the co-operative marketing field; and
(vi) one representative of labourers.
(c) Presidents of State Agricultural Boards shall be members co-opted as and when

so required in the event of problems concerned with a State or the States,

6. Each State Agriculture Board shall consist of:—

(a) a President to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation-with
the Government of the respective State;

(b) seven other members of whom three shall be appointed by the Central
Government and four by the respective State Government in the following manner,
namely:—

(i of the three members to be appointed by the Central Government, at least
one shall be from co-operative marketing field and at least one from credit co-
operative institution;

(ii) the State Government shall appoint four members in the following manner,
namely:—

(व) two representatives of agriculturists;
(6) one representative from credit co-operative institutions; and
(©) one representative of labourers,
7. (1) The tenure of office of the Chairman and the members of the Commission shall

be for a period of three years from the date of appointment.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (7) the Central Government shall

have the right to reconstitute the Commission at any time before the expiry of the tenure,

(3) The provisions of sub-sections (/) and (2) shall also apply to the office of the

President and the members of the State Agriculture Board of each of the States.

8. The Chairman shall be the Chief executive authority of the Commission.

9. (1) The authority for carrying out the provisions of this Act shall vest in the

Commission.


25

30

35

40

4s

(2) The Commission shall have the power to appoint panels and sub-Committees as
and when required.

10. The Commission shall—
1. (a) recommend measures to increase agriculture production;
(b) undertake continuous research for increasing production of agricultural products;

(c) recommend to the Government to establish cold storage facilities for agricultural
products at appropriate places;

(d) recommend the measures to increase the storage facilities in relation to food
grains;

(e) recommend to the Government the items of agricultural products which are to be
imported or exported;

(f) recommend to the Government the loan facilities or financial assistance to be
extended to farmers;

(g) any other matter relating to agriculture.

2. (a) fix remunerative prices of agriculture commodities and declare them before the
sowing seasons and, while fixing such remunerative prices, the Commission shall keep in
view: all relevant factors but in particular the following factors, namely:—

(0 the input cost including capital investment;
(0 the average cost of land;

(iii) the labour charges as fixed under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and
amended from time to time;

(iv) the farmer and his family members’ labour input including consumptive
finance;

(») the expenditure on insurance, if any;
(vi) any other incidental expenditure;
(vii) interest on loans borrowed for this specific purpose;

(viii) incentives for intensive agriculture, scientific methods and improved
technology and income factors;

(ix) maintenance cost of the farm.

3. (a) carry out studies in the marketing of agricultural products and make recommen-
dations to the Central Government;

(b) carry out studies in the new agricultural technologies and make its recommenda-
tions to the Central Government;

(©) recommend measures to the Government either to provide secondary occupation
or alternate employment or compensation to the small farmers and marginal farmers in
their off season unemployment so as to make their agriculture viable and prevent their
mobility from the farms to other places for employment and additional earnings;

(@ recommend on the-use of employment guarantee schemes for land development
particularly utilizing the services of farmers in their off season unemployment for the
development of their own land; and पु

(e) recommend different financial facilities like provident fund, gratuity, etc. to the
farm labour and wage-eamers on agriculture as in the case of industrial labour.

4, Recommend to the Central Government the measures to be taken in case of fall
down in prices due to heavy production of an agricultural product during a particular
season and facilities to be given to farmers to encourage them for growing that agricultural
product also in the next sowing season.

Functions of
the Commis-
sion.


Power to
make rules,

Power to
regulate the
functioning of
the
Commission
and State

Agriculture
Boards

11. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the purposes of this act,

(2) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as may be after they are made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.

12. The Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
make regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder,
regulate the functioning of the Commissicn and the State Agriculture Boards,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Our country is an agriculture based economy even after rapid industrialisation. In
the last two-three years it was witnessed that agricultural production touched the low ebb.
Measures taken to improve agricultural production did not bear any result, As most of the
farming community depends upon rains for irrigation, production differs from season to
season. In one season agricultural production is very good and in next season the production
falls down. Since adequate cold storage facilities are not available in our country, the
Prices of agricultural products go up when there is low production. Since, farmers are
discouraged from growing a particular agricultural product if the price of that product
goes down in a particular season, the price of product goes up during the next season. The
Government should take steps to check the vagaries in production and prices from season
to season. Adequate remunerative prices should be given to farmers and announced well
before the sowing season to solve these problems.

Therefore, with a view to increasing the agricultural production in the country, it is
proposed to set up a National Agriculture Commission.

New Det,
November 8, 2000 UTTAMRAO DHIKALE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Agriculture
Commission. Clause 4 provides for the constitution of a State Agriculture Board in every
State. To meet the expenses of the National Agriculture Commission and to some extent
the expenses of the State Agriculture Boards also, a sum of rupees five crore is likely to be
incurred annually from the Consolidated Fund of India.

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be incurred on
the constitution of the Commission and the Boards.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out
the purposes of the Bill. Clause 12 empowers the Commission to make regulations, with
the previous approval of the Central Government to regulate the functioning of the
Commission and the State Agriculture Boards. Since the rules and regulations will relate
to matters of detailed procedure only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the constitution of a National Agriculture Commission with the
objectives to increase agricultural productivity in the country.

(Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4662L S—23-11-2000.

een