THE RAINW ATER (COMPULSORY HARVESTING) BILL, 2015
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater by every household, business
establishment and Government building, in order to ensure availability of
water and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rainwater (Compulsory Harvesting) Act, 2015.
(2)  It extends to the Union territories only.
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in public interest that the Union Government
udertake measures to preserve and harvest rainwater in the country for augmenting drinking
water availability in the country.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘business establishment’’ includes any building which is used as an office or
a factory in connection with any trade or business;
(b) ‘‘Government’’ means the Central Government or the Union territory
Administration, as the case may be;
Bill No. 179 of 2015
Short title and
extent.
Declaration.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting in
Government
buildings.
(c) ‘‘Government building’’ includes the offices of the Ministries, departments,
public sector enterprises, statutory bodies or bodies owned or administered by the
Government and autonomous bodies, local self Government bodies and residential
areas of Government employees provided by the Government;
(d) ‘‘household’’ means a dwelling unit of any description; and
(e) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
4. It shall be the duty of the Government to ensure provision of necessary infrastructure
and implement such measures, as it may deem necessary, to harvest rainwater in Government
buildings within such time as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every household and business establishment shall adopt such measures, as may
be notified by the Government, for rooftop rainwater harvesting within such time, as may be
specified in the notification.
(2) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall
lie, in the case of household, on the head or karta of that household, and in the case of a
business establishment, on the person, by whatever name called, who is primarily responsible
for the affairs of that establishment.
6. It shall be the duty of the Government to ensure construction and repair of
conventional water bodies such as wells, tanks, ponds, creeks and watersheds to preserve
the rainwater so as to recharge the levels of ground water.
7. (1) The Government shall, as soon as possible, prepare an action plan to educate the
masses about the technology and the benefits of rooftop rainwater harvesting.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Government shall also associate Non-
Governmental Organisations and such other agencies or institutions, as it may deem fit, in
such manner as may be prescribed.
8. Any person violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with a fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh or with both.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder, shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting by
households
and business
establishments.
Duty of
Government
to protect
water bodies.
Action plan
to educate the
masses about
rainwater
harvesting.
Punishment.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is estimated that our country receives rainfall of about four thousand billion cubic
metres every year and major part of this rainwater goes waste as it falls into the sea through
the rivers of our country. This huge wastage of rainwater is taking place inspite of the fact
that there is severe shortage of drinking water throughout the country. Water is a scare
resource and its availability for drinking and other household purposes in the country as a
whole is hardly as per requirement-more so in the desert and drought prone areas. The only
way to overcome this problem is to prevent the wastage of rainwater by conserving it
through harvesting and recharging the groundwater levels.
Identification of the areas not receiving normal rainfall with the help of reconnaissance
of each and every hamlet of the country, for success of this programme is the need of the
hour. The private sector as well as the Non-Governmental Organisations have to play a major
role in physical and financial terms, in order to achieve the goal of rainwater harvesting. To
save the planet earth, we have to make rooftop rainwater harvesting a movement of the
masses, in which, the Government, corporates and every household would participate and
preserve the rainwater which is the purest form of water. This will increase the level of ground
water which can be used for drinking and other purposes. Hence, it has become necessary to
make rooftop rainwater harvesting mandatory throughout the country to overcome the
water scarcity which otherwise will worsen further in near future if we do not act now.
As water is a State subject, initiative has to come from State Governments. But in the
first instance the initiative has to come from the Central Government by making rainwater
harvesting compulsory in the areas governed by it. The States can follow the Central
Government and make it compulsory in the States.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT RAJ
July 7, 2015.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for creating infrastructure for compulsory rainwater
harvesting in Government buildings. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall
ensure construction and repair of water bodies to preserve rainwater. Clause 7 provides that
the Central Government shall prepare an action plan to educate the masses about the
technology and the benefits of rooftop rainwater harvesting and associate Non-Governmental
Organisations and private sector for the purpose. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
one thousand crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to
be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater by every household, business
establishment and Government building, in order to ensure availability of
water and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1449LS(S-3)—16-07-2015.