1
THE  CASHEW DEVELOPMENT BOARD BILL,  2017
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Board for the development and promotion of cashew
cultivation, cashew nut processing, marketing and research to improve its production
and productivity and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cashew Development Board Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  179 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Board" means the Cashew Development Board constituted under
section 3;
(c) "cashew" means both raw and processed cashew; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall not later than three months from the
commencement of this Act, establish a Board to be known as the Cashew Development
Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of:—
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated by the Central Government having
outstanding calibre and eminence in the field of cashew cultivation, research or
marketing;
(b) two members of Parliament of whom one shall be from the House of the
People and one from the Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers
of the respective Houses;
(c) two members to be appointed by the Central Government one each to
represent the Legislative Assemblies of Kerala and Tamil Nadu;
(d) two members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the
alphabetical order to represent the State legislatures of Karnataka, Goa, Andhra
Pradesh, Orissa and Jharkhand:
Provided that every appointment under sub-clauses (c) and (d) shall be made
on the recommendation of the Presiding Officers of the respective State Legislative
Assemblies.
(e) three representatives, representing the Union Ministries of Commerce and
Industry, Agriculture, and Finance, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Central
Government;
(f) two members to be appointed by the Central Government one each to
represent the Governments of the States of Kerala and Tamil Nadu;
(g) one member to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the
alphabetical order to represent the States of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Goa,
Jharkhand and Orissa:
Provided that every appointment under sub-clauses (f) and (g) shall be made
on the recommendation of the State Government concerned.
(h) two members representing the cashew farmers;
(i) two members representing the workers of cashew processing industry;
(j) two memebrs representing the cashew processing industry;
(k) one member representing the food processing industry;
(l) one memebr representing the Indian made foreign liquor industry; and
(m) the Secretary to the Union Ministries of Commerce and Industry, who shall
be the Member-Secretary to the Board, ex-officio.
(3) The Board shall have a term of office of three years.
(4) The Board shall have its office at Ranchi in the State of Jharkhand.
Definitions.
Cashew
Development
Board. 10
15
20
25
30
35
5
40

3
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to
the Board as is required for its efficient functioning.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to and other conditions of service of
the officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall —
(i) make recommendations to the Central Government regarding formulation of
a comprehensive policy regarding cashew cultivation, processing, marketing, value
addition of cashew products, research and development aimed, inter alia,  at
discovering new uses of cashew products;
(ii) formulate welfare measures for cashew cultivators and workers in cashew
industry and advise the appropriate Government accordingly;
(iii) study the problems in cashew cultivation, processing, marketing including
issues in product diversification, value addition, research and development of cashew;
(iv) identify new cashew markets overseas and send business delegations to
study those markets;
(v) set up training and research institutes for imparting expertise in cashew
cultivation, value addition and product diversification; and
(vi) recommend measures to expand cashew cultivation in new areas in order to
attain self-sufficiency in cashew nuts.
5. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be called the Cashew Development Fund and there shall be credited thereto —
(a) any grant by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act;
(b) any grant or donation from State Governments, voluntary organizations or
other institutions:
Provided that no such grant, loan or donation shall be credited to the Fund
except with the prior approval of the Central Government.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act;
7. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor
General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Board.
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Functions of
the Board.
Constitution
of Cashew
Development
Fund.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Accounts and
audit.
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
40
45

4
8. (1) The Board shall submit an annual report on its functioning to the President.
(2) On receipt of annual report under sub-section (1), the President shall cause the
same to be laid before each House of Parliament within a period of thirty days from the date
of its receipt.
9. (1) The Central Government   may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Board to
submit an
annual report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is the largest producer of Cashew nuts, biggest consumer and also the largest
exporter of processed cashew nuts. It provides livelihood to lakhs of farmers, provides
employment to lakhs of workers in the cashew based industries and it is one of the most
important export earners for the country.
However, cashew cultivators are mainly the small farmers and the cultivation is done
in a very unorganised and unscientific manner. The farming practices and post harvest
technology are all very traditional and backward. There is hardly any research done in any
aspect of cultivation, processing, marketing and product diversification or the value addition.
All these factors lead to the fact that productivity of cashew in the country is very low.
But the possibilities in this field are unlimited. There is a huge possibility of expanding
the cultivation of cashew nuts and increasing the production and productivity of cashew
nuts as well as in the field of value addition and also new uses of cashew products. There
is also a big possibility of manufacturing high quality liquor from cashew kernels, which at
present goes as waste. Though there is scope for quality improvement, the "Fenni", being
made in the State of Goa from cashew kernels, is an example. Cashew nuts can also be used
for making drugs. Cashew trees may prove very useful for the timber industry, the pulp
industry, etc.
The constitution of the Cashew Development Board is primarily meant for improving
the techniques of cashew farming and giving boost to cashew processing industry,
manufacturing industry based on cashew, product diversification, promotion of research
and value addition along with market promotion and research and development.
If all these are done with a measure of success, it would bring prosperity to this sector
in agriculture and a new industry will be developed with tremendous potential and possibility.
The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
July 7, 2017.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Cashew Development Board,
Clause 4 provides that the Board shall perform certain functions for the welfare of cashew
farmers and workers of cashew based industries. Clause 6 provides that the Central
Government shall provide money, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf, to the Board by way of grants. Clause 7 provides that  the Board shall maintain
proper accounts and relevant records and bear the expenditure for auditing of the accounts.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Board for the development and promotion of cashew
cultivation, cashew nut processing, marketing and research to improve its production
and productivity and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2113LS(S3)—23-10-2017.