1
Bill No. 179 of 2014
THE FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION FOR CHILDREN OF PARENTS LIVING
BELOW POVERTY LINE BILL, 2014
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education from pre-primary to senior secondary level
and career guidance to the children of parents living below poverty line
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Free and Compulsory Education for Children of
Parents Living Below Poverty Line Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "career counsellor" means a person who possesses essential qualifications
and professional experience to give advice and information to students about their
career;
(c) "career guidance" includes providing information to students on the various
courses available on completion of school education, the basic requirements to join a
course and the manner of applying for admission in such courses;
(d) "child" means a male or a female who has not attained the age of eighteen
years;
(e) "parent" includes the adoptive or step parent or guardian of a child;
(f) "parents living below poverty line" means such parents whose income from
all sources does not exceed rupees one lakh per annum; and
(g) "school education" means education from pre-primary level to senior
secondary or equivalent level and includes vocational courses.
3. The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory school education to
every child whose parents are living below poverty line.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, "free education" includes:—
(a) any fee including admission and tuition fee;
(b) provision of books, note books and stationery materials free of cost; and
(c) mid-day meal and free hostel facility, wherever necessary.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of schools for
imparting school education.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government may, if it deems
necessary, upgrade any of the existing primary, middle or secondary school to senior
secondary level.
5. The appropriate Government shall apoint at least one career counsellor in every
school for career guidance to every student.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of every parent living below poverty line to admit his children
in a school.
(2) No parent shall withdraw his child from school till the child completes the education.
7.  No person shall employ a child in any job which prevents him from receiving school
education.
8.  Any person, including parents, who for any reason prevents, restrains or obstructs
a child from attending school or receiving school education, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year and shall also be liable to fine.
9. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
10.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parlament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Free and
compulsory
school
education.
Establishment
of schools.
Provision for
Career
Guidance.
Duty of
parents to
admit their
children in
school.
Prohibition on
Employment
of child.
Punishment.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the State
Governments.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both house agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Education plays an important role in shaping an individual's career. Education removes
blanket of ignorance, empowers people and familiarizes them of their fundamental rights. The
level of education helps people to earn recognition and respect in the society. Article 21A of
the Constitution guarantees free and compulsory education to all the children between the
age of six to fourteen years. However, there is no obligation on the part of the Government to
ensure pre-primary and higher education. Although, Government has taken an important
step by enacting the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, yet, a lot
more needs to be done to enable the children to secure gainful employment after completing
their education.
Modern education system is so expensive that all citizens cannot afford it. Poor parents
with meager income are unable to send their children to school beyond eighth standard and
the child is left with no option but to dropout after eighth class. It reflects poorly on our
educational system.
Education alone cannot be fruitful unless supplemented by career guidance in schools.
It will prove to be a boon to the students in pursuing further studies and choosing their
career.
The present Bill, therefore, seeks to put an obligation on the appropriate Government
to ensure free and compulsory education and career guidance to the children of parents
living below poverty line from pre-primary upto senior secondary or equivalent level.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
November 11, 2014.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education to every child whose
parents are living below poverty line. Clause 4 provides for establishment of adequate
number of schools for imparting school education. It further provides for upgradation of
primary or middle schools upto senior secondary and also appointment of career counsellor
in every school. Clause 9 provides for providing of adequate funds to the State Governments
for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees fifteen hundred crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education from pre-primary to senior secondary level
and career guidance to the children of parents living below poverty line
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3117LS(S3)—04.12.2014.