1
Bill No. 179 of  2018
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth  year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
2. After article 275 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
 namely:—
“275A. Notwithstanding anything in article 275, there shall be paid out of the
Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Bihar such
capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to enable the State to meet the costs
of implementation of schemes for accelerated development of the State including
development of infrastructure, generation of adequate employment opportunities and
Short title.
Insertion of
new article
275A.
Grants from
the Union to
the State of
Bihar.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

for undertaking relief and rehabilitation measures in the flood and drought prone
areas:
Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India a sum of
rupees ninety thousand crore as one time grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of
Bihar and a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore every year to that State:
Provided further that such grants-in-aid shall be in addition to the annual
allocation made by the Finance Commission to the State of Bihar and such other
financial assistance as may be provided by the Government of India to that State:
Provided also that the grants-in-aid referred to in this article may be reviewed
by the Government of India on the expiration of a period of five years from the
commencement of this Act.”.
3. After article 371-J of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“371K. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by
order made with respect to the State of Bihar, having regard to the requirements of
the State as a whole for development, poverty alleviation, employment opportunities
and other welfare measures for the people of the State, provide for:—
(a) implementation of long term schemes for accelerated development of
the State;
(b) an integrated scheme for flood control particularly in respect of rivers
originating in the neighbouring countries;
(c) an integrated scheme for drinking water supply and irrigation in the
drought prone areas of the State;
(d) long term schemes for the development of infrastructure such as
roads, highways, electricity, industries, sanitation, healthcare and such other
projects; and
(e) adequate facilities for technical education, vocational training,
equitable opportunities for employment in services under the control of the
Government and in private sector.”.
Insertion of
new article
371K.
Special
provision
with respect
to the State
of Bihar.
2
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Bihar is strategically one of the most important States of the Indian Union, but
unfortunately stricken with acute backwardness. Its underdevelopment and educational
and social backwardness are mainly due to the consistent neglect by the Central Government
and absence of good governance. Mother nature has also not been kind to this State, as half
of the State is drought prone, while the other half is prone to floods. Bihar faces the fury of
floods every year mainly from the rivers  originating in the neighbouring country of Nepal.
The State is inhabited by tribals, dalits and other socially and economically backward people
and is facing numerous problems such as widespread unemployment and lack of industrial
development due to very poor infrastructure. There has also been unprecedented rise in
cases of various diseases mainly vector-borne diseases like malaria, filaria, kala azar, dengue,
encephalitis, and other diseases like water-borne diseases, cancer, AIDS, heart ailments, etc.
The road network of the State is in shambles and educational facilities are in a very poor
shape particularly technical, medical and vocational education. Investment in the State, be it
domestic investment or FDI, is dismal. There is no adequate infrastructure like power, irrigation,
roads, railways, communication, etc., in the absence of which it is not possible to accelerate
the growth and development of the State at the desired levels.
In the year 2008, the flood waters of the river Kosi originating in Nepal devastated a
major part of the State as it breached its embankments displacing millions of people. Most of
these displaced people are yet to be rehabilitated. Though the State Government is doing its
level best to rehabilitate these displaced people and also to bring about overall development
of the State, but this is not possible without the active support of the Centre as the State will
require huge Central assistance. Therefore, rupees ninety thousand crore as grants-in-aid
and additional rupees thirty thousand crore annually needs to be allocated to the State of
Bihar for its overall development.
For this purpose new provisions are to be inserted in the Constitution to enable the
Centre to release the required funds to the State.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM  PRAKASH YADA V
November  28, 2018.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for grant-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Bihar for
development activities. It also provides for one time grant-in-aid to the tune of rupees ninety
thousand crore and rupees thirty thousand crore as recurring annual expenditure. Clause 3
provides for special provisions for the development of the State of Bihar. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve a recurring expenditure of rupees thirty thousand crore per annum
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ninety thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2086LS(S3)—11-12-2018.