1
THE FARMERS WELFARE FUND BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Farmers Welfare Fund and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Farmers Welfare Fund Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 179  of  2016
Short title and
extent.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "farmer" means any person engaged in agriculture and whose landholding
does not exceed five acres of land;
(ii) "Fund" means Farmers Welfare Fund constituted under section 3; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Farmers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
4. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Farmers Welfare Board for the purpose
of administering the Fund.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) one representative each of the Union Ministries of Power, Water Resources,
River and Ganga Rejuvenation, New and Renewable Energy, Rural Development and
Finance;
(iii) one representative of the NITI Aayog;
(iv) one representative of every State Government;
(v) three members representing the agro-based commerce and industry sector,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(vi) one representative of the farmers, to be appointed by the Central Government
in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(vii) the Secretary of the Union Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
who shall be ex-officio Secretary to the Board.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers and
staff as may be required for its efficient functioning.
5. (1) The Board shall formulate policies and guidelines regarding welfare of the farmers.
(2) The Board shall utilize the Fund for the following purposes:—
(i) free education to the children of farmers;
(ii) free medical facilities for farmers and their families;
(iii) payment of disability allowance to farmers for injuries leading to disability
sustained at work;
(iv) life insurance cover to the farmers;
(v) compensation to the farmers or their families, as the case may be, in case of
accidents resulting in permanent disability or death;
(vi) payment of old age pension to the farmers;
(vii) payment of subsistence allowance to the farmers during off-season; and
Definitions.
Constitution
of Farmers
Welfare Fund.
Constitution
of Farmers
Welfare Board
for
administering
the Fund.
Duties of the
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(viii) financial assistance to the farmers at the time of marriage of their children,
particularly daughters.
6. (1) Every State Government and the Union Territory Administration, shall conduct
a district-wise survey, in such manner and with such details, as may be prescribed, of all
farmers within their respective jurisdictions and cause the same to be published in such
manner and form, as may be prescribed.
(2) Any complaint or objection relating to inclusion or omission of name of any farmer
shall be addressed to the District Magistrate concerned who shall,  after due inquiry, decide
upon the rectification of the records.
7. (1) Every nationalized bank and financial institution, shall extend loans to farmers,
whether for farming or personal needs, without seeking any mortgage or guarantee or putting
any other condition.
(2) The rate of interest charged on loans provided under sub-section ( 1) shall not
exceed four per cent simple interest per annum:
Provided that the rate of interest shall not be increased before five years from the
commencement of this Act and any subsequent increase in the rate of interest shall
also not be made before a lapse of five years.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Survey of
farmers.
Banks to give
loans to
farmers
without any
guarantee.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even though farmers and agriculture form the backbone of our economy, it is surprising
that Government does not have any proper policy for the welfare of farmers as well as their
family members. The condition of farmers who own small holding of land is even worse.
There are a few welfare schemes in existence but these have not resulted in any noticeable
improvement in their living conditions. There is no institutional arrangement to meet their
credit needs. For that, they have to depend upon the local bankers and mahajans who
charge exorbitant rates of interest. Once in debt, it becomes very difficulty for them to come
out of this debt trap. In some parts of the country, farmers are committing suicide as they are
neck deep in debt. If this trend is not reversed soon, it can be easily imagined that what is
going to happen. It may also threaten the food security which we have attained after a lot of
struggle.
There is need for providing a net of social security for them. Banks and financial
institutions should also provide loans to the farmers at low rates and without stringent
conditions with regard to guarantee and mortgage.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA
July 4, 2016
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Farmers Welfare Fund to which
the Central and State Governments shall contribute in such proportion as may be prescribed.
Clause 4 provides for the constitution of a Board to manage the Fund. Clause 5 provides for
the utilisation of Fund for welfare measures of the farmers. Clause 6 provides for conducting
of district-wise survey of all the farmers covered by the provisions of the Bill. The expenditure
relating to State shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States.
However, the expenditure in respect of Union Territories shall be brone out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty
thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-five thousand crore is also likely
to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—1429LS(S3)—22-07-2016.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Farmers Welfare Fund and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria, M.P .)