......... 
BIU No. 11 of 195. CJ/ 
THE GIFT-TAX BILL, 195H 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

TIm GIFT-TAX BILt, 1958 
CLAUSBS 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRm.IMINARY 
I. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
CHARGE OF GIFT-TAX AND GIFTS SUB]BCT TO SUCH 
CHARGE 
3. Charge of gift-tax. 
4. Gifts to include certain transfers. 
S. Exemption in respect of certain gifts. 
6. Value of gifts how determined. 
7.~Amount of gift-tax how determined. 
8. Gift-tax Officers. 
CHAPTER~III 
GIFT-TAX AUTHORITIBS 
9. Appellate Assistant Commissionen of Gift-tax. 
10. Commissioners of Gift-tax. 
II. Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Gift-tax. 
• 
12. Gift-tax Officers to be subordinate to the Commissioner of Gift-tax and 
the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax,' 
13. Gift-tax authorities to follow orders, etc., of the Board. 
CHAPTER IV 
AssESSMENT 
14. Return of gifts. 
IS. Return after due date and amendment of return. 
16. Assessment. 
17. Gift escaping assessment. 
18. Penalty for concealment. 
19. Rebate on advance paymentAJI 

CHAPTER V 
LIABILITY TO ASSESSMENT IN SPBCIAL CASJIS 
~o. Tax of deceased person payable by legal representative. 
21. Assessment after partition of a Hindu undivided family. 
22. Liability in case of discontinued firm or assoc1&tion of persona. 
CHAPTER VI 
ApPBALS, REVISIONS, AND RBFERENCBS 
23. Appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner from orders of Gift-
tax Officers. 
24. Appeal to the .Appellate Tribunal from orders of the Appellate Assis-
tant Commissioner. 
2,. Power of Commissioner to revise orders of subordinate authorities. 
26. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal from orders of enhancement by 
Commissioner. 
27. Reference to High Court. 
28. Hearing by High Court. 
29. Appeal to Supreme Court. 
CHAPTER VII 
PAYMENT AND RECOVERY OF GIFT-TAX 
30. Gift-tax by whom payable. 
31. Gift-tax to be charged on property gifted. 
32. Notice of deml'nJ. 
33. Recovery of tax and penalties. 
34. Mode of recovery. 
35. Rectification of mistakes. 
36. Proaecution. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
37. Power to take evidence on oath, etc. 
38. Power to call for information. 
39. Effect of transfer of authorities on pending proceedinp. 
40. Computation of period of limitation. 
41. Service of norice. 
42. Prohibition of disclosure of information. 
43. Bar of suits in civil courts. 
44. Appearance before Gift-tax authorities by authorised representatives, 
45. Agreement for avoidance or reijd of double-taxation with respect to 
gift-tax. 
46. Act not to apply in certain cases. 
47. Power to make rules. 
THF SCHEDULB. 

5 
10 
4 of 19&40 20 
8W No. 11 of 19s! 
THE G 1FT-TAX BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of gift-tu. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title. 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu commCBlce-
and Kashmir. mmt. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gift-tax Act, 1958. 
(3) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1958. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(i) "Appellate Assistant Commissioner" means 8 person 
empowered to exercise the powers of the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner of Gift-tax under section. 9: . 
(ii) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal 
appointed under sectior. 5A of the Income-tax Act: 
(iii) "assessee" means a person by whom gift-ta or any 
other sum of money is payable under this Act; 
(it') "aasessment year" means the year for which tax is 
chargeable under section 3; 
(v) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue consti-
tuted under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; 
(vi) "Commissioner" means a person empowered to 
exercise the powers of a Commissioner of Gift-tax under section 
10; 
DeftnitiODB. 

2 
(vii) "company" means a company as defined in section 3 
of the Companies Act, 1956, and includes a foreiill company 
within the meaning of section 591 of that Act; 
(viii) "donee" means any person who acquires any property 
under a gift, and, where a gift is made to a trustee for the benefit S 
of another person, includes both the trustee and the beneficiary; 
(ix) "donor" means any person who makes a gift; 
(x) "executor" means an executor or administrator of the 
estate of a deceased person; 
(xi) "firm" has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian 10 
I of 1,,6. 
PartneMhip Act 1932· 9 of 1932. , , 
(xii) "gift" means the transfer by one person to another of 
any existing movable or immovable property made voluntarily 
and without consideration, and includes the transfer of any 
property deemed to be a gift under section 4; 15 
(xiii) "Gift-tax Officer" means the Income-tax Officer 
authorised to perform the functions of a Gift-tax Officer under 
section 8; 
(xiv) "Income-tax Act" means the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922; 2011 of 1912. 
(xv) "Income-tax Officer" means a person appointed to be 
an -Income-tax Officer under the Income-tax Act; 
(xvi) "Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax" 
means a person empowered to exercise the functions of an 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax under section 11; 25 
(xvii) Upartner" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
Indian Partnership Act, 1932, and includes a person who being 9 of 1'32. 
a minor has been admitted to the benefits of partnership; 
(xviii) uperson" includes a Hindu undivided family; 
(xtX) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 30 
this Act; 
(xx) "previous year", in relation to any assessment year, 
means the previous year as defined in clause (11) of section 2 
of the Income-tax Act if an assessment were to be made under 
that Act for that year : 
Provided that where in the case of an assessee there are 
different previous years under the Income-tax Act for different 
IOUrces of income, the previous year for the purposes of this Act 
shall be that previous year which expired last; 
35 

S 
3 
(xxi) "principal officer", used with reference to a company 
or any association of persons, means--
(a) the secretary, treasurer, manager, managing agent, 
managing director or agent of the company or association; 
or 
(b) any person connected with the management of the 
affairs of the company or association upon whom the Gift-
tax Officer has served a notice of his intention of treating 
him as the principal officer thereof; 
10 (xxii) "property" includes any interest in property, mov-
able or immovable; 
(xxiii) "taxable gifts" means gifts chargeable to Gift-tax 
under this Act; 
(xxiv) "transfer of property" means any disposition, con-
IS veyance, assignment, settlement, delivery, payment or other 
alienation of property and, without limiting the generality of the 
foregoing, includes-
(a) the creation of a trust in property; 
(b) the grant or creation of any lease, mortgage, charge, 
20 easement, licence, power, partnership or interest in pro-
perty; 
(c) the exercise of a power of appointment of property 
vested in any person, not the owner of the property, to 
determine its dispositiun in favour of any person other than 
2S the donee of the power; and 
(d) any transaction entered into by any person with 
intent thereby to diminish directly or indirectly the value 
of his own property and to increase the value of the pro-
perty of any other person; 
30 (xxv) "valuer" means a valuer appointed under section 4 of 
the Estate Duty Act, 1953. 
CHAPTER II 
CHARGE OF GIFT-TAX AND GIFTS SUBJECT TO SUCH CHARGE 
3. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, there Charle 
35 shall be charied in the manner provided in section 7 for every lift-taL 

Gifts .. in-
dude euain 
tranlfen. 
financial year commencing on and from the 1st day of April, 1958, a 
tax (hereinafter referred to as gift-tax) in respect of the gifts, if 
any, made by a person during the previous year. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, gifts made by the 
wife of any person out of any gifts made to her by her husband shall 5 
be deemed to be gifts made by the husband. 
4. For the purposes of this Act,-
(a) where property is transferred for less than the full con-
sideration therefor, the amount by which the market value of the 
property at the date of the transfer exceeds the value <Yf the 10 
consideration shall be deemed to be a gift made by the trans-
feror; 
(b) where property is transferred for a consideration which 
in the opinion of the Gift-tax Officer, having regard to the cir-
cumstances of the case, has not pa6sed or'is not likely to pass 15 
either in full or in part from the transferee to the transferor, the 
amount of the consideration which has not passed or is not likely 
to pass shall be deemed to be a gift made by the transferor; 
(c) where there is a release, discharge, surrender, forfeiture 
or abandonment of any debt, contract or other actionable claim 20 
or of any interest in property by any person in favour of another, 
the value of the release, discharge, surrender, forfeiture or 
abandonment shall be deemed to be a gift made by the person 
responsible for the release, discharge, surrender, forfeiture or 
abandonment: 25 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in respect of 
any debt which is proved to the satisfaction of the Gift-tax Officer 
to have become irrecoverable; 
(d) where a person absolutely entitled to property causes 
or has caused the same to be vested in whatever manner in 30 
himself and any other person jointly and such other person 
makes an appropriation from or out of the said property, the 
amount of the appropriation used for the benefit of the person 
making the appropriation shall be deemed to be a gift made in 
his favour by the person who causes or has caused the property 35 . 
to be 80 vested. 
Bxemption 5. (1) Gift-tax shall not be charged under this Act in respect of 
in rapect of gifts made by any person-certain lifta. 
(i) of immov.able property situate outside the territories to 
which this Act extends; 40 
• 

(ii) of movable property situate outside the said territorie§ 
unless the person-
(a) being an individual, is a citizen of India; or 
. (b) not being an individual, is resident in the said terri-
tories during the previous year in which the gift is made; 
(iii) of property in the form of savings certificates issued by 
the Central Government, which that Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, exempts from gift-tax; 
(iv) to the. Government or any local authority; 
10 (v) to any institution or fund established for a charitable 
purpose to which the provisions of section 15B of the Income-tax 
Act apply; 
(vi) for any charitable purpose not falling within clause (v), 
subject to a maximum of rupees one hundred in respect of each 
IS such gift; 
(vii) (a) being an individual, to any female relative depen-
dent upon him for the necessaries of life on the occasion of her 
marriage; 
(b) being a Hindu undivided family, to any female mem-
20 ber of the family who under any law, order or decree of a court 
is entitled to maintenance from the joint family property, on 
the occasion of her marriage; 
subject in either case to a maximum of rupees ten thousand in 
respect of the marriage of each such relative; 
25 (viii) to his wife, subject to a maximum of rupees one lakh 
in the aggregate in one or more previous years; 
(ix) of policies of insurance or annuities to his wife or 
children or to any other person dependent upon him for the 
necessaries of life, subject to a maximum of rupees ten thousand 
30 in value in the aggregate in one or more previous years of the 
benefits in respect of each such donee; 
(x) under a will; 
(xi) in contempl~tion of death. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section 
35 (1), gift-tax shall not be charged under this Act in respect of gifts 
made by any person during the previous year, subject to a maximum 
of rupees ten thousand; but such maximum shall have effect as if 

Value of 
gifts, how 
determined. 
Amount of 
gift-tax, 
bow deter-
mined. 
it had been reduced to rupees five thousand if the value of the tax-
able gifts to anyone donee during the previou&. year exceeds rupees 
three thousand. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) a Hindu undivided family, firm or other association of 5 
persons shall be deemed to be resident in the territories to which 
this Act extends durin~ any previous year unless, during that 
year, the control and management of its affairs was situated 
wholly outside the said territories; 
(b) a company shall be deemed to be resident in the terri- 10 
tories to which this Act extends during the previous year, u-
(i) it is a company formed and registered under thE. 
Companies Act, 1956, or is an existing company within the 
meaning of that Act; or 
(ii) during that year, the control and management of IS 
that company was situated wholly in the said territories; 
(c) "gifts made in contemplation of death" has the same 
meaning as in section 191 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925... 39 of 1925. 
6. (1) The value of any property other than cash transferred by 
way of gift shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and 20 
(3), be estimated to be the price which in the opinion of the Gift-tax 
Officer it would fetch if sold in the open market on the date on which 
the gift was made. 
(2) Where a person makes a revocable gift, the value of the 
property gifted shall be the capitalised value of the income from the 2S .. 
property gifted during the period for which the gift is not revocable. 
(3) Where the value of any property cannot be estimated under 
sub-section (1) because it is not saleable in the open market, the 
value shall be determined in the prescribed manner. 
7. For the purpose of determining the gift-tax payable by any 30 
person for any financial year under this Act-
(a) there shall first be ascertained, the value of all taxable 
gifts made by the donor during the five previous years imme-
diately preceding the financial year (other than "gifts made 
before the 1st day of April, 1957) and the gift-tax that 35 
would have been payable on the total value of all such gifte in 
accordance with the rates specified in the Schedule if all such 
gifts had been made during the previous year; 

7 
(b) the gift-tax payable for any financial year in respect of 
the gifts made during the previous year shall be that amount 
which bears to the amount of the gift-tax ascertained under 
clause (a) the same proportion as the total value of the taxable 
S gifts made during the previous year bears to the total value of 
all the taxable gifts made during the five previous years imme-
diately preceding the financial year. 
CHAPTER III 
GIFT-TAX AUTHORITIES 
10 8. Every Income-tax: OftIcer having jurisdiction or exercising Gift-to 
powers as such under the Income·tax Act in respect of any person Officers. 
shall perform the functiolJ8 of a Glft·tax Officer under this Act in 
respect of that person. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the Income-tax 
IS Officer having jurisdiction in relation to a person who has no income 
assessable to income-tax under the Income-tax Act, means the In-
come-tax Officer of the area in which that person resides. 
9. The Board may empower as many persons as it thinks fit to AAPl?etanllatte 
• SS15 
exercise under this Act the functions of an Appellate Assistant Com- Commis-
20 missioner of Gift·tax, and on being so empowered the Appellate ~~~f 
Assistant Commissioners shall perform their functions in respect of 
such areas or such persons or such classes of persons as the Board 
may direct, and where such directions have assigned to two or more 
Appellate Assistant Commissioners the same areas or the s.'\me per-
2S sons or the same classes of persons they shaIl perform their functions 
In accordance with such orders as the Board may make for the distri· 
bution and allocation of the work to be performed. 
10. The Board may empower as many persons as It thinks fit to Commis· . f 
exercise under this Act the functions of a Commissioner of Gift·tax, ~m~~~ 
30 and on being so empowered the Commissioners of Gift-tax shall per-
form their functions In respect of such areas or such persons or such 
classes of persons as the Board may direct, and where such directions 
have assigned to two or more Commissioners the same area, or the 
same persons or the. same ela!l;ses of persons they shall have con· 
3S current jurisdiction subject to such orders, it any, as the Board may 
make for the distribution and allocation of the work to be perfonned. 
11. The Qommissioner of Gift-tax may empower as many persons AInspectinit SU8tan 
lis he thinks fit to exercise under this Act the tunctions of an Commis-
inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Gift·tax, and on being soL~'ift~~~f 

8 
empowered the Inspecting Assistant Commissloners of Gift-tax shall 
perform their function!! in respect of such area!! or such persons or 
such classes of persons as the Commissioner may direct, and where 
such directions have assigned to two or more Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioners the same area or the same persons or the same 5 
classes of persons they shall perfonn their functions in accordance 
with such orders as the Commissioner may make for the distribution 
and allocation of the work to be performed. 
Gift-tax Offi- 12. The Gift-tax Officers shall be subordinate to the Commissioner 
~~bo:3in~~e of Gift-tax and the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax 10 
to. t~e Com- within whose jurisdiction they perform their functions. 
nu~S1oner of 
Gift-tax and 
the-Inspec-
ting Assistant 
Commi~soner 
of Gift-tax. 
Gift-tax ~ .13. All officers and other persons employed in the execution au thori ti cs 
to rollow~ of this Act shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and 
~f~~~'Boe;rcd~ directions of the Board: 
Provided that no orders, instructions or directions shall be 15 
given by the Board so as to interfere with the discretion of, the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax in the exercise of his 
appellate functions. 
CHAPTER IV 
ASSESSMENT 
Return of 14. (1) Every person who during a previous year has made any 
gifu. taxable gifts shall, before the thirtieth day of June of the corres-
ponding assessment year, furnish to the Gift-tax Officer a return in 
the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner. 
20 
(2) If the Gift-tax Officer is of opinion that in respect of the 2S 
- gifts made by a person during any previous year he is liable to 
gift-tax under this Act, then notwithstanding any thin$! contained 
in sub-section (1), he may serve a·notice upon such -person requir-
ing him to furnish within such period, not being less than thirty 
days, as may be specified in the notice, a return in the prescribed 30 
form and verified in the prescribed manner. 
(3) The Gift-tax Officer may in his discretion extend the date 
for the delivery of the return under this section. 

9 
15. Jf any person has not furnished a return within the time Return after 
allowed under section 14, or having furnished a return under that due ddm8te anI d amen en 
section, discovers any omission or a wrong statement therein, he of return. 
may furnish a return or a revised return as the case may be, at any 
S time before the assessment is made. 
16. (1) If the Gift-tax Officer is satisfied without requmng the Assessment. 
presence of the assessee or the production by him of any evidencp. 
that a return made under section i4 or section 15 is complete, he 
shall assess the value of the taxable gifts made by the assessee and 
10 detennine the amount payable by him as gift-tax. 
(2) If the Gift-tax Officer is not so satisfied, he shall serve a 
notice on the assessee either to attend in person at his office on a 
date to be speoified in the notice or to produce or cause to be 
produced on that date any evidence on which the assessee may 
IS rely in support of his return. , 
(3) The Gift-tax Officer, after hearing such evidence as the 
p~rson may produce and such other evidence as he may require 
on any specified points shall, by order in writing, assess the valuE' 
of taxable gifts made by the assessee and determine the amount 
20 payable by him as gift-tax. 
(4) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, 
the Gift-tax Officer may serve on any person who has made a return 
under sub-section (1) of section 14 or section 15, or upon whom a 
notice has been serveq under sub-section (2) of section )4, a notice 
25 requiring him to produce or cause to be produced on a date speci-
fied in the notice such accounts, records or other documents as the 
Gift-tax Officer may require. 
(5) If any person fails to make a return in response to any 
notice under sub-section (2) of section 14 or fails to comply with 
30 the terms of any notice issued under sub-section (2) or sub-section 
(4), the Gift-tax Officer shall estimate the value of taxable gifts 
to the best of his judgment and determine the amount payable by 
the person as gift-t~x. 
35 
17. (1) If the Gift-tax Officer- Gift escapin. 
assessment, 
(a) has reason to believe that by reason of omISSIOn or 
failure on the part of an ~ssessee to make a return under 
section 14 for any assessment year or to disclose fully and truly 
all material facts necessar·y for his assessment for that year, 
any taxable gift has escaped assessment for that year, whether 

10 
by reason of under-assessment or assessment at too low a rate 
or otherwise; or 
(b) has, in consequence of any information in his possession, 
reason to believe, notwithstanding that there has been no 
such omission or failure as is referred to in clause (a), that any S 
taxable gift has escaped assessment for any year, whether by 
reason of under-assessment or assessment at too Iowa rate or 
otherwise; 
he may, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time within eight 
years and in cases falling under clause (b) at any time within four 10 
years of the end of that assessment year, serve on the assessee a 
notice containing all or any. of the requirements which may be 
included in a notice under sub-section (2) of section 14, and may 
proceed to assess or re-assess any taxable gift which has escaped 
assessment, and the provisions of this Act shal~, so far as-may be, IS 
apply as if the notice had issued under that sub-section. 
(2) Nothing contained in this section limiting the time within 
which any assessment or re-assessment may be made shall apply 
to an assessment or re-assessment made on the assessee or any 
person in consequence of or to give effect to ~ny findin,g or direc- 20 
tion contained in an order under section 23, section 24, section 25, 
section ,27 or section 29. 
Penalty for 18. (1) If the Gift-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Commissioner, 
concealment" Commissioner or Appellate Tribunal, in the course of· any proceed-
ings under this Act, is satisfied that any person- zS 
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the re-
turn which he is required to furnish under sub-section (1) or 
sub-sect'ion (2) of section 14 or section 17 or has without reason-
able cause failed to furnish it within the time allowed and in 
the manner required; or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with a 
notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 16; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of any gift or deliberately 
furnished inaccurate particulars thereof; 
he or it may, by order in writing; direct that such person shall pay 3S 
by way of penalty-
(i) in the case referred to in clause (a), in a«1dition to the 
amount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum not exceeding one 
and a half times the amount of such tax, and 

11 
( ii ) in the case referred to in cia use (b) or cia use (c }, in 
addition to the amount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum not 
exceeding one and a half times the amount of the tax, if any, 
which would have been avoided if the return made by such 
S person under section 14, section 15 or section 17, as the case 
may be, had been accepted as correct. 
10 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless the 
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 
(3) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be insti-
tuted in respect of the same factti in relation to which a penalty 
has been imposed under this section. 
(4) The Gift-tax Officer shall not impoSe any penalty under this 
section without the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
IS Commissioner of Gift-tax. 
19. (1) If a person making a taxable gift of the value of not less Rebate on 
than rupees ten thousand pays into the treasury within fifteen days ~~;:~t8. 
of his making the gift, an amount calculated in the manner speci-
fied in sub-section (2), he shall, at the time of assessment under 
20 section 16, be given credit in addition to the amount so paid, for 
an amount equal to ten per cent. of the amount so paid. 
(2) The amount to be paid into the treasury under sub-section 
(1) shall be-
(a) where the value of the gift does not exceed rupees fifty 
25 thousand, four per cent. of the value; 
(b) where the value of the gift exceeds rupees fifty thousand 
but does not exceed rupees two hundred thousand, eight per 
cent. of the value; and 
(c) in any other case, fifteen per cent. of the value. 
CHAPTER V 
LIABILITY TO ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL CASES 
20. (1) Where a person dies, his executor, administrator, or Tax of 
other legal representative shall be liable to payout of the estate ~~~:~~ed 
of the deceased person, to the extent to which the estate is capable cayable 
3S of meeting the charge, the gift-tax determined as payable by such p~es~~~::~ 
person, or any sum which would have been payable by him under 
this Act if he had not died. 
(2) Where a person dies without having furnished a return 
under section 14, or after having furnished a return which the Gift-
40 tax Officer has reason to believe to be incorrect or incomplete, 

Aalessmcnt 
after parti-
tion ofa 
Hindu 
undivided 
family. 
Uabillty in 
case of dis-
continued 
8rmot 
association 
ofpenona. 
/ 
Appeal to 
the Appellate 
Assistant 
Commis-
sioner from 
orders of 
Gift-tax 
Officers. 
12 
the Gift-tax Officer may make "an assessment of the value of the tax-
able gifts made by such person and determine the gift-tax payable by· 
him, and 'for this purpose may, by the issue of the appropri~te 
notice which would have had to be served upon the deceased person 
if, he had survived, require from the executor, administrator or S 
other legal representative of the deceased person any accounts, docu-
ments or other evidence which might, under the provisions of 
section 16, have been required from the deceased person. 
(3) The provisions of sections 14, 15 and 17 shall apply to an 
executor, administrator or other legal representative as they apply 10 
to any person referred to in that section. 
21. (1) Where, at the time of making an assessment, it is 
brought to the notice o.f the Gift-tax Officer that a partition has 
taken place among the members of a Hindu undivided family, and 
the Gift-tax Officer, after enquiry, is satisfied that the joint family 15 
property has been partitioned among the various members or 
groups of members in definite portions, he shall record an order 
to that effect and he shall make asses~ents on the amount of 
taxable gifts made by the family as such as if, no partition had taken 
place and each member or group of members shall be liable jointly zo 
and severally for the tax assessed on ~he value of the taxable gifts 
made by the joint family as such. 
(2), Where the Gift-tax Officer is not so satisfied, he may, by 
order, declare that such family shall be deemed for the purposes 
of this Act to continue to be a Hindu undivided family. 2S 
22. Where a firm or association of persons ijable to pay gift-tax 
under this Act has been discontinued or dissolved, every person 
who was at the time of such discontinuance or dissolution a partner 
of such firm or a member of such association shall, in respect of 
the taxable gifts made ~y the fir~ or association, be jointly and 30 
severally liable to assessment and for the amount of tax payable 
by such firm or association under this Act and the provisions of 
this Act shall, so far as may be, apply to any suah assessment. 
CHAPTER VI 
APPEALS, REVISIONS AND REFERENCES 
23. (1) Any person,-
(a) objecti"ng to the value of his taxable gifts determined 
under .this Act; or 
(b) objecting to the amount of gift-tax determined 81 
35 
payable by him under this Act; or 40 

13 
(c) denying his liability to be assessed under this Act; or 
(d) objecting to any penalty imposed' by the Gift-tax Officer 
under section 18; or 
(e) objecting to a,py order of the Gift-tax Officer under 
S sub-section (2) of section 21; or 
</> objecting to any penalty imposed by the Gift-tax 
Officer under sub-section (1) of, section 46 of the Income-tax 
Act as applied under section 34 for the purposes of gift~tax; 
may appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner against the 
10 assessment or order, as the case may be, in the prescribed form 
and verified in the prescribed Planner: 
Provided that no appeal shall lie under clause (f) unless the tax 
has been paid before the appeal is filed. 
(Z) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the 
IS receipt of the notice of demand relating- to the assessment or 
penalty objected to, or the date on which any order objected to, 
is communicated to him, but the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 
may admit an appeal after the expiration of the period aforesaid 
if he is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not pre-
20 senting the appeal within that period. 
(3) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall fix a day and 
place for the hearing of the appeal and may from time to time 
adjourn the hea·ring. 
(4) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner may,-
25 (a) at the hearing of an appeal allow an appellant to go 
into any ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of. appeal; 
(b) before disposing of Rn appeal, make such further 
inquiry as he thinks fit or cause further inquiry to be made 
by the Gift-tax Officer. 
30 (5) In disposing of an appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commis-
sioner may pass such order as he thinks fit which may include 
an order enhancing the amount of gift-tax determined or penalty 
imposed: 
Provided that no order enhancing the amount of gift-tax 
!s determined or penalty imposed shall be made unless the person 
affected hereby has been given a reasonable opportunity of show-
ing cause against such enhancement. 

Appeal to the 
Appellate 
Tribunal 
from orden 
of the 
Appellate 
Assistant 
Commis-
sioner. 
14 
(6) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner under this section shall be forwarded to the appellant 
and the Commissioner. 
24. (1) Any assessee objecting to an order passed by the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner under section 23 may appeal to the S 
Appellate Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which he is 
served with notice of such order. 
(2) The Commissioner may, if, he is not satisfied as to the cor-
rectness of any order passed by an Appellate Assistant Co:nunis-
sioner under section 23, direct the Gift-tax Officer to appeal to the 10 
Appellate Tribunal against such order, and such appeal may be 
made at any time before the expiry of sixty days of the date on 
which the order is communicated to the Commissioner. 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal after the expiry 
of sixty days referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) if it is satis- 15 
fied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within 
tha t l!teriod. 
(4) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the pres-
cribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and 
shall, except in the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2),20 
be accompanied by a fee of rupees one hundred. 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the 
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as 
it thinks fit, and any such orders may include an order enhancing 
the amount of gift-tax determined or penalty imposeo: 25 
Provided that no order enhanCing the amount of gift-tax 
determined or penalty imposed shall be made unless the person 
affected thereby has been given a reasonable opportunity of show-
ing cause against such enhancement. 
(6) Where the appellant objects to the valuation of any gift, the 30 
Appellate Tribunal may, and if the appellant so requires, shall, 
refer the question of disputed value to the arbitration of two 
valuers, one of whom shall be nominated by the appellant and the 
other by the respondent, and the. Appellate Tribunal shall, so far 
as that question is concerned, pass its order under sub-section (5) 35 
conformably to the decision of the valuers: 
Provided that if there is a difference of opinion between the 
two valuers, the matter shall be referred to a third valuer nomi-

ia 
iiated by agreement, or failin, aifeement, by the Appellate Tribunai, 
and the decisi.on of that valuer on the question of valuation shall 
be final 
(7) The costs of any arbitration proceeding under sub-sectiOn. 
5 (6) shall be borne by the Central Government or the assessee, as 
the case may be, at whose instance the question was referred to 
the valuers: 
Provided that where the assessee has been wholly or partialiy 
s~ccessful in any reference made at his instance, the extent to' 
10 which the co~ts shall be borne by the assessee shall be at the dis-
cretion of the Appellate Tribunal. 
(8) The valuers may, in disposing of any matter referred to 
them for arbitration under sub-section (6), hold or cause to be 
held such inquiry as they think fit, and after giving the appellant 
15 and the respondent an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders 
thereon as they think fit and shall send a copy of such order to 
the Appellate Tribunal. 
(9) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Tribunal 
under this section shall be forwarded to the assessee and the 
20 Commissioner. 
(10) Save as provided in section 27, any order passed by the 
Appellate Tribunal on appeal shall be final. 
(11) The provisions of sub-sections (5), (7) and (8) of section 
5A of the Income-tax Act shall apply ~o the Appellate Tribunal in 
25 the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in 
the discharge of its functions under the Income-tax Act. 
25. (1) The Commissioner mey, either on his own motion or on Power. . of 
application made by an assessee in this behalf, call for the record ~n;!!lI:!~fs; 
of any proceeding under this Act in which an order has been passed ~~~~~d11at:f 
30 by any authority subordinate to him, and may make such inquiry or authorities. 
cause such inqui.ry to be made, and, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, pass such order thereon not being an order prejudicial to the 
al:>l:iessee, as the Commissioner thinks fit: 
Provided that the Commissioner shall' not revise any order under 
35 this sub-section in any case-
(a) where an appeal against the order lies to the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner or to the Appellate Tribunal and the 

16 
time within which such appeal can be made has not expired or, 
in the case of the Appellate Tribunal, the assessee has not waived 
his right of appeal; 
(b) where the order is pending in appeal before the Appel-
late Assistant Commissioner or has been the subject of an appeal 5 
to the Appellate Tribunal; 
(c) where the application is made by the aaseSHe for luch 
revision unless-
(i) the application is accompanied by a fee of rupees 
twenty-five; and 10 
(ii) the application is made within one year from the 
date of the order sought to be revised or within such further 
period as the Commissioner may think fit to allow on bdng 
satisfied that tne assessee was prevented by sufficient cause 
from making the application within that period; and 15 
(d) where the order is sought to be revised by the Commis-
sioner on his own motion, if such order is made more than one 
year previously. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,-
(a) the Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall be deemed 20 
to be an authority subordinate to the Commissioner, and 
(b) an order by the Commissioner declining to interfere 
shall be deemed not to be an order prejudicial to the assessee. 
(2,) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section 
(1), the Commissioner may eall for and examine the record of any 25 
proceeding under this Act, and, if he considers that any order passed 
therein by a Gift-tax Officer is erroneous in so far it is prejudicial 
to the interests of revenue, he may, after giving the assessee an 
opportunity of being heard, and after making or causing to be made 
such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass such order thereon as the 30 
circumstances of the case justify, including an order enhanCing or 
modifying the assessment or cancelling it and directing a fresh 
assessment. 
(3) No order shaH be made under sub-section (2) after the expiry 
of two years from the date of the order sought to be revisei. IS 

17 
al. (1) Any assessee objecting to an order of enhancement made AJpea11 to tJ: Appe late 
by the Commissioner under section 25 may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which the order is ~f~ 
communicated to him. . ment by 
Commis-
sioner. 
, (2) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal Ullder sub-section (1) 
shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed 
manner and shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees one hundred. 
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (3) and (5) to (10) inclusive of 
section 24 shall apply in relation to any appeal under this section as 
10 they apply in relation to any appeal under that section. 
27. (1) Within ninety days of the date upon which he is served~!hC.:: 
with an order under section 24 or section 26, the assessee or the Com-
missioner may present an application in the prescribed form and 
where the application is by the assessee, accompanied by a fee of 
15 rupees one hundred, to the Appellate Tribunal requiring the Appel-
late Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of law arising 
out of such order, and the Appellate Tribunal shall, if in its opinion, 
a question of law arises out of such order, state the case for the 
opinion of the High Court. 
-20 (2) An application under sub-section (1) may be admitted after 
the expiry of the period of ninety days aforesaid if the Appellate 
Tribunal is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting 
it within the said period. 
'(3) If, on an application made under sub-section (1), the Appellate 
~S Tribunal,-
(a) refuses to state a case on the ground that no question of 
law arises, ()II' 
(b) rejects it on the ground that it is time-barred, 
the applicant may, within ninety days from the date on which he 
30 is served with a notice of refusal or rejection, as the case may be, 
. apply to the High Court, and the High Court may, if it is not satisfied 
with the correctness of the decision of the Appellate Tribunal, re-
quire the Appellate Tribunal to state the case to the High Court, 
and on receipt of such requisition the Appellate Tribunal shall state 
3, the case: 
.- Provided that, if in any case where the Appellate Tribunal has 
been required by an assessee to state a case the Appellate Tribunal 
refuses to do so on the ground that no question of law arises, the 

18 
assessee may, within thirty days from the date on which he receives 
notice of refusal to state the case, withdraw his application, and if 
he does so, the fee paid by him under sub-section (1) shall be 
refunded to him. 
(4) The statement to the High Court shall set forth the facts, the, 
determination of the Appellate Tribunal and the question of law 
which arises out of the case. 
(5) If the High Court is not satisfied that the case as stat.ed is 
sufficient to enable it to determine the question of law raised thereby, 
it may require the Appellate Tribunal to make such modification 10 
therein as it may direct. 
(6) The High Court, upon hearing any such case, shall decide the 
question of law raised therein, and in doing so, may, if it thinks fit, 
alter the form of the question of law and shall deliver judgment 
thereon containing the grounds on which s~ch decision is founded r S 
and shall send a copy of the judgment under the seal of the Court 
and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal and the 
Appellate Tribunal shall pass such orders as are necessary to dispose 
of the case conformably to such judgment. 
(7) Where the amount of any assessment is reduced as a result 20 
of any reference to the High Court, the amount, if any, overpaid as 
gift-tax shall be refunded with such interest as the Commissioner 
may allow, unless the High Court, on intimation given by the Com-
missioner within thirty days of the receipt of the result of such 
reference that he intends to ask for leave to appeal to the Supreme 3, 
Court, makes an order authorising the Commissioner to postpone 
payment of such refund until the disposal of the appeal in the 
Supreme Court. 
(8) The costs of any reference to the High Court shall be in the 
discretion of the Court. . 30 
(9) Section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, shall apply to • ef 1,01. 
an application to the High Court under this section. ,... 
Heari0J bJ 28. When a case has been stated to ,the High Court under section 
H;~" Court r.:-.... "1.7, it shall be heard by a Bench of not less than two Judges of the 
High Court and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of 35 
such Judges or of the majority of such Judges, if any: 
Provided that where there is no such majority, the Judges shall 
state the point of law upon lIrhich they differ and the cue abaU 

19 
then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the Judges 
of the High Court, and such point shall be decided according to the 
opinion of the majority of the Judges who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it. 
, 29. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judg- t~g:!~o 
ment of the High Court delivered on a case stated under section 27 CourL 
in any case which the High Court certifies as a fit case for appeal to 
the Supreme Court. 
(2) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed 
10 on appeal under this section, efYect shall be given to the order of the 
Supreme Court in the manner provided in sub-section (6) of 
section 27. 
(3) The High Court may, on application made to it for the execu-
tion of any order of the Supreme Court in respect of any costs 
15 awarded by it, transmit the order for execution to any Court subordi-
nate to the High Court. 
CHAPTER vn 
PAY'IoIENT AND RECOVERY 0'" GIrr-TAX 
30. Gift-tax shall be payable by the donor but where in the Gift-tu 
~ opinion of the Gift-tax Officer the tax cannot be recovered from the ~Y~~l~~ 
donor, it may be recovered from the donee: 
Provided that the amount of the tax which may be recovered 
from the donee shall not exceed that portion of the gift-tax which is 
attributable to the value of the gift made to the donee by the donor 
25 as at the date of the gift. 
31. Gift-tax payable in respect of any gift comprising immovable ~e~~!~ 
property shall be a first charge on that property but any such charge 0!1 propertY 
shall not affect the title of a bona fide purchaser for valuable consi- gifted .. 
deration without notice of the charge. 
30 32. When any. tax or penalt~ is due in consequence of any order ~~~d~ 
passed under thIS Act, the GIft-tax Officer shall serve upon the 
assessee or other person liable to pay such tax or penalty a notice of 
demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable and 
the time within which it shall be payable. 
35 33. (1) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of demand Recovery of 
issued under section 32 shall be paid within the time, at the place, ~aw~. 
and to the person mentioned in the notice, or if no time is so men-
t ioned, then on or before the first day of the second month following 

Mode of 
recovery. 
Rectificatioa 
fIl mistakes. 
Prosecution. 
20 
the date of service of the notice, and any assessee or other person 
liable to pay the amount failing so to pay shall be deemed to be in 
default. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where aft 
assessee has presented an appeal under section 23, the Gift-tax S 
Officer may, in his discretion treat the assessee as not being in default 
as long as such appeal is undisposed of. 
34. The provisions of sub-sections (1), (lA), (2), (3), (4), (5), 
(5A), (6) and (7) of section 46 and section 47 of the Income-tax Act 
shall apply as if the said provisions were provisions of this Act, and 10 
referred to gift-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty under this 
Act instead of to income-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty 
under that Act, and to Gift-tax Officer and Commissioner of Gift-tax 
instead of to Income-tax Officer and Commissioner of Income-tax. 
CHAPTER VITI 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
35. At any time within four years from the date of any crder 
passed by him, or it, the Gift-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner, the Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal may. 
on his, or its, own motion rectify any mistake apparent from the ~ 
record and shall, within a like period rectify any sJ,lch mistake which 
has been brought to the notice of the Gift-tax Officer, the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner, the Commissioner or the Appellate Tribu-
nal, as the case may be, by an assessee: 
Provided that no such rectification shall be made which has the:lS 
effect of enhancing the amount of gift-tax detennined unless the 
assessee has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
the matter. 
36. (1) If any person fails without reasonable C8use,-
(a.) to furnish in due time any return of gifts under this 30 
Act; 
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, on or before the dat .. 
mentioned in any notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) 
of section 16, such accounts, records and documents as are refer-
red to in the notice; . 
(c) to furnish within the time specified any statement or 
infonnation which such person is bound to furnish to the Gift-taz 
Officer under section 3ft; 

, . 
~" " 
.~ 
" 
I
:·'.i .. : ,\ 
,1 • . , . 
Ito'. 
21 
he shall, on conviction before a magistrate, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to rupees ten for every day during which the 
default continues. 
(2) If a person makes a statement in a verification in any return 
5 of gifts furnished under this Act or in a verification mentioned in 
section 23, 24 or 26 which is false, and which he either knows or 
believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be punish-
able with simple imprisonment which may extend to one year, 01' 
w'ith fine which may extend to rupees one thousand, or with both. 
10 (3) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under 
this section except at the instance of the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner may either before or after the institution 
of proceedings compound any such offence. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section "magistrate" means 
tj a presidency magistrate, a magistrate of the first class or a magistrate 
of the second class specially empowered by the Central Government 
to try offences under this Act. 
37. The Gift-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Power to 
Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of take evidenca 
. A h h . on oath. etc:. ~o thiS ct, ave t e same powers as are vested m a court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, l!W8, when trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
25 (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses' , 
and any proceeding before the Gift-tax Officer, the Appellate Assist-
ant Commissioner, the Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal shall 
30 be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 
1860. 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 
38. Where, for the purposes of determining the gift-tax payable by p . ower to any person, It appears necessary for the Gift-tax Officer to obtain call for 
any statement or information from any person, the Gift-tax OffiCC1.lDfonnatiOD. 
35 may ~erve a. notice requi~ing such person, on or before a date co be 
therem speCified, to furOlsh such statement or information on the 
I. -,pOints specified in the notice, and that person shall, notWithstandin" 

anything in any law to the contrary, be bound to furnish such sbte-
ment or information to the Gift-tax Officer: 
Provided that no legal practitioner shall be bound to furnish any 
statement or information under this section based on any professional 
communications made to him otherwise than as permitted by section S 
126 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. i .f 1172 
Meet of 39. Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this Act any 
~f-=:oritie8 Gift-tax authority ceases to exercise jurisdiction and is succeeded by 
on= another who has and exercises such jurisdiction, the authority so 
pr s. succeeding may continue the proceeding from the stage at which the JO 
Computation 
of period of 
limitation. 
Service of 
notice. 
Prohibition 
of disclosure 
of informa-
tion. J 
proceeding was left by his predecessor. 
40. In computing the period of limitation, prescribed for an app!:!al 
under this Act or for an application under section 27, the day on 
which the order c0mplained of was made and the time requisite for 
obtaining a copy of such order shall be excluded. IS 
41. (1) A notice or a requisition under .this Act may be served on 
the person therein named either by post or as if it were summor.;; 
issued by a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
(2) Any such notice or requisition may, in the case of a firm or a 
Hindu undivided family be addressed to any member of the firm or ao 
to the manager or any adult male member of the family, and in the 
. case of a company or association of persons be addressed to the 
principal'officer thereof. 
42. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the 
provisions of section 54 of the Income-tax Act shall apply to aIl~' 
accounts or in relation to statements, documents, evidence or affida-
vits given, produced or obtained in oonnection with or in the course 
of any proceeding under this Act as they apply to or in relation to 
similar particulars under that Act subject to the modification that 
the reference to any "Income-tax authority" in clause (d) of sub- 30 
section (2) and to the "Commissioner" in sub-section (5) of that Act 
shall be construed as a reference to any "Gift-tax authority" and 
to the "Commissioner of Gift-tax", respectively. 
(2) Nothing contained in section 54 of the Income-tax Act shall 
apply to the disclosure of any such particulars as are referred to in 3S 
sub-section (1) to any person acting,in the execution of this Act or 
the Income-tax Act, or the Estate Duty Act, 1953, or the Wealth-tax 
Act, 1957, or the Expenditure-ta~ Act, 1957, where it is necessary 
or desirable to disclose the same to him for the purposes of this Act 
or any of the other Acts aforesaid. IP 
.. 
s of IPO~, 
.. 
304 of I9SS. 
27 of 1957. 
29 of 19'7. 
~ 

37 of 1949. 
Act Dot to 
apply in 
certain 
cues. 
I of 1956. 
23 
43. No suit shall lie in any civil court to set aside or modify any ~ar .of suit. 
assesSlllent made under this Act, and no prosecution, suit or other ~~ll 
legal proceeding shall lie against any officer of the Government for 
anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
5 44. Any assessee who is entitled to or required to attend before Apfo:~ce 
any Gift-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with !':x o::t~~~: 
any proceeding or inquiry under this Act, except where he is required ~ea .b1d au-
under this Act, to attend in person, may attend by a person authoris- re~~ta­
ed by him in writing in this behalf, being a relative of, or a person tive •• 
10 regularly employed by, the assessee or a legal practitioner or a 
chartered accountant or any other person having such qualifications 
as may be prescribed. 
15 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) the expression "a person regularly employed by the 
ass~ee" includes any officer of a scheduled bank with which 
the assessee maintains a current account or has other regular 
dealings; 
(b) "chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant 
as defined in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. 
20 45. The Central Government may enter into any agreement with AJreement 
the Government of any reciprocating country for the avoidance or ~~r a!li~~ce 
relief of double taxation with respect to gift-tax payable under this double 
Act and under the corresponding law in force in the reciprocating :ti:!pect 
country and may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such to gift-tax. 
25 provision as may be necessary for implementing the agreement. 
Explanation.-The expression "reciprocating country" for the 
purposes of this Act means any country which the Central Gov~rn­
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a 
reciprocating country. 
30 46. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to gifts made by-
(a) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(b) a corporation established by a Central, State or Pro-
vincial Act; 
3S (C) any company (other than a private company as defined 
in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956): 

Power to~ 
make rules. 
24 
Provided that the aftairs of the company or the shares in 
the company carrying more than fifty per cent. of the total 
voting power were at no time during the pre¥ioua year control-
led or held by less than six persons; 
(d) a company which is a subsidiary of and in which more , 
than half the nominal value of equity share capital is held by 
a company referred to in clause (c); 
(e) any institution or fund to which the provisions of section 
15B of the Income-tax Act apply: 
Explanation.-For the purpose of computing the number of 10 
six persons referred to in the proviso to clause (c), persons who 
are related to one another as husband and wife, brother and 
sister, brothers, sisters or who are lineal descendants or ascen-
dants of one another and persons who are nominees of any 
other person togetaer with that other person shall be treated 15 
as a single person. 
47. (1) The Board may, by notification in the OfficiaL Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, rules made under this section may provide for- 20 
(a) the manner in which the market value of any property 
may be determined; 
(b l the form in which returns under this Act shall be made 
and the manner in which they shall be verified; 
(c) the form in which appeals and applications under this 25 
Act may be made, and the manner in which they shall be 
verified; 
(d) the form of any notice of demand under this Act; 
(e) the refunds which may be made under this Act; 
(f> the areas for which lists of valuers may be drMVn up; 30 
(g) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed 
for the purposes of this Act. 
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall on 
the first occasion of the exercise thereof include the power to give 
retrospective effect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier ¥ 
than the date of commencement of this Act. 
(4) All rul~s made under this Act shall be laid before each House 
1)f Parliament as soon as may be after they are made and shall be 
subject to such modifications as Parliament may make during the 
aession in which they are so laid or the session immediately fQllolVing. 40 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 7) 
RATES OF GIn-TAX 
Rate of ~ 
5 ta7-
(1) On the first Rs. 50,000 of the value of all taxable gifts. 4% 
(2) On the next Rs. 50,000 of the value of all taxable gifts. 6% 
(3) On the next Rs. 50,000 of the value of all taxable gifts. 8% 
(4) On the next Rs. 5ID,000 of the value of all taxable gifts 10% 
10 (5) On the .ext Rs. 1,00,000 of the value of all taxable gifts 12% 
(6) On the next Rs. 2,00,000 of the value of all taxable gifts 15% 
(7) On the next Rs. 5,00,000 of the value of all taxable gifts 20% 
(8) On the next Rs. 10,00,000 of the value of all taxable gifts 2.5% 
(9) On the next Rs. 10,00,000 of the value of all taxable gifts 30% 
IS (10) On the next Rs' 20,00,000 of the value of all taxable gifts 35% 
(II) On the balance of the value of all taxable gifts 40% 
25 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to levy a tax on gifts made by individuals, 
Hindu undivided families, companies, firms and associations of 
persons. Gifts from one person to another provide a convenient 
means of avoiding or reducing liability to Estate Duty, Income-tax, 
Wealth-tax, and Expenditure-tax. The only e1fective method of 
checking such attempts at evasion or reduction of tax liability is by 
levying a tax on gifts. With the introduction of this tax, the inte-
grated tax ~tructure which the Government have been aiming at 
will be complete. 
The notes on clauses explain the various provisions contained in 
the Bill. 
J. NEHRU. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th February, 1958. 

27 
Notes on clauses 
Clatl.8e 2 defines, inter alia, "gift", "previous year" and "transfer 
of property". All voluntary transfers of property without considera-
tion and transfers deemed to be gifts under clause 4 of the Bill are 
covered by the definition of "gif.t". The definition of "previous year" 
secures that all gifts made during the period between the valuation 
dates determined for two consecutive wealth-tax assessments are 
charged to gift-tax in one year. The definition of "transfer of pro-
perty" is designed to cover all possible transfers of property. 
Cla1LSe 3 is the charging clause which provides that the tax is to 
be levied on all gifts made during the previous year by individuals, 
Hindu undivided families, companies, firms and associations of per-
sons. The persons referred to in clause 46 are however exempt from 
the charge. The liberal exemption provided for gifts made to one's 
wife may lead to avoidance of tax by gifts being made through one's 
wife and the Explanation to this clause seeks to check such avoidance. 
Clause 4 brings ~o charge certain transfers which are for 
nominal or inadequate consideration or for a consideration which 
although stipulated is not meant to pass actually. Similarly release 
or discharge from one's debts or liabilities, appropriations or with-
drawals from joint accounts for the benefit of a person other than the 
person who made the original deposit or investment, are brought 
within the scope of gifts. 
Clause 5 provides for the exemption of various types of gifts. 
Besides the gifts of property enumerated in sub-clauses (i) to (xi) 
which are exempt from charge to the extent indicated therein, there 
is a basic exemption of Rs. 10,000 which will be reduced to Rs. 5,000 
if the taxable gift to an individual donee exceeds Rs. 3,000. This 
reduction of basic exemption is meant to ciiscourage large gifts being 
made to the same individual. 
Cla1LSe 6 provides for the manner in which the values of gifts may 
be determined. Ordinarily the market value of the property gifted 
would be the value of the gift. 
Clause 7 while providing that the tax is charged on the value of 
gifts made during the previous year, lays down that the rate of 
tax shall be determined by the value of the gifts made during the 
five previous years preceding the assessment year. Gifts made 
before the lst day of April, 1957 though within the five year period, 
will not be taken into account for aggregation. 
G:la1LSes 8 to 13 deal with the administrative machinery. The in-
tention is to entrust the administration of this Act to the officers of 
the Income-tax Department under a procedure which follows broadly 
the procedure in the Income-tax Act. 
Clauses 14 to 18 are assessment provisions which follow similar 
provisions in the Income-tax, Wealth-tax and Expenditure-tax Acts. 

28 
Clawe 19 provides for a rebate of 10 per cent. on advance. pay-
ments towardii tax liability made within fifteen days of makIng a 
gift. The amount to be paid is calculated at specified percentages on 
the value of the gift. This provision is meant to encourage prompt 
payments. 
Clauses 20 to 29 relate to assessment in special cases, appeals, 
revisions and references and are similar to those in the lncom.tax, 
Wealth-tax and Expenditure-tax Acts. 
Cl4use 30 provides that the tax is primarily the liability of tlle 
donor, but in the interests of revenue it also provides that the donee 
will be jointly and severally liable for the tax. The donee's liabili~ 
is, however, restricted to the tax attributable to the gift received by 
him. 
Clause 31 makes the gift-tax a first charge on the immovable 
property comprised in the gift. 
Cl.a:uses 32 to 45 provide for payment and recovery of the tax and 
other connected matters. They follow similar provisions in the 
Income-tax, Wealth-tax and Expenditure-ta,. Acts. 
Clause 46 exempts Government companies, corporations establish-
oed by Central, State or Provincial Act, public limited companies 
whose affairs are controlled by not less than six persons and charit-
able institutions or funds from the application of the Act. 
Clause 47 makes the usual provision authorising the Central Board 
of Revenue to make rules for carrying out the purposes o~ the 
Act .. 

FIl(ANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill proposel to levy a tax on gifts made by individuals, Hindu 
undivided familiel, companies, firms and associations o~ persons. 
Although this ia a new tax, the procedure for assessment, appeal 
and collection follows the same pattern as in Income-tax, Wealth-tax 
and Expenditure-tax Acts. It is, therefore, proposed to administer 
the tax through the Income-tax Department which is administering 
the Wealth-tax and Expenditure-tax Acts as well. The pressure of 
work on the Income-tax Department has even otherwise consider-
ably increased since last year consequent on the reduction of mini-
mum taxable limit to Rs. 3,000. The Department cannot, therefore, 
take on the responsibility of administering this new tax without some 
expansion of staff at the various levels of the departmental cadres. 
2. The increase of personnel, along with incidental expenses of 
administration, including payment of remuneration to valuers is 
estimated to cost Rs. 8 lakhs. Actual recruitment of staff will, how-
ever, be made as and when it is found really necessary . 
I. VOLUME OF WORK • 
As we have no reliable data regarding the number of gifts made 
in a year, the extent and value, it is very difficult to make even a 
rough estimate of the number of persons who would be called upon 
to pay gift-tax if the Bill is enacted as proposed. It would, however, 
be safe to assume that normally only the very well-to-do persons 
would be in a position to make substantial gifts which attract liabi-
lity to this tax. As a rough guess the number of such assessees may 
be taken as 10,000 in anyone year. 
29 

II. REQUIREMENT OF pERSONNEL AND FINANe! 
A. Officers: 
No. of Inspecting Assistant Commis-
sioners and Appellate Assistant 
Commissioners. 
No. Cost RI. 
(2+2) 4 4x1200x12 57,600 
No. of Gift-tax Officers taking the 
average disposal per Officer per 
annum at 400. 25 25x500x12 1,50,000 
B. Staff: 
Inspectors 
No. of Supervisors 
No. of Head Clerks 
No. of UDCs. 
No. of LDes. 
No. of stenographers. 
No. of steno-typists. 
• 
C. Incidental expenditure: 
Incidental expenses including Class 
IV staff, contingencies and 
payment of remuneration to 
valuers estimated nt. 
30 
12 12x250x12 
5 5x350x12 
24 24x250x12 
58 58x150x12 
29 29x120x12 
4 4x150x12 
27 27x140x12 
say 
TOTAL 
36,000 
21,000 
72,000 
1,04,400 
41,760 
7,200 
45,360 
5,35,320 
5,50,000 
2,50,000 
8,00,000 

I 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 47 of the Bill authorises the Central Board of Revenue to 
make rules with respect'to matters like the manner in which market 
value of property gifted may be determined in cases where they are 
not easily determinable, the form in which returns may be made 
under the Act, the form in which appeals should be filed or notices 
of demand issued and the manner in whioh refunds may be made. 
The rule making power is of a normal character. 
31 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of gift-tax. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article II7 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the 
Lok Sablla, the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri JQfJ)aharlal Nehru, 
Minister of Pinance.) 