Bm No. 17 of 19S5. 
THE INDUSTRIAL AND STATE FINANCIAL CORPORA-
TIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABIiA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948, and 
the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Industrial and State Financial Short title 
Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1955. :~=.-
, (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In sub-section (2) of section 1 of the Industrial Finance Corpo- r:=nt 
ration Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the Ac:ex.J~l' 
words "except the State of Jammu and Kashmir" shall be omitted. 1948· 
10' , 3. In clause (c) of section 2 of the principal Act, for the words Amen~nt 
"and engaged" the words "which is engaged or is to be engaged" J:c~ex~~l' 
shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted. 1948. 
4. In sub-section (2) of section 3 of the principal Act, for the words ~t 
"acquire and hold", the words "acquire, hold and dispose of" shall A~;X~~l' 
IS be substituted. 1948. 
5. In sub-section (1) of section 6 of the principal Act, the words Amendment 
"with the assistance of an Executive Committee and a Managing A~~~l' 
Director" shall be omitted. 1948· 

1 
~:~n7~: 6. Section 7, section 8 and section 9 of the principal Act shall be 
and 9 in Act omitted. xv of 1948. 
Amendment 
of secdon 10, 
Act XV of 
1948. 
Insertion of 
new8ccdon 
loA in Act 
xv of 1948. 
Chairman 
of thc Board. 
7. In section 10 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substi- S 
tuted, namely:-
"(a) A Chairman to be appointed by the Central 
Government after consultation with the Board; 
(aa) four Directors nominated by the Central Gov-
ernment"; 
(ii) clauses (f) and (g) shall be omitted; 
(iii) the provisos shall be omitted; 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
8. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"lOA. (1') The Chairman of the Board shall receive such 
salary and allowances as may be determined by the Board with 
the approval of the Central Government. 
(2) The Chairman shall hold office for three years or until 
10 
IS 
his successor is appointed and shall be eligible for reappoint- 20 
ment. 
. (3) The Chairman shall exercise such powers and discharge 
such duties as are assigned to him by this Act or as may be 
delegated to him by the Board. 
(4) If the Chairman is of opinion that circumstances exist 2S 
which render it necessary for him to take immediate action in 
respect of any matter which is within the competence of the 
Board or of the Central Committee and that the interests of the 
Corporation may be prejudicially affected if such ar.tion is de-
ferred until after the next meeting of the Board or of the Central 30 
Committee, as the case may be, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub-section (3), the Chairman may take such action 
in respect of that matter as he deems necessary and for such 
purpose, he may exercise all powers and do all acts and things 
which may be exercised or done by the Board or the Central 3S 
Committee but in every such case, he shall, as soon as may be, 
after the action is taken, make a written report to the Board or 
the Central Committee containing a statement of the action 
taken and the circumstances under which it was taken." 

3 
9. For sub-section (4) of section 11 of the principal Act, the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- tctsefv~fll. 
"(4) Directors shall be paid such fees for attending the meet- 1948. 
ings of the Board and if they are members thereof, of the Central 
5 Committee, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the 
Chairman or to any other Director who is a servant of the 
Government:' 
10. In clause (a) of section 12 of the principal Act, for the words Amendmf . ent 
10 'th M'D' h D 0 sect10n 12, e anagmg lrector or t e eputy Managing Director", the words Act XV of 
15 
20 
"the Chairman" shall be substituted. 1948. 
11. For sub-section (1) of section 13 of the principal Act, the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - I!:r. ae~~:3' 
"(1) The Central Government may at any time remove the 1948· 
Chairman from office." 
12. For section 13A of the principal Act. the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
section Substitution ofnew sec-
tion for sec-
tion 13A in 
Act XV of 
1948· 
"13A. If the Chairman of the Board is by infirmity or other- Casual 
wise rendered incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent vChac81,:ncy of rman. 
on leave or otherwise in circumstances not involving the vacation 
of his appOintment, the Central Government may, after consul-
tation with the Board, appoint another person to act in his place 
during his absence." 
13. For section 14, section 15 and section 16 of the principal Act, ~ub8titu-
25 the following sections shall be substituted, namely: - ~~~~Snf:: 
30 
35 
sections 14. 
IS and 16 in 
Act XV of 
1948• 
"14. (1) There shall be established a Central Committee Central Committee. 
which shall consist of,-
(a) a Chairman, 
(b) two Directors elected by the nominated Directors, 
and 
(c) two Directors elected by the elected Directors. 
(2) The Chairman of the Board shall be the Chairman of 
the Central Committee. 
(3) A Director elected to be a member of the Central Com-
mittee shall hold office as such for the rest of his term of office 
as Director for which he is so elected. 
(4) Subject to such general and special directions as the 
Board may from time to time give, the Central Committee shall 

Advisory. 
Unmnitteea. 
AppointmeDC 
of oflicera, 
aclvleara, etc. 
4 
be competent to deal with any matter within the competence 
of the Board. 
(5) The minutes of every meeting of the Central Committee 
shall be laid before the Board at its next following me~tL'lg. 
15. The Corporation may from time to time "ppoint one S· 
or more Advisory Committee or Committees for the purpose of 
assisting the Corporation in the efficient performance of its 
functions and in particular, for the purpose of securing that 
those functions are exercised with due regard to the circum-
stances of, conditions prevailing in, and requirements of, parti- 10 
cular areas or industries. 
16. The Corporation may appoint a General Manager and 
such other officers, employees and advisers as it considers neces-
sary for the efficient performance of its functions under this 
Act." IS 
Amendment 14. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
of aection 17, 
Act XV of (a) in sub-section (l),-1_ 
(i) fat' the words "Executive Committee" the 
"Central Committee" shall be substituted; 
words 
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "the Managing Direc- 20 
tor", the words "the Chairman" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (b) of sub-section (2), for the words "Executive 
Committee", the words "Central Committee" shall be substi-
tuted; . 
(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 2S 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) At a meeting of the Board or of the Central Com-
mittee, each Director or member of the Committee, as the 
case may he, shall have one vote, and in the event of an 
equality of votes, the Chairman or, in his absence, any other 30 
person presiding shall have a second or casting vote."; 
(d) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(5) If for any reason the Chairman is unable to be 
present at a meeting of the Board or of the Central Com- 35 
mittee, a Director or member of the Committee, as the case 
may be, authorised by the Chairman in writing in this behalf 
shall preside at that meeting and in default of such autho-
risation, the Board or the Central Committee may elect a 
Director or member of the Committee, as the case may be, 40 
to preside at that meeting". 

10 
15 
20 
5 
15. In section 21 of the principal Act, for sub-section 
lowing sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
(.1), the fo1- Amcn~t of sectIOn 21, 
Act xv of 
U(3) The Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out 1948· 
its functions under this Act, borrow money from the Reserve 
Bnnk,-
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed 
peridds not exceeding ninety days from the date on which 
the money is so borrowed, against securities of the Central 
Government or of any State Government; Or 
(b) repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not exceed-
ing eighteen months from the date on which the money is 
so Dorrowed, against securities of the Central Government 
of any maturity or against bonds and debentures issued by 
the Corporation under sub-section (1) and guaranteed by the 
Central Government and maturing within:\ period not 
exceeding eighteen months from the date on which the 
money is so borrowed: 
Provided that the amount borrowed by the Corporation 
\mder clause (b) shall not at any time exceed three crores 
of rupees in the aggregate. 
(4) The Corporation may also, for the purpose of carrying 
out its functions under this Act, borrow money from the Central 
Government on such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon: 
25 Provided that the total amount borrowed by the Corpora-
tion from the Central Government under this sub-section and 
from the Reserve Bank under clause (b) of sub-section (3) 
togp.tht'r with the amount of bonds and debentures issued under 
sub-section (1) and outstanding shall not at any time in the 
30 aggregate exceed five times the amount of the paid-up share 
capital and the reserve fund of the Corporation". 
16. In clause' (d) of sub-section (1) of section 23 of the principal A.mcncJ.m=t 
, d' ·th·· d f of aec:t1oa 23 Act, for the words 'an In Qny case WI In a perlo 0 Sf>ven years Act XV of ' 
from the date of such acquisition", the words "but in so case, the 1948· 
35 stocks, shares, bonds or debentures so acquired shall be retained 
beyond a period of seven years from the date of such acquisition, 
except with the permission of the Central Government" shall be 
substituted. 
1'7. In sub-section (2) of section 25 of the principal Act, for the ~dJDent 
d " D' t " h 11 b of &ecuOD 25. 40 words "a Director", the wor s one or more lrec ors s a e Act XV Of 
substituted. 1948. 

6 
~~~, 18.) n section 26 of the principal Act. in the proviso, for the 
Act XV of words "any shares". the words "any stock, shares" shall be substi-
1948· tuted. 
Amendment 
of lecdon 28, 
Act XV of 
1948. 
AmendmeQt 
of lection 30. 
Act XV of 
1948. 
19. In section 28 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "right to sell", the words 
"right LO transfer by way of lease or sale" shall be substituted; 
(bl in sub-section (2),-
(i) the words "of sale and realisation" shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the words "as if the sale", the words "as if the 
transfer" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (3A).-
(i) for the words "sold or realised", the words "trans-
ferred and realised" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "sale or realisation" occuning in 
both places, the words "or transfer and realisation" shall be 
SUbstituted. 
20. In section 30 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "without prejudice 
to the provisions", the words and figures "of Election 28 of this 
Act and" shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (10), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(lOA) An order under this section transferring the 
management of an industrial concern to the Corporation 
shall be carried into effect, as far as may be practicable, in 
the manner provided in the Cctde of Civil Procedw.w, 1908 V ofI90B. 
for the possession of immovable property or the delivery of 
movable property in execution of a decree, as if the Corpora-
tion were the decree-holder." 
::::L: 21. A~ter section 40 of the principal Act, the following section 
40A in Act shall be Inserted, namely:-
XV of J94B. 
Delegation or 
powen. 
Amendment 
of section 43. 
Act XV of 
1948• 
"40A. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate 
to the Chairman or any officer of the Corporatil)n, subject to 
such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in 
the order, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may 
deetl" necessary." 
H. In sub-section (2) of section 43 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (e), for the words "Executive Committee", the 
words "Central Committee" shall 'be substituted; 
5 
10 
IS 
30 
3S 

7 
(b) after clall~e (e), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(ee) the delegation of powers and functions of the 
Board to the Chairman or to officers of the Corporation"; 
5 (c) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(k) the duties and conduct, salaries, allowances and 
conditions of service of officers and other employees and 
of advisers and agents of the Corporation"; 
IO (d) in clause (n), after the words "this Act", the words 
"fees for attending meetings thereof and the conduct of business 
thereat" shall be inserted. 
23. In clause (c) of section 2 of the State Financial Corporations Amen'!ment 
Act, 19h1, after the word "engaged" the words "or to be engaJ;ted" ~ setxcni' 
15 shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted. of J9SJ• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Following the recommendations of the Industrial Finance Cor-
poration Inquiry Committee, 1953, organizational arrangements in 
the Corporation were reviewed by Government. Among other things, 
it is proposed to provide for a "Central Committee" instead of an 
"Executive Committee" and for the appointment (If a stipendiary 
Chairman to be assisted by a Generai Manager in place of the hono-
rary Chairman and a paid whole-time Managing Director. Certain other 
amendments have also been suggested by the further experience 
gained in the working of the Corporatictn and the present oppor-
tunity is being availed of to carry them out. The Bill seeks to amend 
the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 to achieve these objects. 
The mn also includes a provision for widening the definition of 
'industrial concern' in section 2(c) of the State Financial Corpora-
tions Act, 1951 in the same' way as the definition is proposed to be 
widened under the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948. 
The Notes nn Clauses appended to the Bill explain the provisions 
thereof. 
A. C. GUHA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 30th March, 1955. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to extend the Act to the State o~ 
Jammu and Kashmir. 
Clawe 3.-Doubts have arisen as to whether concerns which are 
not actua11y engaged in the manufacture or processing of goods 
are eligible for loans. This clause seeks to clarify the intention that 
concerns whiC'h have been formed with the object of engaging in 
the manufacture or processing of goods are als<1 eligible for loans. 
Cl.ause 4.-This clause seeks to make it clear that the Corpora-
tion should have the power not only to acquire and hold property 
but also to dil;pose it of. 
Clause S.-This clause seeks to vest in the Board of Directors the 
sole responsibility in regard to the general superintendence and 
direction of the affairs and ,business of the Corporation. 
ClI!1use 6.-ThP. oml&sion of sections 7, 8 and 9 is consequential 
on the abolition of the post of the Managing Director and the re-
placement of the Executive Committee by the Central Committee. 
Clause 7.-Scction 10 has been amended to provide for the ap-
pointmeat of the Chairman by Government after consultation with 
the Board and thE' abolition of the posts of the Managing Director 
and Deputy Managing Director are consequential changes. 
Clau.se B.-This clause deals with the terms and conditions of ser-
vice of the Chairman and the functions to be performed by him. 
Clauses 9 and lO.-The changes made are merely I!onsequential. 
Clauses 11 and l.e.-The powers for removal from office and for 
ftlling up casual vacancy at present exercisable by Government in 
respect of the Managing Director are provided by these clauses in 
respect of the Chairman. 
Clawe l3.-The proposed section 14 sets out the composition and 
functions of the Central Committee which will replace the existing 
Executive Committee. 
The proposed section 15 corresponds to original section 8. 
The proposed section 16 will enable the Corporation to appoint a 
General Manager along with other officers and advisers. 
Clau.se l4.-The changes made are merely consequential. 
Clause 15.-The proposed sub-section (3) of section 21 is merely 
a drafting change to make the intention clear and to bring it in 

to 
conformity with section 17(4B)(b) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934. 
The proposed sub-section (4) of section 21 empowers the Corpora-
tion to borrow money from the Central Government. 
Clause l6.-It is considered that the limitation in section 23(1)(d) 
that the stocks, shares, debentures or bonds taken up by the Corpora-
tion in fulfilment of its underwriting liabilities should not be held 
for more than seven years might be an obstacle to the Corporation 
taking up this business. It is therefore proposed to empower the 
Central Government to remove this limitation. 
Clause l7.-This clause seeks to make it clear that the Corpora-
tion has the right to appoint more than one Director on the Board 
of Directors of the industrial concern to which it has given a loan. 
Clause lB.-This is merely a drafting change. 
Clause 19.-This clause seeks to make it clear that for the pur-
pose of realising its dues, the Corporation can not only sell but also 
lease the property pledged or mortgaged to it. 
Clause 20.-When an industrial concern makes a default in the 
payment of its dues to the Corporation, the Corporation has been 
given certain rights under section 28 to realise its dues. The rights 
under section 28 are intended to be enforceable otherwise than in 
terms of the procedure laid down in section 30. It has, therefore, 
been provided that the procedure laid down in section 30 shall be 
without prejudice to the provisions of section 28. 
Again, section 30 of the Act does not provide for any procedure 
for the execution of the order passed by the court for transferring 
the management of an industrial concern. The proposed sub-section 
(lOA) of section 30 seeks to remove this lacuna. 
Clause 2l.-This clause empowers the Board to delegate its powers 
to the Chairman or other officers of the Corporation. 
Clawe 22.-Regulations governing pay, allowances and conditions 
of service of officers of the Corporation are not at present framed 
under the Act. Section 43 is being amended to provide for such staff 
regulations being framed under the Act. 
The other provisions made in this clause are self-explanatory. 
Clause 23.-The definition of 'industrial concern' in section 2(c) 
of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 is being widened in 
the same way as the definition is proposed to be widened under the 
Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948. 

II 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CoRPORATION ACT, 1948 (ACT 
No. XV OF 1948) 
• • • • 
1. Short title, extent and commenceDient.-
• • • • 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
• • • • 
2. Interpretation. 
• • • • 
(c) "industrial concern" means any public limited ('ompany or 
co-operative society incorporated by or under any law for the time 
being in force and registered in India and engaged in the maun-
facture or processing of goods or in shipping or in mining or in 
the generation or distribution of electricity or any other form of 
power; 
• • • • 
3. Establishment and incorporation of CorporatioD.-
• • • • 
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name of 
the Industrial Finance Corporation of India, having perpetual suc-
cession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, to acquire and hold property, both movable and immoveable, 
and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
• • • • 
6. Management.-(l) The general superintendence and direction 
of the affairs and business of the Corporation shall be entrusted to 
a Board of Directors which, with the assistance of an Executive 
Committee and a Managing Director, may exercise all powers and 
do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the 
Corporation. 
• • • • 
7. Powers of Executive Committee.-(1) Subject to such general 
or special directions as the Board may from time to time give, the 
Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with any matter 
within tht' competence of the Board. 
(2) The minutes of every meeting of the Executive Committee 
shall be laid before the Board at its next following meeting. 

I2 
8. Advisory Committee.-The Corporation may from time to time 
appoint one or more Advisory Committee or Committees for the pur-
pose of assisting the Corporation in the efficient discharge of its 
functions and in particular for the purpose of securing that those 
functions are exercised with due regard to the circumstances, condi-
tions prevailing in and requirements of particular areas. 
9. Managing Di.rector.-The Managing Director sha1l-
(a) be a whole time officer of the Corporation; 
(b) perform such duties as the Board may, by regulations, 
entrust or delegate to him; 
(c) hold office for four years and be eligible for re-
appointment; 
(d) receive such salary and allowances as the Board, with the 
approval of the Central Government, may determine. 
10. Board of Directors.-(l) The Board of Directors shall consist 
of the following, namely:-
(a) four Directors nominated by the Central Government; 
• • • • 
<I) one Managing Director appointed by the Central Gov-
ernment after consideration of the recommendation-
(i) in the case of the first appointment, of the Central 
Board of the Reserve Bank; 
(ii) in the case of subsequent appointments, of the Board; 
(g) One Deputy Managing Director appointed by the Cor-
poration: 
Provided that on the first constitution of the Board the Directors 
referred to in clauses (c), (d) and (e) shall be nominated by the 
Central Government to represent the classes of shareholders respec-
tively specified in the said clauses, and Directors nominated under 
this proviso shall for the purposes of this Act be deemed to be 
elected Directors: 
Provided further that all Directors of the Board first constituted 
other than the Managing Director shall retire at the end of the first 
year. 
• • • • 
11. Term of oftlee and retirement of Dlreeton.-(l) 
• • • • 
(4) Directors other than the Managing Director and the Manag-
ing Director llnd not being servants of the Government, shall be paid 

13 
such fees for attending meetings of the Board and if they are 
members thereof, of the Executive Committee, as may be prescribed . 
• • • • 
12. DisquaHftcation.-No person shall be a Director who-
(a) except in the case of the Managing Director or the Deputy 
Managing Director, is a salaried official of the Corporation; or 
110 
• • • 
13. Removal of Director from oftlce.-(l) The Central Govern-
ment may at any time remove the Managing Director from office 
after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
the action proposed to be taken in regard to him. 
• • • • 
13A. Casual vacancy of Managing Director.-If the Managing 
Director is by infirmity or otherwise rendered incapable of carrying 
out his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances 
not involvin~ the vacation of his appointment, the Central Govern-
ment mav. after r.onsideration of the recommendation of the Board, 
appoint another person to act in his place. 
14. Appointment of olllcers, advisers, etc.-The Corporation may 
appoint a Deputy Managing Director and such other officers, advi-
sers and f'mployees as it considers necessary for the efficient per-
formance of its functions. 
15. Chainnan of the Board.-(l) The Chairman of the Board shall 
be one of the Directors (not being the Managing Director) nominated 
in this behalf by the Central Government after considering, except 
in the case of the nomination of the first Chairman. the recommenda-
tion of the Board: 
Provided that the nomination of the Chairman for any period (other 
than the> first period) shall be made only after the vacancie~ in the 
office of Directors occurring by efflux of time in that period have 
been filled by nomination or election, as the case may be. 
(2) ThE" Chairman shall hold office for two years or until his 
succeSf:or is nominated: 
Provided that a Chairman shall. so long as he remains a Director 
be eligible for renomination as Chairman. 
16. Executive Committee.-(l) The Executive Committee shall 
consist of the Managin~ Director (who shall be Chairman of the 
Committee), two Directors elected by the nominated Directors and 
two Directors elected by the elected Directors. 

14 
(2) A Director eleded to be a member of the Executive Commit-
tee shall hold office as such for the rest of his term of office as 
Director for which he is so elected. 
17. Meetings of Board and Committee.- (1) Meetings of the Board 
and of the Executive Committee shall be held at such times and 
at such places as may be prescribed: 
Provided that until regulations have been made in this behalf 
such meetings shall be convened by the Managing Director 
(2) To constitute a quorum at a meeting of-
(a) the Board, not less than five Directors shall 'be present. 
of whom not less than two shall be nominated Directors and 
at least one an elected Director; 
(h) the Executive Committee, not less than three members 
shall be present, of whom at least one shall be a nominated 
Director and one an elected Director. 
(3) At a meeting of the Board or of the Executive Committee. 
each Director or member of the Committee. as the case may be, 
shall subject to the provisions of. sub-section (2) of section 10 have 
one vote, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman or 
in his absence. any other person presiding shall have a st"cond or 
casting vote. 
• • • • 
(5) If for any reason the Chairman is unable to be present at a 
meeting-
(a) of the Board. a Director (other than the Managing 
Director) authorised 'by the Chairman in writing in this behalf 
shall preside at that meeting and in default of o;uch authorisa-
tion the Board may elect a Chairman to preside at that 
meeting; 
(b) of the Executive Committee, a member authorised in 
writing by the Managing Director shall preside at that meeting 
and in default of such authorisation the Executive Committee 
may elect a Chairman to preside at that meeting. 
• • • • 
21. Borrowing powers.-
• • • • 
(3) The Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out it!! 
functions under this Act, borrow money from the Reserve Bank-
(a) against securities of the Central Government or of any 
State Government, repayable on demand or on the expiry of 

15 
fixed periods not exceeding ninety days from the date on 
which the money is so borrowed; or 
(b) against bonds and debentures issued by the Corporation 
under sub-section (1) or against such other security as may be 
required by the Reserve Bank maturing and repayable within 
a period not exceeding eighteen months from the date on which 
the money is so borrowed: 
Provided that the amount borrowed by the Corporation under 
clause (b) shall not at any time exceed three crores of rupees in 
the aggregate. 
• • • • 
23. Business which the Corporation may transact.-(l) The Cor-
poration shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be authorised 
to carryon and transact the following kinds of business, namely:-
• • • • 
(d) retaining as part of its assets any stock, shares, bonds 
or debentures which it may have to take up in fulfllment of its 
underwriting liabilities, so however that it disposes of th~ stock, 
shares, bonds or debentures'so acquired as early as practicable 
and in any case within a period of seven years from the date 
of such acquisition; 
• • • • 
25. Power to impose conditions for accommodation.-
• • • • 
(2) WhE're one of the conditions imposed is that a Director shall 
be appointed by the Corporation on the Board of Directors of the 
industrial concern to protect the interests of the Corporation, such 
condition shall be valid notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) or any other law for the 
time being in force or in any instrument relating to the industrial 
concern. 
26. Prohibited business.-The Corporation shall not-
(a) accept deposits except as provided by this Act; 
(b) subscribe directly to the shares or stock of any company 
having limited liability; 
(c) grant any loan or advance on the security of its own 
shares:: 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) shall affect the right of the 
Corporation to acquire any shares, bonds or debentures of a com-
pany having limited liability in fulfilment of any underwriting 
agreement entered into by the Corporation. 

" 
28. lUghts of Corporation in ease of default.-(l) Where any 
industrial concern which is under a liability to the Corporation 
under an agreement makes any default in repayment or otherwise 
fails to comply with the terms of its agreement with the Corpora-
tion, the Corporation shall have the right to take over the manage-
ment of the concern, as well as the right to sell and realise the 
property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the 
Corporation. 
(2) Any transfer of property made by the Corporation in exer-
cise of its powers of sale and realization under sub-section (1) shall 
vest in the transferee all rights in or to the property transferred 
as if the sale had been made by the owner of the property . 
• • • • 
(3A) Where the management of an industrial concern is taken 
over by the Corporation or any property is sold or realised by it 
under the provisions of su'b-section (l), all costs, charges and expenses 
properly incurred by it as incidental to such management, sale or 
realisation shall be recoverable from the industrial concern, and the 
money which is received by it from such management, sale I.)f re-
alisation shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be 
held by it in trust to be applied, firstly, in payment of such costs, 
charges and expenses and, secondly, in discharge of the debt due to 
the Corporation, and the residue of the money so received shall be 
paid to the person entitled thereto . 
• • • • 
30. Special provisions for enioreemeu.t of elaims by the Corpora-
tiODo-Where an industrial concern, in breach of any agreement, 
makes any default in repayment of any loan or advance or any 
instalment thereof or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of 
its agreement with the Corporation or where the Corporation requires 
an industrial concern to make immediate repayment of any loan or 
advance under section 29 and the industrial concern fails to make 
such repayment, then, without prejudice to the provisictns of section 
69 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (IV of 1882), any officer of 
the Corporation generally or especially authorised by the Board in 
this behalf may apply to the District Judge within the local limits 
of whose jurisdiction the industrial concern carries on the whole 
or a substantial part of its business for one or more of the follow-
ing reliefs, namely: - ' 
(a) for an orGer for the sale of the property pledged, mort-
gaged, hypothecated or assigned to the Corporation as security 
for the loan or advance, or 

I' 
(b) for transferring the management of the industrial con-
~~rn to the Corporation, or 
(c) for an ad interim injunction where there is appreaen-
sion of the machinery or the equipment being removed from 
the pr~misea o~ 1;he iAdusU'!al concern without Ule permiaiioa 
oi ihe BoIrd. 
• • • • 
43. Power of Board to make replatloDS.-
• • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
• • • • 
(e) the calling of meetings of the Board and of the Execu-
tive Committee, fees for attending meetings thereof and til. 
conduc~ of business tbereat; 
.. • • 
(k) the dutie. and conduct of officers, other employee., 
advisers and agenw of the Corporation; 
• • • • 
(n) appointment of adviSOry committees for technical ud 
other advice for purpolea of this Act; 
• • • • 
Ix11lACT FROM THI STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS Act, 1951 (Ace 
No. LXIII OF 19S1) 
• .. 
(2) DeAnitlOlll.-
• • • • 
(C) Clin.ciu.trial cOA<:ern" means any eortcern engaged in the 
manufacture, preservation or processing of goods or in minin. 
or In the gelkerationor distribution ot electricity or any other 
form of power,; 

'~". 
LOK SABRA 
:A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948. 
and the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II? cf 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secreta",. 
(Shri Arun Chandra Guha; 
Minister of Revenue and Defence Expenditur,.) 