As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
.. 't ~ \~9" 
BIU No. 17 of 11M 
THE INCHEK TYRES LIMITED AND NATIONAL RUBBER 
MANUFACTURERS LIMITED (NATIONALISATION) 
BILL, 1984 
ARRANGEMEJ>ff OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPrER II 
ACQUlSl1'ION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the 
undertakings of the two companies. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
S. Companies to be liable rior certain prior liabilities. 
·6 .. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of ,the under-
takings of the two companies in an existing Government· 
company. 
7. Transfer of the undertakings of the two companies from an 
existing Government company to a new Government company. 
CHAPI'ER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. Payment of amount. 
9. Payment of further amounts. 
CHAPrER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE 1WOCOMPANIES 
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the two companies. 
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of 
the two companies to deliver all assets. I etc. 
12. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc.,· in their possession. 
CHAPI'ER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING ro EM'P'LOYEES OF' mE TWO COMP~ 
13. Continuance of employees. 
14. Provident fund and other funds. 

(ii) 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
CLAuSES 
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner. 
17. Certain powel's of Central Goverrunent or existing or new, 
Government company. 
18. Claims to be mad'c \0 the Commissioner. 
19. Priority of claims. 
20. Examination of claims. 
21. Admission or .rejection of claims. 
22. Disbursement of money by Commissioner. 
23. Disbursement of amounts to the companies. 
24. Undisbursed Or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the 
general revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
25. Act to have overriding eftect. 
26. -Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Cenb-al 
Government or existing, or new, Government company. 
27. Penalties. 
28. Offences by companies. 
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
30. Delegation of powers. 
31. Power to make rules. 
32. Power to remove difficulties. 
33. Repeal and saving. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SF£OND SCHEDULE. 

• 
to 
THE lNCHEK TYRES Lll'1ITEI· .iliD NATIONAL RtJBm MANUFACTliRERS 
LIMITED (NATIONALISATI:JI~) ~ILL, 1984 . 
. (To be/As introduced it 10k Sabha) 
1. That in the Long Title, line 1,-
(1) ~r "f':)r" insert "the" 
(11) m "Inchecktt ~ "Inchek" 
2. That in the Long Title, line 7,-
!Ql:. "therto" read.. "thereto" 
3. page 3, against line 2 insert the marginal c1tation,-
"1 of 1956." 
4. P~ge 4, line 33,-
.1b.I. "Cenra 1 " ~"Cent ra I" 
5. page 6, line 4,-
. .. 
.f2l: 141m d ert 0 king s " ~ "undertakings" 
, '. ,- pa Be 6, 'lin e 5',-
(1) !su:. ":4.., st 00 d" ~ "int erest " 
7. P;lg~ '0, line 8,-
!oX. "each" ~ "such" 
8. Page 0, line 11,-
m "underto kin gs II ~ "uncertakings" 
9. 
. , ,'. 
Page ., line 20,-
(1) fol: !Iiayment" l.:.f.ill!1."payment" 
( 11) ..tlu:. "amo una s " ~ lJame unt s" 
10. Page ~, lines 22 and 23,-
!Ql: "deterhined" ~ "determined" 
• 

• - 2 -
11. page"', line 24,-
(1) before "companies" .~ in sert "two" 
(11) befpre "amount 'I insert "the" 
12." page 8, in .the marginal he8..ding to clause 15,-
!Ql: ''Pay S3.'vin g" t..c..:lQ. ''Pa Y!!lent s. " 
13. page 8, line ~L,_ 
(i) !Ql: ."the section " r8:'~ed "this sE;;ction" 
.. 
(ti) !Ql: !ldef!lyed" reJ.d.. "defrayed" 
14. Page 18, line 10,-
!Q.r.. "by" ~ "be" 
NEW ULHI· . , 

Bill No. 17 of 1184 
THE INCHEK TYRESLIMITED AND NATIONAL RUBBER 
MANUFACTURERS LIMITED (NATIONALISATION) BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
to provide for acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Incheck. 
Tyres Limited and the National Rubber Manufacturers Limited, with a 
view to securing tI~ proper management of such undertakings SO as to 
subsenJe the interests of the genera.lpublic by ensuring the continued 
ma.nujQcture, production and. distribution of tyf'es, tubes and other.' 
rubber goods which are essential to the -needs of the econom.y Of the', 
country and fCIT matters connected therewith or incidentC1l therto. 
WRBREAS the Incllek Tyres Umited and the National Rubber Manufilcturers 
Umited bad been eagaged in the manufacture, production and distribUtiQll of 
_ articles mentio'Jed in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and 
6,'j( otlP5] 'ltcplatiOll) Act, ]951, namely, ~Tes, tubes and other rubber goods; 

2 
AND WHEREAS ~e management of the undertakings of the Incbek Tyres 
Limited a:nd the management of the undertakings of the National Rubber Manu-
facturers Limited were taken over by the Central Government Ulnder the. provi-
sions of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; , 
ANn WHERl!lAS for the purpose of securing the optimum utilisation of the 5 
available facilities for the manufacture, production and distribution of tyres, 
tubes and other rubber goods by the undertakings of the two compal11,ies, invest-
ment of a large amount is necessary; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessally to acquire the undertakings of the Inchek Tyres 
Limited and the National Rubber Manufacturers Limited to enable the Ccmral 10 
Oovemmcnt to have such investments made and to ensure that the interests 
of the geacnl public are served by the continuance, by the undertakings of 
the companies, of the manufacture, production ~ distribution of tbe aforesaid 
articles which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Repubfu: of India J 5 
as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title 1. (1) TIiis Act may be called the Inebek Tyros Limited and National 
and Rubber Manufacturers Limited (Nationalisation) Act, 1984. 20 
commen-
cemem. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 14th day of February, 
DefiDi-
tiODl. 
1984. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 14th day of February, 1984. 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments appointed 25 
under section 15: 
(c) "existing Govcrnnlem company" means a Government company 
wbjch is ca·rrying on business on the appojnted day; 
(d) "new Government company" means a Government comp8Dy form-
ed and registere.d on or after the appointed day; 
(e) "notification" means a notification published in the OfIieial Gazet~; 
(I) "prescribed"· means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
30 
(g) "specified date", in relation to any provision of this Act, 
means such date 88 the Central Government may, by notification, specify for 
the purposes of that provision, and different dates. may be specifie4 for 35 
diffCl'ent provisions of this Act; 
65 ot 195! 
(h)' "two companies" mcaaa tbelnchek Tyres Limited and the. Nat10Dal 
'.. Rubber Manufacturers Limited,~being:companies aa:d,~:"':tbe:..c.on;tpapies' 
'. Act, 1956, aDd'havingtbeirtegisteteddices at"'Lestie Hous~\J9"JawaIJarlal 1 of 19S8. 
N"btv Road, Caleutta-700013; . ,.," .. . ', '40 

3 
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in 
the Companies Act, 1956, shaU have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER IJ 
5 ACQUISITION ~ND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANlES 
3. On the appointed day, the undertakings of eaeh of, the two eom-
panles, and tbe right, title and interest of eaeh of the two eompaaiea 
tn relation to its undertakinp, shall by virtue of this Act, .tand trans-
ferred to, 8IId shall vest in, the Centra] Government. 
10 4. (1) The undertakings of each of the two companies referred to in section 
3 shall be deemed to include all assets. rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities 
and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, including lands, 
buildings, workshops, s!ores. instruments, machinery and equipment, cash 
balances, cash on hand, cheques, demand drafts, reserve funds, investments, 
15 book debts and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property 
as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership. possession, 
power or control of such company whether within or outside India, and all 
books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating 
thereto. 
2U (2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Ccntra( Government 
under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from 
any trust. obligation, mortgage. charge, lien and all other incumbrances affecting 
them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court. tribunal 
or other authority restricting the use of such properties in any manner or ap-
25 pointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such propertiea 
shalt be deemed 10 have been withdrawn, 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act 
in the Centra) Government and every person holding any charge, lien or other 
interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, within snch time 
30 and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner 
of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of 
any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other person holding any 
charge. lien or other interest in. or in relation to. any such property shall be 
:lS ent~tled to claim. in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the 
mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in part. out of the amount specified. 
in relation to the company owning such property, in the First Schedule, ,and 
alsO' out' Of the amounts referred to in section 9. but, no such mortgage, charge, 
lieri 'm. other interest shall be enforceable against any property which· bas vested 
40 in the Central Government. 
Transfer 
to, and 
vesting 
in, tbe 
Central 
Govern-
ment of 
the UD-
dertak-
ings of 
the two 
com-
panies. 
General 
effect of 
vesting. 

::ompa-
rues to 
be liable 
for ce .... 
taln prior 
liablli-
tiel. 
4 
(5). Any licence or other instrument granted to either of t,he two companies 
in relation to any undertaking which has vested in the Central Government 
under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in force immediately 
before that day shall continue to be in force on and after such day in accordance 
with its tenor in reiation to and for the purposes of such undertaking, and, on 5 
and from the date of vesting of such undertaking under section 6 in an existing 
Government company, or under section 7 in " new Government company, the 
existing, or new, Government company. as the case ,may .be. shall be deemed 
to be substituted in such lk.:nc.: or oth(!r instrument as if such Iiccn.::e or other 
inst:nmleDt h~ been granted to sucb existing, or new, Government company and 10 
such ~IiUng, or new, Government company. shall hold it for the remainder of the 
period ,for which the compan,y to which it was granted \\-'lmld have held it under 
the terms thereof. 
(6) If. 00 the appointed day. any suit, appeal or other proceeding of what-
ever nature, in relation to any property which has vested in the Central Gevern- I j 
ment under section 3, instituted or preferred by or against either of the two 
companies is pending. the same shall not abate. be discontinued (IT be, in any 
way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of such 
company or of anything contained in this Act, but t~e suit. appeal or 
other proceeding may he continu.:d. prosecuted Of enfof~ed hy or against the ~o 
Central Government, or where the undertakings of the two companies vest 
under section 6 (lr section 7 in an existing. or a new, Government company. 
by Of against sllch Government company. 
5. (1) Evory liability, other than the liability specified in sub-section (2). 
of each of the two companies in respect of any period prior to the appointed 2.') 
day, shall be the liability of the concerned company and shall be enforceable 
agrunst it and not against the Central Government, or where the undertakinp 
of t.he two companies vest in an existing. or a new, Government company. 
against such Government company. ' 
(2) Any liability arising in respect of materials supplied to either :~f) 
of the two companies after the management of its undertakings had 
"been taken over by the Centl'81 Government shall, on and from. the 
appointed day, be the liability of the Cenral Government or of the exist· 
iIlg, or new, Government company aforesaid, 8IIld shall be discharged 
by that Goverllment or, as the case may be, the existing, or new, Gov· 35 
ernme:at company, os and when repayment for such supplies becomes 
due and payable. • .. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that-
(0) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any 
other provision of this Act, no liability, other than the liability 40 
specified in su'b-section (2), of either of the two companies in relation 
to its undertakings in respect of any period prior to the appOinted clay 
shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or. where the under-
takings of the two companies vest in an existing. or a new, Government 
company. against such Government company; 45 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court. trihuTI:l' or other autbo-
rity in relation to the undertakings of either of the two companies, passed 
OIl or after the appointed day, in respect of any maUer. claim Or dispute. 
not being a matter. claim or dispute in retatioa~toany matter refe~ 
to in sub-section (2), which arme hC'fore that day. 5haU be enforceab1e. 
against the Central Govl"rnment, or where the IIndert!1kin~!'I of the two 50 

.5 
companies v~st in an exj~ing, or'a new, Government company, agaiDSt 
such Government com~ny; 
~c) no liability incurre4. by either of the two cOmpanieS befOre tho 
appomted day, for the contravention of any provision of ~w for the time 
5 being in force, !'hall be enforceable against the Central Government, 
or. where the undertakings of the two companies vest in an existiq, 
or a new, Government company, against such Govemment company. 
6. (l) ~.otwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, and "w,ject Power of 
to the pr!;'Vlslons of section 7, the Central Government may if it is satisfied that Central 
loan existing Government company is willing to comply, ~ has complied, with =~~~ 
such terms aDd conditions as. that Government may think fit to impose, direct, dIrect 
by notification, that the ulldcrtaking~ (If ~:lch of the two companies and' the right. vestfna 
title and in,terC'lt of eaeh of the two companies in relation to its lJ'lKIertakings of the 
h· h h ed .. h C I under-w I~ • ave vest .111 t ~ .C'ntra Government under section 3, shall. instead of taldnis 
15 contlnmng to vest m the Central Government, vest in that existing 00\ ~mment of the 
company either on the date of the notification or on such earlier- or later date two can. 
(not being a date t:arIier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the panles 
notificetioo. in an f'!X-
latin, 
Govern. 
(2) Where tbe right, title and interest of the two companies in relation to ment 
20 their undertakings vest, under suh-section (l), in an existing Government company.. 
company, that C'lOVernment com IXln Y shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to have become. and, until the transfer ·of the under-
tak:ings, by virtue of the rrovisions of sectiOtt 7, to a new Govermnent 
company, be deemed to he, the owner in relation to such lJJIdertatings. 
25 and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to 
such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
deemed to have become, and, until the date of such transfer, be deemed to be, 
the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that existing Government company. 
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, where the Transfer 
30 undertakings of each of the two companies have been directed, under sub- ~~::_ un-
section (J) of section 6, to vest in an existing Government company, the Central Inp of 
Government may, if it is satisfied that a new Government company is wiIling to the two 
comply, or hal! complied, with such terms and conditions as that Government COIDPaDi-
may think fit to ~mpose, declare. by notification, that the undertakings of each es from 
35 of the two companies and the right. title and interest of each of the two companies ~~ : 
in relation to its undertakings he transferred to that new Government company, ernment 
and on the issue of such declaration, the right, title and interest of each of the company 
two companies in relation fo its undertakings which had been directed under sub-- to a llew 
. ... G shall 'nstead GoYera. scctiOD (1) of secllon 6 to vest In an eXIsting overnment company. , I mentcom-
40 of CODtinuing to vest in that existing Government company, vest In that new Gov- PIUl)'. 
emmcnt company with effect from the date on which !luch declaration is made. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the existing Government company 
in relation to the undertakings of the two companies vest. under sub-section (1), 
in a new Government company, that Government company shaU, on and from the 
45 date c:A. such vesting. be deemed to have become the owner in relation to sucb 
undertakings anrl the rights and liabilities of the existing Government company in 
,-elation to such undertakings, shaH, on aDd from the date of such vesting, be deem-
ed to have become the rights end liabilities, respectively. of that new Oovemment 
company. 

Payment 
of 
.1moullt. 
Puyment 
of fur-
th£'r am-
ounts. 
Manage-
ment, etc., 
of the 
under 
takings 
of the 
two Com-
panies. 
CHAPTER 1II 
PAYME1'o'l OF AMOUNTS 
8. For the trausfer to and vesting 10, the Central Gove.rnmaDt, 
UDder section 3, of the ~dertoldngs of eacb 01 the two companies, and 
the ri8ht, title and insteod of each of the two companes in relation to ;, 
its UDdertakings, there shall be paid by the Central Government to each 
of the two companies, in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI 
an amount equal to the amount specified against the Dame of each com-
pany in the First ~beduJe. 
9.(1) For the deprivation of the two companies of the "lIuuIagemellt 1 0 
of their undertokings during the period commencing on the date on which 
the undertakings of each such company was taken over in pursuanee of 
the orders made by the Central Government under the provisions of the 65 of In;;l. 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 and ending on the 
appointed day, there shall be paid by the Central Government to eacl1 15 
of the companies in cash, 81ft amount of rupees ftfty thousand. 
2) The amount referred to in section 8 and the amount specified in 
sub-section (1) shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent 
par BDDUJD for the period commencing on the appointed day and endinl 
on the date on Which jayment of such amounas is made by the Central 2 0 
Government to the Commissioner. . 
(J) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) aDd the amount deter-
hined inaeeordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) shall be given 
by the Central Governmmt to the companies in addition to amount 
spedfled in seetion 8. 
( 4) For the removal of doubt~, i I is hereby declared that the Ji~bilities of 
either of the two companies in relation to its undertakings which have vested in 
the Centra] Government under section 3, shall be discharged from the amount 
:referred to in section 8, and also from the amount specified in sub-section (I) 
and the amount determined under suh-section (2). in accordance with the rights 30 
and interests of the creditors of the two companies. 
CH A'J)'fER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
It. The genera] superintendence, direction. control and m8lllagetnent of the 
affairs and husiness of the undertakings of each of the two companies, the 35 
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Govern-
ment under seetig., 3. shal1,-
(a) where a direction has been given by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 6, vest on and from the date specified in 
such direction. in the existing Government company specified therein; or 40 
(b) where 'a declaration has been made under sub-section (1) of 
section 7, vest, on and from the date of such declaration, in the new 
Government company specified therein, 
and thereupon the existing, or new, Government company so specified, shall be 
entitled to eltercise, to the exolusion of all other persons, all such powers aDd 45 
do all such tbiDp as either, or both, of the two companies, is or are, authorised 
to exercise and do in relation to its or their undertakings. 

, 
11. (1) On the vestmg of the manasement of the Undertakings of the two Duty of 
companies in an existing, ora new, GoVernment company, ali pcr8Qb.S.1n perlOllB 
cbarge of the management of the undertakings of either of the two COlllimmies lnt chari. . media " 0 manllle-
ID1 tely before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to such Government ment of 
5 company. all assets, books of account, registers and other documents in their under-
custody relating to the uodertakilngs. takJnp 
of the 
(2) ~.e Ceo.tral Government may issue such ~jt~tionsas ft 1118' deem !:~e~; 
desirable In the clr~urnstences of the case to the eXlstmg, or new; GoveulIDcUt deliver 
company and such Government company ma"{ also, if it is constdered necessary all tPets, 
10 ~o to do. apply to the Centra] ('J(wernment at any timeforinstrUctiOM 8'S to etc, 
the manner in which the m:magement of the underta1clngs of the two ~arJles 
shall be conducted or in relation to any other matter arising in the course Or 
such management. 
, . 12. (1) Any person who has. on tho a"pointed day. in his passessidn or' Duty of 
15 under his control anv assetc;, books. documents or other OOl)ers retatio!!; to the:: rsonl 
undertakings owned by either of the two companies. which have vested 'n the cO= 
Centr~l Government or in a'll exlstin~. or a new. Government company under for 
,..thill Act, shall .be liable to account· for the said as~efs. bOOk9. dOCuments Uleta, 
aJJd .other papers to the Central Government or the' existhig.6r neW, Govern- QrJat)eo 
20 ment comoanv. as the caSe may be. and f!halJ deliver them to the Cctu:raJ Gov- .. ~ 
'~rnroent or the extstinl!. or new. Government companv orft)'sueJi J)er!!On or" . 
pers~ns as the C'.entra'1 ('JOvernment or th~ eyfo;tinl!. or new. Government c6m-
pany. m~ s!)ec'ify in this behaU. 
(I) The Central Government OT th~ ('JOvomml"nt romnany af~said may 
25 tete. or cause to br taken, ~11 nec~"sary stet'll' .forseeur;n2Possessiql',of .the 
undertakings of the two comoani~ which haVf~ vested. in the Central Govern-
ment or the Government company undr.r thi!' Act. 
(3) The two comoanies shan. within such neri~ as the . Central Govern-
ment may allow in this hehalLfumish to that Govcrn~entl'a co~pteteinven-
30 tory or all their properties and assets. ~·s on thl' :lOnointed day. oertalnlnll to 
the undertakings Which have vested in the ('potTal Oovprnmeot under section 
~. and. for this' pm,~')~e. the Centrql ("JOvem111cnt or th" C'rovernment company 
aforesaid ~an afford to the two cOJTIf)anies all reasonable facilities. 
CHAPTER V 
8.5 PROVT!'lTONS Rl'rATT1IJr, TO F.M'Y'TOVF.FC; or. Tf{F. TWO c'()MP~A~ 
13. (n Every pe~on who hac; he(,fl. imOlecll~telv h,.,or" th~ ~oT'Ointed CoDtJau-
I- d t_· f' 'L oJ h' ~'I_" -'LaD anc;, of day, employed m llny un ert~ ... tnt! 0 cI'ner.,. t~' two ..... ' ......... 'i'" 511 10 , ., '" emp yeu. 
beeome,-. " .' 
~ 'J ' • ~ 0-
(a) on lind from the apl'Ointed day, an cm~Joy('e of ~he Central 
40 Government. and 
(b) where the undertlllcifl'!" of the twn conmani .. .; liTe directed. 
under secti~ 6 or unl'ler .;C('tion 7. to ve!:t, in .an e:ttistin,l!. M a new, 
Gtwemment company. an employee of such Govc-mment company on and 
from the date of !;uch vc!lting, 
45 and shall hold office or ...ervice under the ('ontra1 (';nvrrnment f)r ftte n'l'tfnlP, 
or new. Government company. a!'l t~e .case 'TIav bt-. with tb~ ri~bt~ and orlvf-
leges 8Sto per1!1ion. !'1'8tuitv and othe'T matte1'!i. ndmi~siblf' to him immediately 

PrOYid-
ent fUnd 
aDd 
ofhet 
fUDda. 
.APpoint-
ment of 
CoapniI-
'-'~r 
of Pay-
...... 
8 
before the appointed day, as modified by the Memorandum of Seltlom .. t 
lipod by the repi'esentatives of the management and the employees of each 
of the tw6 companies OIl the . 10th day of February. 1984, and sba~l COl'ltmue . 
to do io unIeaa and until his employment under the Central Government 'or 5 
the exlstIn& or new, Govemment company. as the case'may be, is duly tend-
nated or untn his remunoration and other conditions of service are ~uly. altered 
., the Central Government. or the existing. or new. Government company, as 
tile cue may be. 
(I) Notwithstanding anythin~ contained in the .Industrial Disl"utcs Act, 
1947, or in lilY other law for the time being in force. the transfer of the 10 
seirvlcel tt uy oftker or other penron employed in any undertaking of either 
of the two companies. to the Central Gove·rnment or the existing. or new, 
Goveminent company, shall tt'ot entitle !ruch officer or other employee t~ any 
ct:'mpim.tion nnder this Act or any other law fOr the time being in force 'and 
no such claim shalt be en!ertained by any court. tribunal Or other authority. 15 
I.. (I) 'Mere either of the two companie!l has e<ltablished _ a provident 
faad~ superannuation. welfare or other fund fm the benefit of the persons 
~ in any d. its undertakin~. the moneys relatable to the ofticetil or 
adler e~ whose servi~ have become transferred bv . or under thii 20 
Act fo the Central Oovl'rnment or an exi!lting. or a new. Government 
company ilba11. out Of the moneys standing. on the appOinted day. to the credit 
of such provident fo·nd, . superan~uation. welfare or other fnnd. stand tramfer-
red to. and sb"l VC'!lt in. tl'te Centrnl Government Or tl'te existing. or new. Gov-
eiiuneat company. as tbe case may 'be. ". 
(2) The moneys which stand transferred unlir-r 'iub-!le'ction (1) to the ('entral 125. 
-Government or tlle existinR'. or new. Government comoanv. at; the c:.a.~ mev be. 
shall be dealt ~th by that GOVf'mment or the existing. or new. Government 
complny in such manQer as mav he prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMTSSTONP.R OF PAYMENTS 
15. (1) The Central Government· shall for the purpo!'le or disbU1'IIill;'" 30 
.. ~ 
the amounts 1I8yable under sections 8 and 9 to each of the two com. .-
.1Ianles, by notification, appoillt a Commi85ioner of Payments. . ~ 
, ~ 
(t) The Central Government may apPOint· such other 1)ersons as it 35 
may thh," fit to mIdst the Commifttoner alld thereupOll the Commis-
sioner may Rnthom.. one or mOre of lIuch ..,e~nns also to'ex~rci!le all or 
aity of the DOWP1'II ~ercisa'hl., by him unde? fbi,. Act and different per. 
IIOIIS may be Mlth01'J"t!'d to exercise different powers. 
(j) ARv pe1'so..· !Il1thnris("d b·' tbe ('ommis'lion"1" to e~erci~~ :m" of the 
plOWers exercisablf'"bv the Commissioner may e'.(ercie;e those t'IOw~ in Ihe !;ame 40 
manner and with the ,same effect ae; if ·thev h:we heen oonfl'rr~d on Ih'lt nerson 
directly hy thi!! Act and not'hy way of allthorl~ation. . 
(4) The s"18,,," and ftllo.ncl!!ll of the ConnnluloneJ' and ~h_ 
perwon!ll a"""'nted 1mdel' flu'! flPC'tion !IIhnll 'hp' dplayNf nut of the ('.on. 
solld.ted Flmd of III"a. 45 
14 of IH7. 

9 
16. (1). The Central Government shaU, witbin thirty days from the specified Pa1lUDt 
da{e,pay In cash to the Commissioner, for payment to each of the two by Cell-
companies._ .. tral Goy. 
ernment 
.(a) an amount equal to the amount specified against the name of such to the 
5 company in the First Schedule; and Commia-
I ) sloner . . () an amount equal to the amoun~payable to each of·the two 
companies under section 9. . 
(2) A deposit account shaU be opened by the Central Government in favour 
of the (;ommissioner in the P~b~k Account of India and every amouotpaicl 
10 under thIS Act to thl! COmrmSSl<lner shall be deposited by him to the credit 
of the .sai.d deJ:X>sit account and the said deposit account shaU be operated by the 
C0mtnlS81oner. 
(3) Separ:ate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect Of 
the undertakmgs of each of the two companies in relation to whicb payments 
15 have been made to him under this Act. 
( 4) Interest accruing on the amount standi III to the credit ~ the deposit 
account referred to in sub-section (:) shall cnureto the benefit of tbe two 
companies. 
1'1. (1) The Central GOVC1'UOlent or the existing, or new, G0ger1IIIIftt ccMl-CertalD 
20 pany, as the case may he, shall be entitled to r~ive op to ··dle'specffied date, ",powers 
the exclusion of all other persons, ony money due to either C1fthc two ~DiC. ;" lC~. 
inrelatjon to it'! undertakings whieh have vcstO(fin the Central·Go¥enu:aat or1he .. ~t 
existing, or new, Government company, III the case may be, and 11Ni1iscd after·the 'or exJat-
appointed day notwithstanding th'lt the realisation pertains to _ period prior to.the ln" or 
25 appointed day. new, Gov- . emment 
(2) The Central Government, or the existing, or new, ~t ~t ClOtnpallY. 
as the case may be; may make 3 claim to the Commissioner with f8IClrd to tN«Y 
paymenttlUlde by it after the appointed dey, for discharging any liability of either 
of the two companie~, not being any liability specified in sub-teetioo (2) of section 
305, in ~lation to any period prior to the appointed day, and every such claim shill 
have priority, in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this ~t. ~ tbq . 
matter in relation to which such liability bas been discharged by the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government 06rnpany. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of lCit.ber.of 
35 the two cOmpanicf; iii respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day which' 
·bave not been discharged on or before the specified date shall be the liabilities of 
lhe respective company. 
18. Every person having a claim against either of the ,twooompan-=s with Clairna 
regard to any of the matters specified in the Second Schedule pcrtaiDiq to any to be 
.f.o undertakings owned by it, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within =d~o~. 
thirty days from the specified date: ml .. loner. 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented 
by 'sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, 
he may entertain the claim within a further period of thirty days but DOt thereafter . 
• 5 19. The claims arising out of t.he matters s~ifie~ i.n thc Second Schedule Priorit7 
shall have priorities in accordance WIth the foUowlDg pnncrpJes, namely:- of elafIH. 
( Q) Category I shalt have precedence over all other categories and 
Category II sba.U kave precedence over Category III, &ad so 00; 

l!:xamina-
tian of 
claima. 
AdmiJ.. 
Ilion or 
rejec-
tion of 
claims. 
10 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shail rank equally and 
be paid in full, but, if thcaUlount is insufficient to meet such claims in fu11, 
they shall abate in equal proportions a.qd be paid accordingly, and 
(c) the qaestion of discharging any liability with regard to a mauer 
specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus is left· after 5 
meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher category. 
20. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commissioner 
sbiU' 1lTan,e . the claims in the' order of Priorities specified· in the SecaDd 
Sdliic1ule • and eX8Dline the same in accordance with such order . . 
. (1) If, onexaminatioo of the claims, the ComMissioner is of opinion that "10 
the amount paid to him under th\S Act is not sufficient to meet the liabi-
lities ~ed in any lower category~ he ~ ~ot be required to cxamiDe 1M. 
cl~ in~ Of !I~h lower ~~. . r " '" ' 
21. (1) .After examining the claims with reference to . the' priorities ipeci-
fied in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or beforel 15 
which eveTy,clai.ow;lcshW.l file the proof of his claim. ' ' 
(2) Not leas than fourteen days' notiCe' of the date so fixed shall be"giWD 
by ~ in one issue of: .any daily newspaper in the English language 
baving~on in the major part of the country and in one issue of IZl1 
'. daily J101FIP8Pet' ~ .such.regional langullge as the Commissioner may ~"~o 
BUitablc. sad every' .sucb notice sball. call \JPOD the c1aim,ant to" file the proof 
of'lds claim wkh the Commissioner ~fiin the period. specified in the advor-, 
,tiaemeot. • . II 
.'. (3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the period 
specified by ~ Commissioner, shall be excluded ~ the disbursc1:n~t J:Dade 25 . 
by the Cnm~ODer. 
(4) The CdDmissioDer shall,' 'after such investigation as may, io his opiD- . 
ion, be DeCOIISary< an:d after giving the concerned company an opportunity cI. 
refutlngthe claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. admit;or reject by order in writing the claim in whole or m" part. .. 30 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power" 1.0 regulate his own Procedure 
in aU matten arising out of the discharge of his" functions, including the place 
or pkca at which.he may hold his sittiap and shall. for the PurPo-e of mak-
ing any investigatiotl, .under this Act, have the same powers as' are vested . 
in a civil court undef1he Code of Civil Procedw"e, 1908,.wbile trYma a auito 35 501180. 
ia respect of the following matters, name1y:- . -
(a) the summoning and eoforcing the; .attendance of any witDcN aa.d 
exa.mill.ing him on O"dth; 
(b) the ctisoovery and Pro<tuction of any document or other ma~ 
object producible as evidence;' .! r: 40 
(c) the ~ece~tion of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the rissu~g of any cOhlmission for the ~xaminatioll of witneases. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding withiothe meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian 
. Penal Code and the Commissioner shaH be deemed to be a civil \:ourt for tho .5 45 of 1110. 
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a Of 1874. 
1973. 

5 
10 
II 
(7) A clWmanl who is dissatisfied with the decision of th,~ CommissiOllet 
may prefer an appeal against such decision to the principal civil CQU11 of 0ri&iD~ 
jurisdiction within the local limits of wh'?SC jurisdktion the registered office of 
the concerned company is situated: 
Provided that where a perSOQ who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed 
to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to tbe High Court exercising 
jurisdiction over the place in which the registered omce or the concerned com-
pany is situated and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
than two Judges of that High Court. 
.22.. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect; Disburse-
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persoll8 to ment of 
whom such amount is due, and on such payment, the liability of each Qf the money by 
two comnllnies in respect of such claim shall stand discharged. Commis-r- siotler. 
13. (1) If, out· of the moneys paid to him iu .rl!Jil\.i;oo,. ~9 the undertakings of Disburae-
15 either .?f lli~ two compani~s, there is a bal~c: .left.after. Ulef;ft.iHg thcJiapilities ment ot 
as spcQfied 1,n the Second Schedule, the CODl1ll1S,Sloner shall dis_~,wch ~ amounts 
to the concemec.1 company. '. , to the 
(2) Where the possession of any machiIlery, equipnient of'other propelty 
has vested in the Centra'" '(}overnment' or the' existih'g; or new;' GO"crnment 
compa-
nies. 
20 company,.under this,iAct, . but ~ch· machinery. ,oijuipment 'Oli other pro-
perty does not belong to eitherofAhe twopP!p.Pal1ies, it shall be l)lwful 10r the 
Central p0vern~t ·or the existing, or ne~., 90vernmcIlt company, as:~b~ .. case 
may be,: to continue to poss~s. sUfh machine~y or equipmeijt or. ~~cr Rf.p.~erty . 
on the same terms and conditiOns undcr which they were possess~4 D.Y clth.:r 
!:I5 of the two companies immediateJ), before the appointed day, ' . 
24. Any mone)' paid to, the Conwnissioner which remains uddisbursed or Vndis-
unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which, the office of bursed 
the Commissioner is finally wound up, shan be transferred by the Commissioner, ~~ai:e~ 
before his' office is finally wound up, to the ge.th!ral revenue account of the amount 
30 Ce~tral Government; but a claim to any money so i.ransfcrred may be preferred to be de-
to the Central Government by ~e penon entitled to such pllyment :l1nd shall p~Bited 
be dealt with as if such transfer bad not been made, and the order, if any, for WIth the 
the payment of the claim' b~ing treated as an order for the refund of revenue. ~:~~~~ 
CHAPTER VII 
account. 
35 ~ELLANEOUS 
'40 
25. The. -proviaiOl1l of this Act shall have effect notwithataDdinl any- Act to 
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in ~i~~e over-
force Qr in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, other than tbis effe~~ 
Act, or in . any decree or order of any court, -tribunal or other authority. . 
lit. Every contract entered Into oy either of the ;two companies in rclationContrllcts 
to any of its ulldertakings which has vested in the~ .. ~ntral Government und~r to 
section 3 for any service, sale or supply, and in force imtnediately before the cease to 
appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a p.::riod of one hundred and have ef-
eighty days from such day, cease to have effect unl~ss such contract is, before ~ect u~_ 
45 . the expiry of that· period, ratified, in writing, by· tho,. Central Government or fiee~ ~~ 
the existing, Or new, Government company and in,iatifying such contract, the the Cen-
Central Government or the existing, Qr DCW, GOVl:mment company may mako tral GoV-
IUch alteration or modification therein as it may think fit:' , emment 
• 
or exist-
jng, or 
new, Gov-
ernment 
. compan,.. 

Penalties. 
Offences 
);y com-
panies. 
Prov4d ~l the Central Goverumentor. the existing, or new, Government 
company shall not omit to ratify a contract and shall not make any al~rati\)n 
or modUlcation in a contract-, 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous, or has 
been entered into in bild hutn, or is detruueutl1 to the interests of the 
Central Government or such Government wmpauy; and 
(b) except after giVW& the parties to the contract 6 reasonable oppor-
tunity of belDg heard and except after recording in writing its reasons for 
refusal to rattly the contract or 101' maklDg any atterllioll Or modification 
therein. • 
27. Any person who.- -,_. 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property form-
ing part of any ~rtaking df eithu of the two companies. wronafully 
withholds such property from the Central Government or the existiDg, or 
5 
10 
new. Government company; or .' . _ .. 15, 
(b) wrOOifully o~ possession of, or retains. any property form-
1Di part of any oodertaking of eitbe.r of the two companies; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to ftImish to the Central Govenuncnt 
or the exJstlng. or new. Govcmmcot company or any porson or body of 
persons ipccificd by that Government or Government company, any dqcu- 20 
JJ¥?Dl reJati.D.g to such undertaking, which may be in his possession. ~y 
or OODtrol; or .,_. _ ......... 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Goveroment or the emling, or 
new. Gov~ company, as the case may ~, 'w. any person or ',body 
of pclS0D6 specified by that Government, .or Government cOmpany, any 25 
assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, 
custody or controL rdating to the undertakings of either of the two 
companies; or 
r (e) 'WrOIIlIfully removes or destroys any property forming part of' 
an, uadcrtaking of eitlw of. the two companies or prefers any daiJD 30 
which be knows or has reaso.oable cKuSC to believe to be false or gr~y 
inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment fOI a term. which may extend to two 
years, or with fme which may extend to ten tllousand rupees, '«with both, 
28. (1) Where an offence under this Act, has been committed by a 35 
company, every person who, at the time the otIence was committed, was 
in charge ,of, and was responsible to. the company for the, conduct of (he 
busiDcss of the company, as well 88 the company. shall be deemed to ;be pty 
of the offence and sball be liable to be proceeded against, and 'punished 
accordiDglJ : 
p'rovided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
penon liaPle to any pm;shtnent, if he proves that., the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he· bad exercised all due dili&ence to prevent the 
commission Of such 01rence. .' 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where Illy 45 
offence ' under this Act has been committed by a company and it is • 
proved that the ofteIlce hal been committed with the CODSenl or comllVIDCC of, 

13 
• iI attribIatabIe to any neclect OR the part of, any director. manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director. manager, secrelary or other 
officer shall be deemed to he guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
5 Exp/anation.-,-Por the pu'rposes of this section,-
, (a) "company" means any 'body cOrporate and includes a firm or 
other association of. individuals; and 
(b) "c:tireotor", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
29. (1) No suit pl'Mecution Or other legal proceeding shall lie against the ~rotec-• . ffi hon of 
10 Central Government or the eX,lSting, or new, Government company or any 0 cer action 
or other' employee of that Government or the Govcrnm·!nt company Or any taken 
person authorised by that Government or Government company for anything in ~ood 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. . talth. 
(2) No suit. or other legal, proceeding, shall lie against the Central Govern-
J 5 ment or the existing, or new. Government company, or 'any offir.~r or Qther 
employee of that Government or Government company or any person authori~cd 
by that Government or Government company for any dam:t!re caused OT liL.~ly 
to be caused by anything wh!ch is in' good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act. 
20 30. (1) The Central Government, may, by notification,' direct that aU or Det. legat-• . Ion 0 
any of the powen; exercisoo,Je by' it under thIS Act, other than the powers powers. 
conferred by this section, section 31 or section 32. may Llso be exercised by 
s~h persOil or persons as m'ay. be specified' in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section (1). the 
25 person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the direction. 
conlrol and supervision of the Central Government. 
31. (1) 'The Centr,al Government may. by ,nolifica!ion, make rules. for Power 
• 1 to make 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. rules. 
q) In particular. and without prejudice to the ~nera1itv of the fore!!oing 
30 power, such rules may p~vide fop all or any of the fotlowiQg matters. m:me1y:-
35 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which. an intimation 
rc-ff<rred to in sub·section (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or other 
fund refefred to in section 14 shall be deaft with; , 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the' Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as maybe after it is. made, before each House of Parliament. 
whne it is in ~ession, fOT a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions. and if, before the expiry 
40' of the session immediately following the session or the successive se~j(}ns 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both' 
Houses agree that the. rule should not Qe mlki¢, the rule sun thereafter have 
effect only in sud'! modified form or be of no effect. as the case mny he; so. 
however, that any such modificatio~ or annulment shall be without pTf'judice 
4~ to the validity of anyt~ing previously done under that rule. 
32. If any difBculty ari!ICs in giving effect to the provisiops of this' Act. POWer 
the Central Government may, by order, not ioconsistent with the provi~ions of :0: dlfti. 
thi" Act, remove the difficulty: cultiP.J. 

R.epeal aud 
.aving. 
, 
14, 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the eXpiry ofa .period 
of ·.two yean from the appointed day. 
33. (1) Tb~ Inchek Tyres Limited and National Rub~r Mauaufacturen 
Limited(Nationalis~tion) Ordinance, 1984, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action t~n UDder 5 
the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the cor- .. of 19" 
responding PfQvisions of this Act. 
THE FIRST .SCHEDULE 
[See sections 4 (4), 8 and 16 (1)] 
---_.--_ .. __ ._._._------ .. ---- ....• ----.- ... --.---
S1. No. Name of the Company Amount 10 
-------.~.- ._--
1. 
2. 
Inchek Tyres Limited' 
National Rubber 
Manufacturers Limited 
_._---_ .. _-, .. _.---- _. ----_ .. _-------_. 
~ 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
830.40 
159.M 
[See sections 18, 19, 20(1) ,21 (1) and 23 (1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORI'lDS'FOR '1"IU DISOIABGJ: OF LIABILI'l'IJ:S OF THE TWO COMP.um:B 
. Ca.tegory. 1- " 
(a.) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of 
the companies. .,# 
. a 
(b) Arrears in re1ation to contributions to be made by the com- 20 
panies to the provident fund, 'Employees' State InlUrance F'Ilnd, LIfe 
Insurance Corporation premium and any other arrear under any law 
for the time being· in force. 
Po~t-take-over ~gement p~riod: 
Category Il-
Principal amount of loans advanced by-
(a) ~e Central.Governmentj 
(b) .a State Government; 
(c). banks and. public financial institutions; 
(d) any other sources. 
Category III-
30 
(a) Any credits availed of by the companies fOr the purpose of 
carrying on any trading or manufacturing operations, other than the 
liabilities specift~ in sub-secti~n (2) of section 5. 35 
(b) Any dueS 01 State Electricity Boards or other Government 
and semi.Gove~~nt institut~ons against supply of goods or servicea, 
.' oth~r than the liablltties spec1fied In sub-section (2) of section 5. 
(e) Arrears of interest on loans and advances. 
-

5 
10 
Category IV-
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to Central Gov-
ernment, a State Govemment or any local authority. 
(b) Any other dues. 
Pre.take..ovet' management perioci 
Category V-
Principal amount of secured loans advanced by--
(a) the Central Government; 
(b) a State Government; 
(c) banks and public financial institutions. 
Category VI-
Principal amount of 'unsecured loans advanced by-
(a) the Central Government; 
(b) & State Government; 
(c) banks and public financial institutions; 
(d) any other sources. 
Category VIl-
1 
( , 
.. ~ 
... 
. I 
(a) Any eredits availed of by ~he companies for the purpose of 
carrying on any trading or manufacturing operations. 
20 (b) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government 
and semi·Government institutions against supply of goods or services. 
(c) Arrears of ~nterest on loans and advances. 
(d) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to Central Gov-
ernment, a State Government or any local authority. 
(e) Any other loans or dues. . .. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Inchek TyreS Limited commenced production of automobile 
'lyres 'and tubes in KaIQnara (West Bengal) in 1963. The undertaking 
started showing unfavourable operational results after 1970 and by 
June 1977 the company had an accumulated loss of Rs. 8.9 crores as 
against the. paid up capital of Rs. 3 crores. The management of the 
undertaking was taken over under the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951, on the 13th April, 1978. The undertaking 
employs about 1,380 persons. 
2. The National Rubber Manufacturers Limited, Calcutta, have ~ 
units. The unit at Tangra (Calcutta) produces cycle tyres, tubes and 
rubber goods like fan and V belts, transmission and conveyor belts, 
')loses, etc., and the other unit at Kalyani produces reclaimed rubber. 
In early 1970s, the production at both the units was affeeted due to 
labour trouble, erratic power supply, shortage of certain raw materials 
and poor quality of the finished products. By March 1977, the com-
pany had an accumulated loss of Rs. 4.25 crores as against the paid up 
. capital of Rs. 1.30 crores. The management of the Tangra unit was 
taken over by the Government under the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951, on the 23rd December, 1977, and that of 
the Kalyani unit on the 10th February, 1978. The company employs 
about 3,120 persons. 
3. A common Board of Management was appointed as the "autho-
rised person" under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Ad, 
1951, for both the undertakings. HoweveiI', operational results of the 
undertakings continued to be unfavourable even after the take-over of 
management for various reasons. Rehabilitation of the Undertakings 
required large investments for repair, replacement, modernisation and 
change in product mix. It was not possible for government to arrange for 
such investments without nationalisatlon of the undertakings. The 
undertakings could not also generate adequate resources even for 
current operations for payment of wages. The accumulated losses 
soared to Rs. 25.81 crores in the . Inchek Tyres and to Rs. 18.74 
• crores in National Rubber Manufacturers by 31st March, 1982. 
The revival of these undertakings~ restructuring the capital base 
and the payment of past liabilities of these companies were, 
therefore, considered to be an immediate necessity. Among the 
various alternatives, nationalisation of the undertakings of the compa-
nies was considered to be the only acceptable alternative to achieve 
this process quickly, followed by a major renovation and modernisa-
tion programme involving substantial capital expenditure. Banks and 
financial institutions which had been nursing the undertakings found 
it no longer possi~)e to finance its losses. The operations in the under-
takings had come to a standstill. In view, of these cfrcumstances it 
was considered necessary in the public interest to immediately acquire 
the undertakings of the Inchek Tyres Limited and the National Rubber 
16 

17 
Manufacturers Limited so that the undertakings could restart opera-
tions and the revival and modernisation programmes may be imple-
mented early to avoid further losses and deterioration in the assets of 
the undertakings. The nationalisation of the undertakings would also 
save about 4,500 workers from unemployment. The Inchek Tyres 
Limited and National Rubber Manufacturers Limited (Nationalisa-
tion) Ordinance, 1984 (4 of 1984), was accordingly promulgated by the 
President on the 14th February, 1984. The said Ordinance, apart from 
providing for the acquisition of the undertakings of the two companies 
and vesting the same in an existing or' a new Government company, 
provided for payment of amounts to the companies for the acquisition, 
appointment of a CommissioMr of Payments for the purpose of dis-
bursing the amounts t.o the companies and other incidental and conse-
quential matters. 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW' DI!!LHI; NARAYAN DA'IT TIWARI. 
The 27th February. 1984. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
,CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 9/2/84-LR, dated 28 February, 1984 from Shri 
Narayan Datt Tiwari, Minister of Industry to the Secretary-General, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The Pr-esident, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Inchek Tyres Limited and National Rubber Manufacturers Limited 
(Nationnlisation) Bill, 1984, recommends under ~lauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitutwn the introduction of the said Bill in and 
its consideration by Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that, on the appointed day, the under-
takings of each of the two companies, and the right, title and interest 
of each of the two companies in relation to its undertakings, shall stand 
transfetrred to, and shall vest in,the Central Government. 
2. Under sub-clause (2) of clause 5 of the Bill, any liability arising 
in respect of materials supplfel:i to either of the two companies after 
the management of the undertakings of the concerned companiell had 
been taken over by the Central Governmeht, shall, on and from the 
appointed day, by the liability of the Central Government or of the 
existin'g, or new, Government company in which theundertaiings are 
vested under the provisions of the Bill It is estimated that this amount 
is likely to be of the order of Rs. 47 lakhs. 
3. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for payment in cash and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI thereof, an amount equal to the amount 
specified against the name of each company in the First Scheldule, for 
the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the under-
takings of each of the two companies. and the right, title and interest 
of each of the two companies in relation to its undertakings. The total 
amount i8 of the order of Rs. 490.04 lakhs. 
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 9 of the Bill provide~ for payment of a 
further amount in cR!=h to each of the companies. for the deprivation 
of the companies of the management of their underlakinJ!S durin'g the 
period commencin~ on the date on which the undertaKings of each 
company was taken over by the Central Government under the provi-
sions of the Tndust1'ie~ (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 and 
endfnJt on the- appointed day, an amount, of· Rs. 50.000. 
5, Sub-clause (2) of clR'use 9 of the 'Bill provides for paYment of 
simple interest at the rat~ of four per cent, per annum on th .. amount 
spec~ed under clause 8 and l'lub-clause (1( nf clause 9 for the period 
<:ommencln~ on the apoointeo dav and endin~ on the date on which 
payment of such amounts is made by the Central Government to the 
Commiasioner of 'Payments. It is estimated that this amount will be· of 
the order of RII. 1 ,63.~O per month. 
6. Clause .15 of the Bill nrovide!o1 that the Central Government shan 
appoint a Cornmi~sioner of Payment~ and may also appoint such other 
persons as i+ mav think fit to aSl'li/;t the CommissIoner and thereupon 
the Commissioner mav Ruthorise one or more of l'luch pet'!lons 
also to exercise an or any of the powers exercisable by him. 'nle 
salaries and allowance& of the Commissioner and the ot'her nerBona 
appointed under the said clause shall be defrayed out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of India. 'nle estimated expenditure on this account is 
1ilCely to be of the order of Rs. 25,000 per month. 
'1. Funds ,,>ill 81ao have to be providM to the existin~. or new. 
Government company in Which the undertakings of the Inchek Tyree 
III 

19 
Limited and. National Rubber Manufacturers Limited are vested, 
towards repairs and replacements during Phase I period, and renova-
tion and modernisation during Phase II period. The estimated cost of 
implementing Phase I would be around Rs. 9,26,00,000 (rupees nine 
crores and twenty-six lakha only). 
8. It is anticipated that all the liabilities specified in the Second 
Schedule to the Bill are not likely to be discharged fully by the Com-
missioner of Payments out of the amounts paid to him under the provi-
sions of the Bill. The Central Government proposes to assume some of 
the undischarged liabilities, such as, repayment of loans given by 
banks and financial institutions after the management of the under-
takings had been taken over by the Central Government, and principal 
amounts of loans and advances given by such banks and financial insti-
tutions at the behest of Government (i.e. all the loans released by IRCI. 
State Bank of India and Sta·e Government of West Bengal after 1-7-1976) 
before S'Uch management was taken over and simple interest thereon. 
The extent of liabi1i~y on this account will be known only subsequently 
after the Commissioner of Payments has made available his reports. 
9. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring 
or non-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to ca.rry out the provtisions of the Bill. The mattel-s in respect of which 
rules may be made, inter alia, relate ,to the time within which, and the 
manner in which, intimation regarding any mortgage, charge, lien or 
other interest 'in, or in relation to, the p.roperties which have vested in 
the Central Government under clause 3 of the Bill shall be given to the 
Commissioner of Payments and the manner in which the moneys in any 
provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund. maintained by 
either of the two companies shall be dealt with by the Central Govern-
ment or the existing, or the new,-Government compan¥. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail. The delegation of legislative power 
i~ thus of a normal character. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
Inchek Tyres Limited and the National Rubber Manufacturers 
Limited, with a view to securing the proper management of such 
undertakings so as to subserve the interests of the general public by 
ensuring the continued manufacture, production and distribution of 
tyres, tubes and other rubber goods which are essential to the needs 
of the economy of the country and for matters connected therewitb. 
or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Ncrrayan Datt Tiwari, 
Minister of Industry.) 