As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
.' is FEB'~ 19 
_11 No. 11 of 1'7' 
THE VICTORIA .MEMORIAL CMtENDMENT) BILL, 1919 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Victoria Memorial Act, 1903. 
1;\E ,it ena~ted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act, Short 
),9.79. title. 
Ulof 1903. 5 ,2. In the Vi<:toria M;~orial Act, 1903 (hereinafter referred to as Amend-
ment the principal Act), in section 2,-
(i)fqr suh-$e(:tion(,1), tile follQwing sub-.section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
" (1) The l'rwltees of the V:ictori~ Mem~~al (hereinafter 
10 called the Trustees) shall be the following, namely:-
.< 
15 
20 
(a) the Governor of West Bengal, e~ otficio Chairman; 
(b) the Chief Justice of the High Court of West 
'f Bengal, ex ojJicio; 
(c) three persons to be nominated by the Central 
qovernment, one of whom shall be a repre.sentative of com-
w~r(fe and industry, chosen in consultation with the State 
GovQrllfIlent of West Bengal and ~w.o others chosen from 
amollg per.sons who, in the opinion of the Central Govern-
ment, ll~ve ~~~rt know1.edge of theexhibiti in the Victoria 
Mem9x:iE41 .or are m~eologists. h1stoJ;'hms Qt' fU't histori:~~ 
of section 
2. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
,-
2 
(d) a representative of the Central Government in the 
Ministry concerned with matters relating to the Victoria 
Memorial, ex otJiCio; 
(e) a representative of the Central Government in the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, concerned S 
with matters relating to the Victoria Memorial, ex of11cio; 
(f) the Mayor of the Corporation of Calcutta and where 
the Corporation of Calcutta is superseded, the Administra-
tor of that Corporation, ex officio; 
(g) an officer, not below the rank of the Accountant- 10 
General, nominated by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India, ex otJicio; 
(h) the Secretary to the Government of West Bengal in 
the Department of Education, ex offici»; 
(i) four persons (of whom one at least shall be from 15 
the general body of subscribers), to be nominated by the 
Trustees from among persons, who, in the opinion of the 
Trustees, have expert lmowledge of the exhibits in the 
Victoria Memorial or are museologists, historians or art 
historians, with the approval of the Central Government."; 20. 
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted. namely:-
II (3A) If any of the Trustees referred to in clauses (b), (d), 
(e), (f>, (g) and (h) of sub-section (1) is unable to attend any 
meeting of the Trustees, he may, with the previous approval of 2S 
the Chairman, authorise in writing a person to do so .... 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "Central Government 
may" the words ", by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be 
inserted; . 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(da) the fees to be levied for admission to the Victoria 
30 
Memorial;"; 3S 
(ii) in clause (e), the word "and" occurring at the end 
shal1 be omitted; 
(iii) clauSe (f) shall be omitted; 
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - 40 
"(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
~ period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in' two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 45 
the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the fUle or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form: 
pr be of no effect, as the case may be; ~o, however, that any 50 
, 

..,.." 
LOK 
SABHA 
CO&-rtIGENDA 
to 
~dE 
VICTORIA 
HEr1JRIAL 
(A:'tEI~bl''iEJ:T) 
BILL, 
1979 
L-To 
be/As 
j..ntro!1ucell 
in 
lQk 
Sabha 
I 
t' 
1. 
Page 
4, 
line 
J,-
.'1-~ 
for 
"subordinate" 
read 
"Subordinate 
n 
2. 
Page 
5, 
line 
12,-
for 
"administrati'Jn" 
~ 
"administrative" 
l-:"E 
W 
DE 
LHI 
• , 
Feb 
mary 
20," 
.,.., 
79 
_ -=--:--~ 
Phalguna 
1, 
1900 
~Saka) 
• 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
3 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice tb 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule .... 
4. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be InserUon 
inserted, namely: - of 
"6. (1) The Trustees may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette make 
regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there-
under, for enabling the body to discharge its functions under this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to 'the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
fol1owing matters, namely:-
(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to which articles 
and things vested in the Trustees may be given on loan; 
(b) the recruitment and conditions of service of the em-
ployees of the Victoria Memorial. 
(3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be, after it is made 
by the Trustees, be forwarded to the Central Government and that 
Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in sessiOn for a total period of thirty 
days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedia-
tely following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification i.n the regulation or both 
Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that regulation.". 
new aec-
tion 8. 
Power of 
Trustees 
to make 
regula-
tions. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Victoria Me~orial Act, 1903 makes provisions for the erection, 
n1aintenance and management of the Victoria Memorial and for the 
appointment of a permanent body of, Trustees. Section 2 specifies the 
composition of the Trustees of the Memorial. It is proposed to amend 
this section suitably for giving wicier representation, as reco'mirierided by 
the Trustees. 
At present, the rules made under the Act provide for the levy of fees 
for admitting persons to the Memorial. The Committee on subordinate 
Legislati6n (Fifth Lok Sabha) in its Nineteenth Report, expressed the 
view that the imposition of fee involving financial burden should be 
specifieally authorised by the Act. It is, therefore, proposed to amend 
section 5 of the Act, on the lines of the Salar Jung Museum Act, 1961, to 
empower the Central Government to make rules for the levy of ree. 
OPportUnity is being taken to incorporate the provision for laying the 
rules made by the Central Government before Parliament. 
The Trustees are empowered under the rules to create such pasts as 
may be necessary for the care or maintenance of the Memorial atld fot 
tegi11ating the service ccmditions of the employees of the Memorial. The 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation desired thilt, to avoid any ambi-
guity, the limits of del~ation in respect of such matters should be well 
defined in the Act. Accordingly, it is proposed to insert a new section 
in the Act for empowering the Trustees to make regulatidns for this 
purpose and for laying before Parliament the regulatiotls made by the 
TrUstees. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; PRATAP CHANDRA CHUNDER. 
The 2nd February, 1979. 
4 

Clause 3 of the Bill' seeks to amend section 5 o~ the Act so as to em-
power the Central Government to make rules regardihg the fees to be 
levied for admission to the Victoria Memorial. 
Clause 4 of the Bill seelcs to iDBett 11ft seetioll 6t. ...,..,.. .. 
Trustees of the Victoria Memorial to make regulations, not inconsistent 
with the Act and the rules made therelinder, regu4tng the e'onditions 
and restrictions subject to which articles arid ttdrrgs Ve~ J11' nteT1'llI-
tees may be given on loan and the recruitment and conditions of·letvice 
of the employees of the Victoria Memorial. 
The matters in respect of W'hiclt sueh rules ad ~attODS may 
be made are generally matters of procedure and ac:lmtaistratilon. 
Mereover the rules and regulations made under the Act will have to 
be laid before eaeh House of Parliament and they will be subject to the 
scrutiny of Parliament. The delegation of legislative power is, there-
fore, of a normal character. 

Trusteee. 
ExTJlA4:TS nOM THE VICTORIA MEMoRIAL AcT, 1903 , ' . ' 
(10 OF 1903) 
.. .. • • • .. 
z. (1) The Trustees of the Victoria Memorial (hereinafter called 
the Trustees) shall be the follOWing, nllmely:-
(4) the Minister in charge of the' Ministry of the Central 
Government concerned with matters relating to the Victoria Memo-
rial, 
(b) the Governor of West Bengal, 
(c) the Chief Justice of Calcutta, 
(d) 'two, persons to be nominated by the Central Government 
from among persons who, in the opinion of that Government, have 
expert knowledge of the exhibits in the Vietoria Memorial or are 
museologists, historians or art histoIians, 
(e) the ~retary to the Government of India in the Ministry 
concerned with matters relating to the Victoria Memorial, 
(f) the President of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce, 
(g) the Mayor of the Corporation of. Calcutta, and 
(h) such and so many persons as shall from time to time be 
nominated by the Trustees from among persons who, in the opini.on 
of the Trustees, have expert knowledge of the exhibits in the Victoria 
Memorial or are museologists, historians Or art historians, with the 
approval of the Central Government to represent the general body 
of subscribers. 
.. .. .. .. .. • 
Rulet. 5. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide-
• • • .. .. • 
(e) for the form of accounts to be kept by the Trustees, and 
for the audit and publication of such accounts; and 
(f) for the application to the mlicers and servants employed by 
the Trustees of the rules which apply to the civil servants of the 
Government, or to any class of such civil servants. 
6 

LOK SABHA , 
, ":4-"' 't 
A 
I 
I'· . BILL 
further to amend the Victoria Memorial Act, 1903. . .. 
(Dr. Pratap Chan.dra Ch'l£f/,der, 
Min.ister oJ Educatioln, 
Social Welfore and C?(lture.) 