BW No. 17 of 1177. 
mE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
fUTtheT to amend the Govemment of Union Temtorie. Act, 1963. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Govelmment of Union Territorie, Sbora 
(Amendment) Act, 1977. title. 
20 of 1181. S Z. In section 5 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (here- Amend-
ment of 
MCt10n 
II. 
10 
inafter referrecl to as the principal Act), after the t!lXisting proviso, the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
'Provided further that the provisions of this section shall,-
(a) in relation to the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu in existence on the 7th clay of 
February, 1977, apply as if for the words "five years", in the two 
places where they occur. the worda "five year. and foUl' months" 
had been .ubltttuted; , 
(b) iIi relation tel the Legislative Assembiy of the Unibrl 
territory of Mizoram in existence on the said date, apply as if for 

Repeal 
and sav-
ini. 
2 
the words "five years", in the two places where they occur, the 
words "five years and seven months" had been substituted.'. 
3. (1) The Government of Union Territories (Ament\ment) Ordinance, 
1977 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such .al, the continuance of the Legislative 5 
Assembly of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu (in existence on 
the 7th day of February, 1977) continued from the 24th day of March, 
1977 till the date of commencement of this Act (both inclusive), under 
section 5 of the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance, shall 
be deemed to have been continued under the said section 5 as amended 10 
by this Act, as if th~s Act had come into force on the 7th day of February, 
1977. 
5 of 19'17. 

.... ~ .~ .. ~., ~ .. -. , 
-. , 
. __ ... -
1. the, Constitut1on(lI'orty-second Amandnent) Act, 1976 
inter ;p~ trade-the following amendnents in the Constittl!ion 
~ro that - . . 
"(al the c!uration of State Isg1slat1ve Assembues 
shall, unless sooner d:1ssolwd, be six years; 
(b) the extent of AssemblY' constituencies and the 
reservation, of seats for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes J as determined on the bRSis of the 
,,19'11 census; shall be f'!'ozen ti.l! the year 2001'1 
ee) the question as to whether a member of a HouSG 
of the Legislature of a State 'has beeome subject to 
any disqualification as also the question wh3ther a 
person is disqualified foF being "ohosen as, and for 
being, a member of the Legislature of a E-'tate on the 
ground of baing tc:un4 gu!lty' ot a 00rtup'-t>~act1ce 
including the question as to the ~fiod or dis-
qualification or as to the removal or the re'duct:t.on 
Qr the period of such disqualification! shall be 
decided by the Presidt,r1t af'ter consult ng the B+ection 
Coumission which is empowered to hold an inquiry in '_ 
~his behalf; 
(d) the oN'ice of profit. the hQld1rtg' of which shall 
disqualify a person for ooing chosen "8.S, and for be1ng 
a Member of the House of Legislature of a State, shall 
be such as may be declare d by Parliament, by law; 
(e) no court or other authority shall be entitled to 
require the production o~ the rules made ,for the more 
oon18n1ent transaction of the business of the 
aoV\lrnment of the State. : 
2. 'lhe pl"ovislons mentioned above were appl.1ed to the 
Union territories with Legislatures bf amend1ng the 
Govermoont of Union Terri toties kt, 1963 by tl1e GovernneDt 
of union ~erritQries (Amancinent) OJ-d:+nance, 1977. .. 
3. It is now considered by the, Govel"llmBnt that the 
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 need ~ amend:1d 
only tef the purpose of extending tfie duration of the 
eJd.sting LegiSlative Assemblies Qf' Oqat Daman and Diu and 
H1zoram for a period of four monttLs and seven tlk)nths 
resp3ctively beyond their normal term of five years • 
.lccor~glY, the Bill makes neceslfary provision only for 
this pUl'pose and the other provisions contained in the 
~d1nance are not being included in the B1ll. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 was amended by the 
Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Ordinance, 1977 with a 
view to provide for the extension of dw-ation of the LegiSlative Assemblies 
of Union territories from five years to six years. The Ordinance also 
amended the Act to bring the Act in line with certain amendments made 
in the Constitution by the Constitution (Forty-second A.mendment) Act, 
1976. 
2. It is now considered by the Government that the Act need be 
amended only for the purpose of extending the duration of the existing ) 
Legislative Assemblies of the Union temtories of Goa, Daman and Diu 
and Mizoram for a period of four months and seven months respec+ively 
beyond their normal term of five years. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective and to repeal the 
Ordinance aforesaid. 
CHARAN SINGH. 
NEW Da.m; 
The 2nd April, 1977. 
J 

Duration 
of Legis-
lative AI.-
aembUes. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACT FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TEJUUTOJU1:s Acr, 1989 ' 
(20 or 1963) 
• • • • • 
5. The Legislative Assembly of a Union territory, unlell sooner dis-
solved, shall continue for five years from the date appointE!d for its first 
meeting and no longer, and the expiration of the said period of 1ive years 
shall operate as a dissolution o~ the Assembly: 
Prcwided that the said period may. while a Proclamation of Emer-
gency issued under clause (1) of article 352 as in operation, be extended 
by the President by order for a period not exceeding one year at a tiDle 
and not ex~ndina in any case beyond a period of six months after the 
Proclamation has ceased to operate . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
/Ut'tM1' to amend the Gooernment of UnUm Temtorie. Act. 1963 
(Ari Chca,.n S'ftrl". 
JltniBte1' Of Home Affair •. ) 