Bill No. 17 of 1959 
THE FINANCE BILL I9~9 , 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 28TH FEBRUARY 1959) 

Bill No. 17 of 1959 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1959-60. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1959. Short title 
and com-
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 3 to 18 inclu- menccment. 
5 sive and sections 20 to 27 inclusive shall be deemed to have come 
into force on the first day of April, 1959. 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), for Income-tax 
th b ·· h f and 8uper-C year . egmmng on t e 1st day 0 April, 1959,- tax. 
(a) income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in 
10 Part I of the First Schedule, and, in the cases to which Para-
graphs A, Band C of that Part apply, shall be increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union and a special surcharge on 
unearned income, calculated in either case in the manner pro-
vided therein; and 
IS (b) super-tax shall, for the purposes of section 55 of the 
11 of 19ZZ. Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as the 
Income-tax Act), be charged at the rates specified in Part II of 
the First Schedule, and, in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B 
and C of that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for 
20 purposes of the Union and a special surcharge on unearned 
income, calculated in either case in the manner provided therein. 
(2) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1960,-
(a) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
25 pany, includes any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" 
or any income chargeable under the head "Interest on Securities" 
or any income from dividends in respect of which by virtue of 
section 49B of the Income-tax Act he is deemed himself to have 
paid the income-tax imposed under that Act, the income-tax 
30 payable by the assessee on that part of his total income which 
consists of such inclusions shall be an amount bearing to the total 
amount of income-tax payable according to the rates applicable 

Amendment 
of section 4. 
2 
under the operation of the Finance Act, 1958, on his to~al income II of 19S8• 
the same proportion as the amount of such inclusions bears to 
his total incom~; 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
pany, includes any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" 5 
on which super-tax has been or might have been deducted under 
the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 18 of the Income-tax 
Act, the super-tax payable by the assessee on that portion of his 
total income which consists of such inclusion shall be an amount 
bearing to the total amount of super-tax payable according to 10 
the rates applicable under the operation of the Finance Act, 1958, II of 19$8. 
on his total 'income the same proportion as the amount of such 
inclusion bears to his total income. 
(3) In cases to which section 17 of the Income-tax Act applies, 
the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that section, IS 
and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (1). 
(4) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under section 18 at 
the prescribed rates, the deduction shall be made at the rates specified 
in Part III of the First Schedule. 
(5) In the case of a company liable to make payments of tax under;~ 
section 18A of the Income-tax Act during the financial year begin-
ning on the 1st day of April, 1959, the provisions of that section shall 
have effect as if the references to the rates of income-tax and super-
tax in force for that financial year were references respectively-
(a) to a rate of 20 per cent. for income-tax; and 
(b) to a rate of----
(i) 25 per cent. for super-tax in the case of an Indian 
company dr a company which has made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends 
within India; and 30 
(ii) 43 per cent. for super-tax in the case of any other 
company. 
(6) For the purposes of this section, and of the rates of tax 
imposed thereby, the expression "total income" means total income 
as determined for the purposes of income-tax or super-tax, as the 3S 
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act, and the expression "earned income" has the meaning assigned 
to it in clause (6AA) of section 2 of that Act. 
3. In section 4 of the Income-tax Act,----
(i) in sub-section (1) ,- 40 
(a) the third proviso shall be omitted; 

5 
3 
(b) c..fter Explanation 2, the following Explanation 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"Explanation 2A.-Income which would be charge-
able under the head "Salaries" if payable in the taxable 
territories but which is paid without the taxable 
territories by the Government to a citizen of India for 
rendering service without the taxable territories shall 
be deemed to accrue or arise in the taxable territories."; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), for clause (x), the following clauses 
10 shall be substituted, namely:-
20 
35 
"(x) Any income received-
- (a) by the Ruler of an Indian State as his privy 
purse under article 291 of the Constitution; 
(b) by any ambassador, high commissioner, envoy, 
minister, charge d'affaires, commissioner, counsellor or 
the secretary, adviser or attache of an embassy, high 
commission, legation or commission of a foreign State 
as remuneration from such State for service in such 
capacity; 
(c) by a consul de carriere, whether called a consul-
general, consul, vice-consul, consular agent, pro-consul 
or by any other name, of a foreign State as remuneration 
from such State for service in such capacity; 
(d) by a trade commissioner or other official repre-
sentative in India of the Government of a foreign State 
(not holding office as such in an honorary capacity) as 
his remuneration, if the remuneration of the correspond-
ing officials, if any, of the Government resident for simi-
lar purposes in the country concerned enjoys a similar 
exempLon in that couniry; 
(e) by a member of the staff of any of the officials 
referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) as 
his remuneration, if the member-
(i) is a subject of the country represented; 
(ii) is not engaged in any business, profession, 
vocation or employment in India otherwise than as 
a member of such staff; and further, where the 
individual is a member of the staff of any official 
referred to in clause (d), if the country represented 

Amendment 
of 8ection 
10. 
4 
has made corresponding provisions for similar 
exemptions in the case of members of the staff of 
the corresponding officiaL of the Government. 
(xa) Any allowances or perquisites paid or 5 
allowed as such without the taxable territories by 
the Government to a citizen of India for rendering 
service without the taxable territories.". 
4. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) after sub-section (2A), the following sub-section shall 10 
be inserted, namely:-
"(2AA) For the purpose of computing-the profits or 
gains of any business consisting of the prospecting for or 
e~traction or production of mineral oils in relation to which 
the Central Government has entered into an agreement with 15 
any person for the association or participation in such business 
of the Central Government (which agreement has been laid 
on the Table of each House of Parliament), there shall be 
made in lieu of, or in addition to, the allowances admissible 
under sub-section (2), such allowances as are specified in 20 
the agreement on account of-
(a) expenditure by way of infructuous or abortive 
exploration expenses in respect of any area surrendered 
prior to the beginning of commercial production by the 
assessee, 
(b) expenditure incurred after the beginning of 
commercial production by the assessee in re5pect of 
drilling or exploration activities, where the expenditure 
does not result in the creation of any tangible asset, and 
25 
(c) the depletion of mineral oil in the mining area 30 
in respect of the assessment year relevant to the previous 
yea\" in which commercial production is begun and for 
such succeeding year or years as may be specified in 
the agreement, 
the allowances being computed in the manner and allowed 
to the extent specified therein: 35 
Provided that the provisions of section 15C shall have 
no application in any case where any allowance is made 
under this sub-section."; 
(ii) sub-sections (2B) and (2C) shall be omitted. 

s 
10 
5. In section 12 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (1A), the Arnendm~f 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- of section 12. 
"(lA) Income from other sources shall include dividends, 
and any dividend declared by a company or distributed or paid 
by it within the meaning of sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) or 
sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d) or sub-clause (e) of clause (6A) 
of section 2, shall be deemed to be the income of the previous 
year in which it is so declared, distributed or paid, as the case 
may be.". 
6. In section 15C of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i) of sub- Amen~ent 
section (2), for the words and figures "used in a business which was ~;c. sectIon 
being carried ·on before the 1st day of April, 1948", the words 
"previously used in any other business" shall be substituted, and 
shall be deemed always to have been substituted. 
IS 7. In section 16 of the Income-tax Act, sub-section (2) shall be Amendment of section 
20 
30 
35 
omitted. 16. 
8. In section 17 of the Income-tax Act,- Amendment 
of section 
(i) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 17· 
inserted, namely:-
. "(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), where a citizen of India, not resident in the tax-
able territories, is in receipt of salary from the Government 
for rendering service without the taxable territories, the tax, 
including super-tax payable by him on his total income for 
the assessment years commencing with the assessment year 
1960-61 shall be determined with reference to his total world 
income in the manner specified in the first proviso to sub-
section (1) ."; 
(ii) for sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(7) Where the total income of a company includes any 
income chargeable under the head "Capital Gains", the 
super-tax payable by it shall be the aggregate of the tax 
calculated-
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. on the amount of 
Capital Gains so inoluded, and 
(ii) at the rate applicable to the company on its 
total income as reduced by the amount of the Capital 
Gains, had such reduced income been its total income.". 

9, In section 18 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2B), for the words "to a person not 
resident in the taxable territories shall, at the time of payment, 
deduct income-tax at the maximum rate and also super-tax on 
the estimated income of the assessee under this head in accord- 5 
ance with the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 17", the words "to a person not resident in the taxable 
territories, not being a person referred to in sub-section (1A) of 
section 17, shall, at the time of payment, deduct income-tax and 
super-tax at the prescribed rates on the estimated income of the 10 
assessee under this head" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-sections (3) and (3A), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) The person responsible for paying any income 
chargeable under the head "Interest on Securities" shall, 15 
at the time of payment, deduct income-tax and super-tax at 
the prescribed rates on the amount of interest payable: 
Provided that where, in the case of any recipient, not 
being a company, the Income-tax Officer gives a certificate 
in writing (which certificate he shall give in every proper 20 
case on the application of the assessee) that to the best of 
his belief the total income or the total world income of the 
recipient will be less than the minimum liable to income-tax 
or will be liable to income-tax at a rate which is less than 
the prescribed rate, the person responsible for paying the 2S 
interest to such recipient shall, until such certificate is can-
celled by the Income-tax Officer, pay the interest without 
deduction or deduct the tax at such lesser rate, as the case 
may be: 
Provided further that where the recipient is not a 30 
company, the proviso to sub-section (2B) shall apply to the 
deduction of super-tax under this sub-section as it applies 
to the deduction of super-tax under sub-section (2B) ,"; 
(iii) for sub-section (3B), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 35 
"(3B) Any person'responsible for paying to a person, 
not being a company, who is not resident in the taxable terri-
tories or to a company which is neither an Indian company 
nor a company which has made the prescribed arrangemeI).ts 
for the declaration and payment of dividends within India, 40 
any sum, not being "Interest on Securities", or any other 

JO 
'I 
in,in1, not being dividends, chargeable under the provisiolll 
of this Act, shall, at the time of payment, unless he is himseU 
liable to pay any income-tax and super-tax thereon as an 
agent, deduct income-tax and super-tax at the prescribed 
rates: 
Provided that where the recipient is not a company, the 
proviso to sub-section (2B) shall apply to the deduction of 
income-tax and super-tax under this sub-section as it applies 
to the deduction of income-tax and super-tax under sub-
section (2B): 
" 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall 
apply to any payment made in the course of transactions in 
respect of which a person responsible for payment is deemed 
under the first proviso to section 43 not to be an agent of the 
recipient."; 
(iv) for sub-section (3D), the following sub-sections shaJl 
be substituted, namely:-
"(3D) The principal officer of an Indian company or a 
company which has made the prescribed arrangements for 
the declaration and payment of dividends within India shall, 
before issuing any cheque or warrant in respect of any 
dividend or before making any distribution or payment to a 
shareholder of any dividend within the meaning of sub-
clause (a) or sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) or sub-clause 
(d) or sub-clause (e) of clause (6A) of section 2, deduct on 
the amount of such dividend, income-tax and super-tax at 
the prescribed rates: 
Provided that where, in the case of any shareholder, not 
being a company, the Income-tax Officer gives a certificate 
in writing (which certificate he shall give only in accordance 
with the rules made in this behalf) that to the best of 
his belief the total income or the total world income of the 
shareholder will be less than the minimum liable to income-
tax, the principal officer responsible for paying any dividend 
to such shareholder shall, until such certificate is cancelled 
by the Income-tax Officer, pay the dividend without deduc .. 
tiOD. 
(3E) Where any share held by a shareholder carries as 
tespects dividends a 'preferential right to be paid a fixed 
amount or an amount calculated at a fixed rate free of 
tax, then, notwithstanding such preferential right, tax 
shall be deductible under sub-section (3D) I and for the 
302'7 (B) L.S.---2. 

• 
purposes of such deduction the amount payable to the share-
holder as dividend shall be taken to be such amount as 
would, after deduction of a sum equal to thirty per cent. 
thereof, be equal to the net amount of dividend receivable 
by the shareholder free of tax. S 
(3F) Where the principal officer of a company considers 
that by reason of the provisions of section 15C no income-tax 
or super.tax will be payable by the recipient on the whole or 
any portion of the dividend referred to in sub-section (4) of 
that section he may, before paying the dividend to the share- 10 
holder, or issuing any cheque or warrant in respect thereof, 
\ ttlake an application to the Income-tax Officer to determine 
the appropriate proportion of the dividend on which incom~ 
tax or super-tax is not payable by the recipient under the 
provisiOns of section 15C; and on such determination by the I' 
Income-tax Officer, no income-tax or super-tax shall be 
deducted on such proportionate amount."; 
(v) in sub-section (5) ,-
(a) the words, brackets and figures "and any sum by 
which a dividend has been increased under sub-section (2) 20 
of section 16" and the words and figures "or section 20, as 
the case may be" shall be omitted; 
(b) in the third proviso, the words, brackets and figures 
, "or in respect of any sum by which the dividend has been 
increased under sub-section (2) of section 16," shall be 2' 
omitted; 
(m) in subo-section (7), for the words "If any such person 
does not deduct or after deducting fail. to pay the tax as required 
by or under this section, he, and in the cases specified in sub-
section (3D) the company of which he is the principal officer", 30 
the following words shall be substituted, namely:-
"If any person or the principal officer of a company does 
not deduct tax or after deducting fails to pay the sums 
deducted 8S required by or under this section, he, or the 
company, aa the case may be,"; 3; 
(vii) in Bubo-section (9) ,-
(a) the brackets, figure and letter "(3A) /' shall be 
omittedj 
(b) for the words "from Which tax has been deducted. 
lurnish to the person to whom such payment is made", the 4tl 
following words shall be substituted, namely:-
"or, as the case may be, at the time of issue of a 
theque or warrant for payment of any dividend to a 

• 
shareholder furnish to the person to whom such pay-
ment is made or the cheque or warrant is issued"; 
(viii) after sub-section (9), the followingsub-lect1ons shall 
be inserted, namely:-
S "(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in this sec-
tion, no deduction of tax shall be made by the principal 
officer of any company on any dividend payable to the Gov-
ernment in respect of any shares owned by it or in which 
it has full beneficial interest. 
10 (11) For the purposes of deduction of tax under sub-
sections (2B), (3), (3B) and (3D) the expression "prescribed 
rates" means the rates prescribed in this behalf by the 
Finance Act of the year in which such deduction is required 
to be made .... 
10. Section 20 of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted. Omission of 
section ao. 
11. In section 23A of the Income-tax Act, in Explanation 2, for AmendmeDt . of IcctioD 
the figures "45%" and "60%", In both the places where they occur, 23A. 
the figures "50%" and "65%" shall respectively be substituted. 
12. In section 23B of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (6), the Amc:Ildmalt 
20 words "or deemed to have been paid" shall be omitted. ofB ICCtJoa 23 . 
13. In section 35 of the Income-tax Act,- Amendment of ICCtfon 3$. 
(i) to sub-section (9), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that this sub-section shall not apply in rela-
25 tion to dividends payable by a company in respect of any 
previous year relevant to any assessment year commencing 
on or after the 1st day of April, 1960."; 
(ii) sub-section (10) shall be omitted. 
14. For section 49B of the Income-tax Act, the following section Subltitution 
ed I . of new lee> 
30 shall be substitut ,name y.- tion for aeo-
tion 49B. 
"49B. Where a company pays to a shareholder any dividend Relief to 
out of its profits and gains which is assessed to agricultural sharehold-en in rea-
income-tax by any State Government, the shareholder shall be pect of 8/P'1-
entitled to a reduction from the tax payable by him unc!er this ~~:~in-
35 Act of a sum equal to-- attributable , to dlvideudl. 
(a) that proportion of the agricultural income-tax 
(including super-tax, if any) paid by the company as the 
amount of the dividend attributable to the profits of the 

10 
company assessed to agricultural income-tax bears to its 
total profits assessed to agricultural income-tax, reduced by 
the amount of refund, if any, allowed to him by the State 
Government: or 
(b) where thl shareholder-
(i) is not,. company, the amount of income-tax (but 
not super-tax) payable by him under this Act: and 
(ii) is a company, 20 per cent.: 
s 
on that portion of the dividend which is attributable to the 
pr~flts of the company assessed to agricultural income-tax: 10 
whichever is less.". 
11. Section 49C of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted. 
:r:ent 18. In section 51 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b), the worda 
!II. and figures "or by section 20" shall be omitted. 
~~=;~ 17. In section 52 of the Income-tax Act, after the words, brackets I, 
and figures "or sub-section (3) of section 33", the words, brackets 
and figures "or furnishes a certificate under sub-section (9) of section 
18" shall be inserted. 
AmeDdmeDt 
of lecdoo !l8. 
CCIInmeace-
IDCDt of the 
amCDdmenti 
to Act II of 
1fU. 
18. In section 58 of the Income-tax Act,-
,(i) in sub-section (1), the word and figures uand 20" shall 20 
be omitted: 
(ii) in sub-section (2), the brackets, figure and letter 
II (3A)," shall be omitted. 
II. (1) The amendments to the Income-tax Act made by-
(a) sub-clause (a) of clause (i) of section 3, in so far as it 25 
Sleeks to omit the third proviso to sub-section (1) of section 4 in 
its application to income chargeable under the head "Salaries": 
(b) sub-clause (b) of clause (i) and clause (ii) of section 
3; and 
(c) clause (i) of a«.-1ion 8: 
shall, for the purpose of making any deductions of income-tax and 
super-tax under sub-section (2) of section 18 of the Income-tax Act, 
have effect on and from the first day of April, 1959, and for other 
purposes shall have effect on and from the first day of April, 1960. 

11 
(Z) The amendments to the Income-tax Act made by section g, 
section 10, section 16 and section 18 shall be deemed to have come 
into force on the first day of April, 1959. 
(3) The amendments to the Income-tax Act made by section 5, 
, section 7, claase (ii) of section 8, section 11, section 12, section 13, 
section 14 and section 15 shall have effect on and from the first day of 
April, 1960. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (3), in relation to dividends declared or payable by a 
10 company in respect of any previous year relevant to any assessment 
year prior to the assessment year 1960-61, the Income-tax Act shall 
have effect as if the amendments contained in section 5, section 7, 
section 9, section 10, section 14, section 15, section 16 and section 18 
had not been made. 
IS ZOo In section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred Amf eDdjment o ICct OD a. to as the Wealth-tax Act), in clause (m), the following amendments 
shall be made and shall be deemed always to have been made, 
namely:-
(i) in sub-clause (i), ·the word "and" shall be omitted; 
20 (ii) in sub-clause (ii), the word "and" shall be inserted at 
the end; and 
(iii) after sub-clause (it), the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
U(iii) the amount of the tax, penalty or interest pay-
25 able in consequence of any order passed under or in pur-
suance of this Act or any law relating to taxation of income 
or profits, or the Estate Duty Act, 1953, the Expenditure-tax 
Act, 1957, or the Gift-tax Act, 1958,-
(a) which is outstanding on the valuation date and 
30 is claimed by the assessee in appeal, revision or other 
proceeding as not being payable by him, or 
(b) which, although not claimed by the assessee as 
not being payable by him, is nevertheless outstanding 
for a period of more than twelve months on the valua-
3S tion date;". 
21. In the Schedule to the Wealth-tax Act,-
(i) in the rates of tax specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) 
of Part I, for the figures "1%", "1%" and "li%" in both the 
places where they occur, the figures "1%", "11%" and "2%" 
shall respectively be substituted; 
Amendment 
of Schedule. 

12 
(ii) in Rule 2, for the figures and words "1·5 per cent", the 
figure and words "2 per cent" shall be substituted. 
:r~1:~~ zz. In section 2 of the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter 2t of I~$1. 
referred to as the Expenditure-tax Act),-
(i) in clause (g), for sub-clause (i), the following sub-clause S 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) where the assessee is an individual, his or her spoUBe 
or minor child, and includes any person wholly or mainly 
dependent on the assessee for support and maintenance;"; 
(ii) for clause (n), the following clause shall be substituted, 10 
namely:-
'(n) "previous year", in relation to any assessment 
year,-
(a) in the case of an assessee having a source of 
income, profits or gains in respect of which there is no 15 
previous year under the Income-tax Act, means the 
twelve months ending on the 31st day of March imme-
diately preceding the assessment year; 
(b) in the case of an assessee having different 
previous years under the Income-tax Act for different 20 
sources of income, profits or gains, means that previous 
year of twelve months determined as the previous year 
under sub-elause (a) of clause (11) (i) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act or such period determined as the 
previous year under sub-clause (b) of clause (11) (i) of 25 
that section, whichever expired last; 
(e) in the case of any other assessee, means the 
previous year as defined in clause (11) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act if an assessment were to be made 
under that Act for that year: 30 
Provided that where an assessment has been made under 
this Act for any assessment year in respect of the expendi-
ture incurred by an assessee in the previous year, the 
meaning of the expression "previous year" as then applicable 
to him shall continue to apply in respect of any subsequent 35 
assessment year unless the assessee is allowed to vary it 
with the consent of the Expenditure-tax Officer who may, 
in allowing any such variation, impose such conditions as he 
may think fit.'. 

11 
!3. In section 3 of the Expenditure-tax Act, for the proviso to Amendmellt 
sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:- of section 3· 
"Provided that no expenditure-tax shall be payable by an 
assessee for any assessment year if the income from all sources 
derived by the assessee and his dependants during the previous 
year as reduced by the amount of taxes to which such income 
may be liable under any law for the time being in force does 
not exceed rupees thirty-six thousand. 
Explanation.-Income derived by an assessee or any of his 
~~ dependants shall include-
IS 
30 
Is 
(i) income which a trustee or any other person receives 
or is entitled to receive during the previous year on behalf 
of the assessee or any of his dependants, or both, as the case 
may be; and 
(ii) in the case of an assessee being an individual who is 
a member of a Hindu undivided family or of any association 
of persons, any sum in money or money's worth spent or 
disbursed for the benefit of the assessee or any of his depen-
dants during the previous year from or out of the income 
or property of the Hindu undivided family or the association, 
as the case may be.". 
24. In section 4 of the Expenditure-tax Act,- Anicndntetlt 
of section •• 
(a) in clause (i), th& words "which, but for the expenditure 
having been incurred by that other person, would have been 
incurred by the assessee," shall be omittedj 
(b) for c:lause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
U(ii) where th& assessee is an individual, any expendi .. 
ture incurred by any dependant of the assessee, and where 
the assessee is a Hindu undivided family, any expenditure 
incurred by any dependant from or out of any income or 
property transferred directly or indirectly to the dependant 
by the assessee.". 
25. In section 5 of the :gxpenditU.re-Ulx Act,- Amendment 
(i) in clause (e), for the words "or in the construction of leCtion s· , 
repair, maintenance or improvement of sny immovable property 
belonging to him", the words "or in the construction of any 
building" shall be lIubstitutedj 

Amendment 
of lection 6. 
14 
(ii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, 
hamely:-
"(f> any expenditure incurred by the assessee by way 
of investment in deposits, loans, shares and securities;"; 
(iii) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substltut- , 
ed, namely:-
"(g) any expenditure incurred by the assessee in the 
purchase of products of any cottage industry in India or any 
work of art, where the price of any such article exceeds 
rupees one thousand, and any expenditure incurred by the 10 
assessee in the purchase of books;". 
26. In section 6 of the Expenditure-tax Act, in sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (a), after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(iii) taxes paid to a local authority in respect of any 15 
property in the occupation of the assessee or any of his 
dependants or both;"; 
(ii) in clause (d), for the words "on the purchase of furni-
ture and other household goods", the words "on the purchase of 
bullion, precious stones, jewellery, furniture and other household 20 
goods" shall be substituted; 
(iii) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely.:-
"(h) a basic allowance-
(i) where the assessee is an individual, of as. 30,0002$ 
for himself and all his dependants; and 
(ii) where the assessee is a Hindu undivided family, 
of lis. 30,000 in respect of the kaTta and his wife and 
children, and a further allowance of Rs. 3,000 for every 
additional coparcener: 30 
Provided that the basic allowance for the Hindu un. 
divided family as a whole shall not exceed Rs. 60,000 in any 
case: 
Provided further that the allowance of Rs. 3,000 for any 
additional co-parcener shall not be allowed where the co- ~$ 
parcener is separately assessed under this Act and is entitled 
to t.he allowance of RB. 30,000 under sub-clause (i) "'. 

or IP,a. 
15 
27. In section 2 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958, in clause (xx) ,-
(i) in sub-clause (a), after the words "in the case of an 
assessee", the words "having no source of income, profits or 
gains or" shall be inserted; 
(ii) after sub-clause (c), the following provisos shall be in-
serted, namely:-
'Provided that where a person who has not been 
assessed under this Act for any assessment year makes a 
gift on a date which does not fall within a previous year as 
Amendment 
of section 2. 
10 defined in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) or sub-olause (c), 
the previous year shall be the twelve months ending on the 
31st day of March immediately preceding the assessment 
year: 
20 
35 
Provided further that where an assessment has been 
made under this Act for any assessment year in respect of 
gifts made by an assessee during any previous year, the 
meaning of the expression "previous year" as then applicable 
to him shall continue to apply for any subsequent assess-
ment year unless the assessee is allowed to vary it with the 
consent of the Gift-tax Officer who may, in allowing any 
such variation, impose such conditions as he may think fit;'. 
28. The Indian Tariff Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment 
Tariff Act), shall be amended in the manner specified in the Second ~~::.~ 32 of 
Schedule. 
29. In the Indian Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1949, in sections 4 and Amf Aendment • 0 Cllof 
5, for the figures "1959", the figures "1960" shan be substItuted. 1949. 
30. In the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, Amendment 
1944 of Act I of 
,- 1944· 
(a) in Item No.8, for the ~ntry in the third column against 
'sub.item (2), the entry "Five rupees and sixty naye paise per 
cwt." shall be substituted; 
(b) in Item No. 9,-
(i) in sub-item 1(5), for the description of goods in the 
second column, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"if other than flue-cured and not actually used for 
the manufacture of (a) cigarettes or (b) smoking mix-
tures for pipes and cigarettes or (c) biris-
(i) stems of tobacco larger than! inch in size, 
(ii) dust of tobacco, 
102'(B) L.5.-a. 

Discontinu-
ance of salt 
duty. 
' .. 
16 
(iii) granule ('rawa') of tobacco capable of 
passing through a sieve made of wire not finer than 
24 S.W.G. (0·022 inch diameter) and containing not 
less than 18 uniform circular or square apertures 
per linear inch, 5 
(iv) tobacco cured in whole leaf form and packed 
or tied in bundles, hanks or bunches or in the form 
of twists or coils. 
Explanation.-Such varieties of unmanufactured tobacco 
used in the manufacture of biris as the Central Government, 10 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specifies in this behalf 
shall not be deemed to fall within this sub-item but shall be 
deemed to be unmanufactured tobacco, not otherwise 
specified, within the meaning of sub-item (6) ."; 
(ii) in sub-item II (2). for the entries in the third column IS 
against sub-items (vii), (viii) and (ix), the entries "Three 
rupees and fifteen naye paise", "Two rupees" and "One rupee 
and twenty naye paise" shall respectively be substituted; 
(c) in Item No. 10, for the entry in the third column against 
sub-item (1), the entry "40 per cent. ad valorem" shall be 20 
substituted; 
(d) in Item No. 11. for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Eight rupees and seventy-five naye paise per cwt." shall 
be substituted; 
(e) in Item No. 12A, for the entry in the third column, the 25 
entry "Six naye paise per square yard"shaU be substituted; 
<f) in Item No. 24. for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Eighty naye paise per imperial gallon" shall be substituted; 
(g) in Item No. 25, for the entry in the third column against 
Bub-item (a), the entry ''Fifty rupees per ton" shall be substituted. 30 
31. For the year beginning on the 1st day of April. 1959, no duty 
under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, or the Tariff Act shall 
be levied in respect of salt manufactured in, or imported into, India. 
DeciaT'ation under the PT'ovisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 
It is hr:>reby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 35 
that the provisions of clauses 28, 29 and 30 of this Bill shall have 
1 of 1944. 
32 of 1934. 
immediate effect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 160f 1931 

1'1 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
PART I 
Income-tax and surcharge on income-tax 
PARAGRAPH A 
(i) In the case of every individual who is married and every 
Hindu undivided family whose total income does not exceed Rs. 20,000 
in either case-
Rates of Income-tax 
10 Where the individual has no Where the individual has one Where the individual has 
child wholly or mainly de- child wholly or mainly de- than one child 
IS 
20 
2S 
more 
pendent on him or where pendent on Dhim or where wholly or mainly depen-
the Hindu undivided family the Hindu undivided family dent on him or where 
has no minor coparcener has one minor coparcener the Hindu undivided 
family has more than 
one minor coparcener 
Rs. Rs. Rs. 
(I) On the first 3,000 of total 3,300 of totlll 13,600 ?f total Nil 
income. income. Income. 
(2) On the next • 2,000 " 1.700 " 
1,400 " 3% 
(3) On the next 2,500 " 
2,SOO 
" 2,500 " 6% 
(4) On the next 2,500 .. I 2,500 2,500 9% 
(5) On the next 2,500 "j 12,500 ,,1 2,500 .. u% 
(6) On the next il,5 00 " f 2,500 " ;.2,500 " 14% 
(7) On the next 5,000 ... 15,000 ., ~5,OOO 
" 18% '" ".' 
(ii) In the case of every individual who is not married and every 
individual or Hindu undivided family whose total income in either 
case exceeds Rs. 20,000 and in the case of every unregistered firm or 
other association of persons, not being a case to which Paragraph B 
30 or Paragraph C or Paragraph D of this Part applies:-
Rs. 
(1) On the first 1,000 of total income Nil 
(2) On the next 4.000 .. " 3" 
(3) On the next 2,SOO .. .. 6% 
3S (4) On the next 2.500 .. .. 9% 
(s) On the next 2,500 " .. n% 
(6) On the next z,Soo " .. 14% 
(7) On the next 5,000 " " 18% 
(S) On the balance of total income 2S% 

18 
Provided that for the purposes of this Paragraph-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income which 
does not exceed the limit specified below; 
(ii) the income-tax payable shall in no case exceed half the 
amount by which the total income exceeds the said limit; s 
(iii) the income-tax payable by an individual who is mar-
ried or a Hindu undivided family whose total income exceeds in 
either case Rs. 20,000 shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable if 
the total income had been Rs. 20,000; 
(b) half the amount by which the total income excee<U 
Rs. 20,000; 
The limit aforesaid shall be-
10 
(i) Rs. 6,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which as at the end of the previous year satisfies either of the 15 
following conditions, namely:-
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other ~o 
and who are not lineally descended from any other livina 
member of the family j 
(ii) Rs. 3,000 in every other case. 
Surcharges on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 25 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges cal-
culated as under:-
(a) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the sum 
cf-
(i) five per cent. of the amount of income-tax; and 
(ii) where the earned income included in the total in-
30 
come exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, five per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of income-tax which would have been 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income if such earned income had been the total income 35 
and the amount of income-tax payable on a total income of 
Rs. 1,00,000; 
(b) A special surcharge on unearned income at fifteen per 
cent. of the difference between the amount of income-tax on the 

19 
total income and the amount of income-tax on the whole of the 
earned income, if any, included in the total income if such earn-
ed income had been the total income: 
Provided that-
(i) no surcharge for purposes of the Union shall be 
payable where the total income does not exceed the limit 
specified below; 
(ii) no special surcharge on unearned income shall be 
payable in the case of an assessee whose total income does 
10 not include any income from dividend on ordinary shares 
if his total income does not exceed the limit specified below, 
and where the total income includes any dividends on ordi-
nary shares, such limit shall be increased by Rs. 1,500 or the 
amount of the said dividends, whichever is less: 
15 Provided further that-
(a) where the total income includes any dividends on 
ordinary shares, the surcharge for purposes of the Union and 
the special surcharge on unearned income shall not in each 
case exceed half the amount by which the total income 
exceeds the respective limits applicable in either case; 
(b) the surcharge for purposes of the Union and the 
special surcharge on unearned income, both together, shall 
not exceed half the amount by which the total income ex-
ceeds the limit specified below; 
The limit aforesaid shall be-
(i) Rs. 15,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided fanlUy 
which satisfies as at the end of the previous year either of the 
following conditions, namely:-
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 
and who are not lineally descended from any other living 
member of the family; 
35 (ii) Rs. 7,500 in every other case. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, in the case of 
every Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara law, a 
son shall be deemed to be entitled to claim partition of the copar-
cenary property against his father, or grand-father notwithstanding 
40 any custom to the contrary. 

20 
PARAGRAPH B 
In the case of every company and local authority,-
" Rate. of income-tax· 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharge on income-tax 
30% 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge of 5 per cent. thereon. 
PARAGRAPH C 
In every case in which under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 
5 
income-tax is to be charged at the maximum rate,- 10 
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income. 
Surcharge on income-tax 
25% 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge of 20 per cent. thereon. IS 
PARAGRAPH D 
In the case of every registered firm,-
Rates of income-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 40,000 of total income 
(2) On the next Rs. 35,000 of total income 
(3) On the next Rs. 75,000 of total income 
(4) On the balance of total income 
PART II 
Super-tax and surcharge on super-tax 
Nil 
5% 
6% 
9% 
20 
PARAGRAPH A 25 
In the case of every individual, Hindu undivided family, unregis-
tered firm and other association of persons, not being a case to which 
any other Paragtaph of this Part applies,-
Rates of super-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 20,000 of total income 
(2) On the next Rs. 5,000 of total income 
(3) On the next Rs. 5,000 of total income 
(4) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(5) On the naxt Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(6) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(7) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(8) On the balance of total income 
Nil 
5% 
15% 
20re 
30% 
35% 
40% 
45% 
30 
35 

1956. 
Surcharges on super-tax 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore speci-
fied shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges calculated 
as under:-
5 (a) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the sum 
of-
(i) five per cent. of the amount of super-tax; and 
(ii) where the earned income included in the total income 
exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, five per cent. of the difference between 
10 the amount of super-tax which would have been payable on 
the whole of the earned income included in the total income, 
if such earned income had been the total income and the 
amount of super-tax payable on a total income of Rs. 1,00.000: 
(b) A special surcharge on unearned income at fifteen per 
IS cent. of the difference between the amount of super-tax on the 
total income and. the amount of super-tax on the whole of the 
earned income. if any, included in the total income. if such earned 
income had been the total income. 
PARAGRAPH B 
Tn the case of every local authority.-
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharge on super-tax 
16% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore speci-
2S fied shall be increased by a surcharge of 121 per cent. thereon. 
30 
PARAGRAPH C 
In the case of every association of persons being a co-operative 
society as defined in clause (5B) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act.-
Rate.~ of super-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 25,000 of total income 
(2) On the balance of total income 
Surcharge on super-tax 
Nil 
16% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge of 12} per cent. thereon. 
3S PARAGRAPH D 
In the case of the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,-
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of its profits and gains from 
40 life insurance business. 11% 

22 
In the case of every other company,-
Rates of super-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Provided that,-
50%: 
(i) a rebate at the rate of 40 per cent. on so much of the totalS 
income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian company 
and a rebate at the rate of 35 per cent. on the balance of the 
total income shall be allowed in the case of any company 
which-
(a) in respect of its profits liable to tax under the Income- 10 
tax Act for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1960, 
has made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration 
and payment within India of the dividends payable out of 
such profits and for the deduction of super-tax from dividends 
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3D) of IS 
section 18 of that Act; and 
(b) is such a company as is referred to in sub-section 
(9) of section 23A of the Income-tax Act with a total income 
not exceeding Rs. 25,000; 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of 40 per cent. on so much of the 20 
tptal income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian 
company and a rebate at the rate of 30% on the balance of the 
total income shall be allowed in the case of any company which 
satisfies condition (a) but not condition (b) of the preceding 
clause; 25 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of 40'% on so much of the total 
income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian com-
pany and a rebate at the rate of 20% on the balance of the total 
income shall be allowed in the case of any company not entitled 
to a rebate under either of the preceding clauses: 30 
Provided further that,-
(i) the amount of the rebate under clause (i) or clause (ii) 
shall be reduced by the sum, if any, equal to the amount or the 
aggregate of the amounts, as the case may be, computed as here-
under:- 3S 
(c) on that part of the aggregate of the sums arrived at in The whole amount of 
accordance with clause (I) of the second proviso to such pan. 
Paragraph D of Parr II of the First Schedule to the Fin-
ance Act, 1958, as has not been deemed to have been taken 
into account, in accordance with clause (ii) of the said 40 II of IPS8. 
proviso, for the purpose of reducing the rebate mention-
ed in clause (i) of the said provisO to nil; 

5 
10 
20 
2S 
(b) on the amoutit ropresenting the face value of any bonus at the rate of 30% 
shares Or the amount of any bonus issued to its 
shareholders during the previous year with a 
view to increasing the paid-up capital except 
to the extent to which such bonus shares or bonus have' 
been issued out of pre;niums received in cash on the 
issue of its shares; and 
(c) in addition, in the case of a company referred to in 
clause (ii) of the preceding proviso which has distributed 
to its shareholders during the previous year dividends 
in excess of six per cent. of its paid-up capital, not 
being dividends payable at a fixed rate-. . 
(A) in the case of a company which is not such as is 
referred to in sub-section (9) of scction 23A of the 
Income-tax Act-
and 
on that part of the said dividends which exceeds 6 per at the rate of 10% 
cent. but does not exceed 10 per cent. of the paid-
up capital; 
on that part of the said dividends whjch exceeds 10 at the rate of 20% 
per cent. of the paid-up capital; 
(B) in the case of any other company-
un that part of the said dividends which exce~Js 6 at the rate of 10% 
per cent. but does not exceed 10 per cent. of the 
paid-up capilal; 
on that part of the said dividends which exceeds 10 at the rate of 20% 
per cent. but does not exceed IS per cent. of the 
paid-up capital; 
un that part of the said dividends which exceeds 18 at the rate of 30% 
per cent. of the paid-up capital; 
(ii) where the sum arrived at in accordance with clause 
(i) of this proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at 
in accordance with clause (i) or clause (ii), as the case may 
be, of the preceding proviso, only so much of the amounts of 
3S reduction mentioned in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause 
(i) of this proviso as is sufficient, in that order, to reduce the 
rebate to nil shall be deemed to have been taken into account 
for the purpose: 
Provided further that the super-tax payable by a company, the 
40 total income of which exceeds rupees twenty-five thousand shall not 
exceed the aggregate ·of-
(a) the super-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been rupees twenty-five 
thousand, and 
45 (b) half the amount by which its total income exceeds 
rupees twenty-five thousand. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph,-
(i) the expression "paid-up capital" means the· paid-up 
capital (other than capital entitled to a dividend at a fixed rate) 
,50 of the company as on the first day of the previous year relevant 
to the assessment for the year ending on the 31st day of March 
2027 (B) L.S.--4. 

1960, increased by any premiums received in cash by the corti-
pany on the issue of its shares, standing to the credit of the share 
premium account as on the first day of the previous year 
aforesaid; 
(ii) the expression "dividend" shall be deemed to include ~ 
any distribution included in the expression "dividend" as defined 
in clause (6A) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act; 
(iii) where any portion of the profits and gains of the com-
pany is not included in its total income by reason of such portion 
being exempt from tax under any provision of the Income-tax 10 
Act, the "paid-up capital" of the c.ompany, the amount distri-
buted as dividends (not being dividends payable at a fixed rate), 
the amount representing the face value of any bonus shares and 
the amount of any bonus issued t'o the share-holders shall each 
be deemed to be such proportion thereof as the total income of 1 ~ 
the company for the previous year bears to its total profits amI 
gains for that year other than capital receipts, reduced by such 
allowances as may be admissible u1}der the Income-tax Act 
which have not been taken -into account by the company in its 
profit and loss account for that year. 2(' 
PART III 
Rates fOT deduction of tax under section 18 ,of the Income-tax Act at 
the prescribed rates 
In every case in which under the provisions of section 18 of the 
Income-tax Act tax is to be deducted at the prescribed rates, dedue·- ;/<, 
tion shall be made from the income subject to deduction at the 
following rates:-
---------_.,- . 
i _____ I~~llle-:_- __ - \ .Super-tax _________ _ 
-I Rate of I Rate of \ Rate of I Rate of Surcharge 
I Income- Surcharge Super-talC 3 :> 
tax 
1. In the calC of a person other 
than a company-
(a) in every ca8':, on the 
whole income (excluding 
interest payable on any 
security of the Central 
Govemn'lent issued or 
declared to be income-
tax free), and 
(b) in addition, where the 
person is one whom the 
p!'rson responsible for 
paying the income has no 
reason to believe to be re-
lident in the taxable terri-
toritl, on the whole 
income. 
,'Yo 
35 
40 
Super-tax and surcharge on 
super-tax in accordance with 
the provisions of clause (b) 
of sub-Bection (1) of section 11 
of the Income-tax Act. . 45 

2. In the case of a company-
Rate of 
Income-
tax 
Rate of 
Super-tax 
5 (a) in every case-
(;) on the whole income (excluding interest payable on any 
security of the Central Government issued or declared 
to be income-tax free) ; and 
10 
(ii) on the whole income (exCluding dividends payable by an 
Indian company referred to in section 56A cifthe Income-
tax Act); and 
20 
(b) ~n addition,-
(i) where the company is an Indian company or a company 
which has made the prescribed arrangements for the 
declaration and payment of dividends within India, on 
the whole income (excluding dividends payable by its 
subsidiary Indian company, if any, or by an Indian com-
pany referred to in section 56A of the Income-tax Act) . 
(ji) where the company is neitlier an Indian company nor a 
company which has made the prescribed arrangements 
for the declaration and payament of dividends within 
India, on the whole income (excluding dividends 
payable by its subsidiary Indian company, if any, or by 
an Indian company referred to in section 56A of the 
Income-tax Act) 
THE SECOND SCH'EDULE 
(See section 28) 
In the First Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
10% 
33% 
(i) in Item No. 29, for the existing entry in the fourth 
30 column, the entry "Rs. 2 per 100 linear feet" shall be substituted; 
3S 
(ii) for Item No. 39 (1), the following Items shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
Item' 
No. 
Name of article 
2 
Nature 
of duty 
3 
Standard Preferential rate of 
rate of duty duty if the article is 
the produce or manu-
facture of 
The Uni- A British 
ted Colony 
Kingdom 
4 5 6 
"39(1) Rubber manufactures, Revenue 35 per cent. 
not otherwise specified, ad valorem. 
excluding apparel. 
Duration 
of protec-
tective 
rates of 
duty 
7 
39(.z) Rubber tyres and tubes Revenue 40 per cent. 
45 for motor vehicles. ad valorem. 
31)( J) Rubber tyres and tubes Revenue 35 per cent. 
not otherwise speci- ad valor"". 
tied. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals of 
the Central Government for the next financial year and to provide 
for certain connected matters. The notes on clauses explain .. he 
various provisions contained in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 28th February, 1959. 
28 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2 continues for the financial year 1959-60 the rates of 
income-tax and super-tax prescribed by the Finance Act, 1958, and 
prescribes the rates for deduction of tax at source from interest on 
securities, dividends, etc., and also the rates for advance payment of 
tax by companies during the financial year 1959-60. 
Clause 3 makes the following amendments in section 4:-
Sub-clause (i) (a) withdraws the exemption up to Rs. 4,500 
allowable to taxpayers resident in India in respect of their un-
remitted foreign income. 
Sub-clause (i) (b) has the effect of bringing under taxation 
salaries paid by Government to its officers serving abroad. 
Sub-clause (ii) clarifies the extent to which exemption from 
tax is available to the officials of the foreign diplomatic missions 
in India and their staff, and also makes a change consequential 
upon the amendment made by sub-clause (i)(b). 
Clause 4 makes the following amendments in section 10:-
Sub-clause (i) enables certain specified allowances to be 
granted in pursuance of agreements entered into by the Central 
Government with concerns engaged in the exploration for and 
production of mineral oil in association with the Government. 
Sub-clause (ii) abolishes the scheme of compulsory deposit 
for companies introduced by the Finance (No.3) Act, 1956, and 
held in abeyance since 1st April, 1958. 
Clause 5 makes a clarificatory amendment to section 12, conse-
quential upon the omission of section 16(2) by clause 7, and pr9vides 
that dividends declared by companies will be treated as the income of 
the shareholders in the previous year in which they are declared. 
Clause 6 amends section 15C with retrospective effect to clarify 
that the exemption is not availahle to undertakings set up with 
buildings, plant and machinery which were previously used in any 
other business. 
Clause 7 deletes sub-section (2) of seetion 16, thereby abolishing 
the scheme of grossing up of dividends in the assessment of share-
holders of companies consistently with the changes proposed by 
clauses 9 and 14. 
Clause 8 makes the following two amendments to section 17:-
Sub-clause (i) provides that Government servants posted for 
service abroad, who will become liable to tax hereafter on the 
27 

salaries drawn by them abroad, will be charged to tax at the 
rates applicable to their total world income, and not at the flat 
rates normally applicable to non-resident taxpayers. 
Sub-clause(ii) provides for the levy of 1ax on capital gains 
of companies at a t6tal flat rate of 30 per cent. (10 per cent. 
.' so.p~r-tax in addition to 20 per ·cent. income-tax) against the 
existing rate of 30 per cent. income-tax and 1·5 per cent. sur-
charge thereon. 
Clause 9 makes the following amendments to section 18 which 
deals with deduction of tax at source by . persons responsible for 
making payments of certain kinds of income:-
Sub-clauses (i), (ii)' and (iii) make formal amendments to 
sections 18 (2B) , (SA) and (3B) relating to deduction of tax at 
source on salary payments to non-residents and interest on secu-
rities and other sums, so as to make these provisions simpler and 
uniform. 
Sub-clause (iv) amends section 18 (3D) .. At present, com-
panies are not required to deduct income-tax on payments of 
dividends to shareholders as the shareholders are deemed to hav~ 
paid income-tax through the companies. By this amendment, 
income-tax has to be deducted at prescribed rates on all dividend 
distributions. The existing provision for deduction of super-tax 
on dividends paid to non-resident shareholders will, however, 
cOl!lltinue to operate. 
Sub-clauses (v) to (vii) formally amend certain other provi-
sion .. of section 18 consequential upon the amendments referred 
to above. 
Sub-clause (viii) inserts two new sub-sections in section 18 
in order-
(a) to obviate deduction of tax on dividends which are 
.payable on shares held by Government; and 
(b) to clarify that the rates for deduction in all cases 
will be, the rates specified in the Finance Act for the purpose 
from year to year. 
The rates for deduction of tax during the financial year 1959-60 an 
interest on seeurities, dividends and other sums. which vary accord-
ing as the recipient is a company or not a company and whether 
resident or not resident in India are specified in Part III of the 
Schedule to the Bill. 
Clause 10 omits section 20 which provides for the issue of a ~ert.i· 
ficate to the shareholders receiving dividends as, in view of th,-

.20 
changes proposed by clause 9, the certificate provided under section 
18 for tax deductions will cover dividends also. 
Clause 11 refixes the percent 1ges for minimum distribution of 
dividends prescribed under section 23A for certain companies, COll-
sistently with the changes proposed in company taxation, so that the 
companies can continue to .,retain the same amount of net profits . 
which they could have retained 'under the existing law without being 
subjected to the penal tax under that section. . 
Clause 12 makes a formal amendment to section 23B consequential . 
upon the abolition of tax credit to the shareholders on their dividend 
income proposed by clause 9. 
Clause 13 makes the following amendments to section 35:-
Sub-dause (i) makes section 35(9) inapplicable to dividends 
p3:-able in respect of any previous year relevant to any year 
after the assessment year 1959-60, as the provision for recovery 
of refunds granted to shareholders in respect of dividends in 
ca:;es where the company fails to pay up its tax will no longer 
be necessary in view of the changes proposed by clauses 7, 9 and 
14. 
Sub-clause (ii) makes the provlslOn relating to recovery of 
rebates of income-tax granted to companies on their undistribut-
ed profits prior to 1956-57 inapplicable after the system of 
gros-'iing of dividends is abolished 1 
Cla,use 14 amends section 49B, so as-
(i) to abolish, consistently with the changes proposed by 
clauses 7 and 9, the legal fiction in the existing scheme under 
which a shareholder is deemed to have paid income-tax on 
dividends received by him from a company. and 
(ii) to retain in a suitably modified form the existing provi-
sion for adjustment of any agricultural income-tax paid by the 
company in the assessment of the shareholder receiving divi-
dends from out of agricultural profits of the company. 
Clause 15 omits section 49C dealing with adjustment of double 
taxation relief obtained by a company in the assessment of share-
holders, which will become unnecessary on the abolition of grossing 
of dividends. 
Clause 16 makes a formal amendment to section 51 consequential 
upon the omission of section 20. 

Clause 17 amends section 52 to penalise the furnishing of false tax 
deduction certificates in the case of dividends and other incomes on 
which tax is to be deducted at source. 
Clause 18 makes formal amendments to section 58 consequential 
on the omission of section 20. 
" Clause 19 contains formal provisions with respect to the com-
mencement of the various provisions in this Bill relating to income-
tax. 
Clause 20 amends section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, with 
retrospective effect to make it clear that taxes which are disputed 
and taxes which are in arrears for more than a year are not to be 
deducted as debts in the computation of the net wealth of an assessee. 
Clause 21 enhances from 1st April, 1959, the rates of wealth-tax 
in the case of individuals and Hindu undivided families. 
Clause 22 amends section 2 of the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to make it clear that the requirement 
that a person should be wholly or mainly dependent on the 
assessee for support and maintenance for the purpose of being a 
dependent has no application in relation to a spouse or minor 
child. 
Sub-clause (ii) 
"previous year". 
clarifies the meaning of the expression 
\ 
Clause 23 amends section 3 of the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957, in 
order to secure that for computing the income of the assessee during 
a previous year, income received for the benefit of the assessee or 
any of his dependants or both during that year is taken into account. 
Similarly it is sought to provide that where the assessee is a member 
of a Hindu undivided family or any other association of persons, any 
expenditure incurred for his benefit or for the benefit of any of his 
dependants from and out of the property or income of the family or 
association, as the case may be, is treated as his income. 
Clause 24 amends section 4 of the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957. 
Sub-clause (i) omits certain words from clause (i) of section 
4 which appear to be unnecessary. 
Sub-clause (ii) makes it clear that expenditure incurred by 
any dependant of the assessee (including, in the case of a Hindu 
undivided family, expenditure incurred by any member of the 
family from and out of the property or income of the family) is 
included in the taxable expenditure of the assessee. 

31 
Clause 25 amends section 5 of the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957. 
Sub-clause (i) removes an exemption allowed in the case of 
certain expenditure in relation to owner-occupied propertieA 
because the expenditure in such cases is really in the nature cr.f 
personal expenditure. 
Sub-clause (ii) omits from section 5 (f) references to bullion, 
precious stones and jewellery as they are now befng included in 
section 6(I)(d). 
Sub-clause (iii) amends section 5(g) so as to restrict the 
elremption to purchases of the more valuable products of cottage 
industry and works of art. 
Clause 26 amends section 6 of the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957. 
Sub-clause (i) provides that municipal taxes in respect of 
owner-occupied properties are not to be deducted in computing 
the taxable expenditure. 
Sub-clause (ii) amends section 6(1) (d) so that bullion, 
precious stones and jewellery are treated in the same manner as 
furniture and other household goods. 
Sub-clause (iii) amends section 6 (1) (h) so as to make it 
clear that the allowance of Rs. 3,000 for a co-parcener is not 
allowed to him again where he is separately assessed and is 
entitled to the allowance of Rs. 30,000 under section 6(1) (h) (i). 
Clause 27 amends section 2 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958, in order to 
clarify the meaning of the expression "previous year". 
Clause 28, read with the Second Schedule, proposes certain 
changes in the Import Tariff:-
(a) The rate of duty of Rs. 1·75 per 100 linear feet on un-
exposed cinematograph films is proposed to be changed to 
Rs. 2·00 per 100 linear feet. The change is necessary to providv 
funds for the Film Finance Corporation. 
(b) Item 39 (1) of the Indian Tariff Act is being split up ftO 
as to provide for an increased rate of duty, equal to the excii" 
duty, on tyres and tubes for motor vehicles only. 
Clause 29 seeks to maintain for another year the status quo !I, 
regard to commitments under the General Agreement on Tari1fs and 
~a • 
Clauae 30-
Sub-clause (a) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
khandsari sugar from Rs. 0-8-0 per cwt. to Rs. 5· 60 per ewt. 
2027(8) L.S.-&. 
, 

32 
Sub-clause (b) (i) seeks to make certain clarificat9ry amend-
ments in sub-item 1(5) of Item No.9 relating to unmanufactured 
tobacco. 
Sub-clause (b) (ii) proposes an increase in the excise duty 
on certain categories of cigarettes. 
Sub-clause (c) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
motor tyres from 30 per cent. ad valorem to 40 per cent. ad 
valorem. 
Sub-clause (d) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
vegetable product from Rs. 7· 00 per cwt. to Rs. 8·75 per cwt. 
Sub-clause (e) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
art silk fabrics from Rs. 0-0-6 per sq. yd. to 6 naye paise per sq. 
yd. 
Sub-clause (f) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
refined diesel oils and vaporising oil from 40 naye paise per 
imperial gallon to 80 naye paise per imperial gallon. 
Sub-clause (g) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
diesel oil, not otherwise specified, from Rs. 40·00 per ton to 
Rs. 50·00 per ton. 
Cla'USe 31, like section 18 of the Finance Act, 1958, provides that 
salt shall be duty free for another year. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to levy a basic excise duty of Rs. 5·60 per cwt. on 
khandsari sugar. Though the Central Excise Tariff provided for an 
excise duty of Rs. 0-8-0 per cwt., this duty was withdrawn by notifi-
cation, with effect from 19-7-1952. With the re-imposition of the 
excise duty at a higher level all the khandsari sugar factories will 
have to be brought under excise control. This will necessitate the 
employment of some additional staff. The increase in staff together 
with incidental expenses of administration, is estimated to cost 
Rs. 2·67 lakhs. 
I.-VOLUME OF WORK 
There are about 800 khandsari sugar factories which are now to 
be brought under excise control. 
n.-REQUIREMENT OF PERSONNEL AND FINANCE 
A.-Ollkm-
No. of Superintendents 
B.-StafJ-
No. of DeputY Superintendents 
No. of Inspectors 
No. of Sub-Inspectors 
No. of Hcad-clerks 
No, of U. D. Cs. 
No. of L. D. C~. 
No. of Stcno-typflt8 
C.-/wnual 'XperlSIS-
Incidental cxpenscs includin, 
Cla •• IV staff, contingencies, 
etc. • 
No. Annual emolume/lts Cost Rs. 
1 X 6,7l0 
8 8 x 4,800 -38,400 
l2 II x l,820 -62,040 
44 44 x 1,884 -8l,896 
1 x 3,575 -3.575 
2 l x 3.568 -5. 136 
3 3 x 1.884 -S,6Sl 
I X 3,1l4 ~2,I24 
-60,000 
TOTAl. 
or Re. l'''7 lath,. 
33 

MEMoAANDUM ROOAlIDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9(iv) of the Bill, read with section 59 of the Income-tlX 
Act, provides for rules being made with respect to the grant of 
certificates to shareholders of companies who are not liable to income-
tax, in order to enable them to obtain their dividends without 
deduction of tax. The rule-making power is of a normal character. 
34 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central 
Government for the financial year 1959-60. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article II7 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the introduction and 
consideration of the Bill. 
GMGIPD-LSI-2027 (B) LS-Z.".5'-*100 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secrettzry. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 