BIU No. 17 of 1957 
THE PROVISIONAL COLLECTION OF 
TAXES (TEMPORARY AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN 1.o1t SABHA) 

· BW No. '11 of itST' , 
THE PROVISIONAL COLLECTION OF TAXES 
(TEMPORARY AMENDMENT) BILL,' 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOR SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Provisional Collection of Taxes "Act. 1931" for .. 
temporary period. 
BE it enaeted. by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Provisional Collection. of TUell Short lltk , 
(Temporary Amendment) Act, 1957 . 
. ~ 2. Where a Bill introduced in Parliament during the period TempoIIID1 
commencing on the 15th day of May, 1957, and ending with the 311t :::::: 
day of December, 1957, contains a declared provision as defined in. and S. Act 
section 2 of the Provisional Collection of, Taxes Act, 1931, sections 4: 16 of (9)'. 
and 5 of that Act shall have effect in relation to such Bill as if for 
c() the words "sixtieth day" in clause (c) of sub-section (2), 01 section. 
and in sub-section (1) of section 5, the words "one hundred and 
twentieth day" had been substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A Finance Bill proposing inter alia certain increases in customs 
and excise duties has been introduced in the current session of 
Parliament. By virtue of a declaration appended to the Bill under 
the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931, these increases have 
been provisionally brought into force immediately with the intro-
duction of the Bill. The authority for provisional collection of the 
increases derived from this declaration lapses at the end of 60 days. 
The Finance Bill would, therefore, have to be enacted into law 
within this period, if provisional collection is not to come to a stop 
and an du~ie8 provisionally collected are not to become refundable. 
The duration of the current session of Parliament is expected to be 
about three weeks only, which will not give Parliament sufficient 
time to examine the important taxation proposals being made in the 
Finance Bill. In order, therefore, that Parliament may be enabled 
to consider that Bill in its next session which is expected to com-
mence in the month of July, 1957, the present Bill proposes to extend 
the 6O-day period provided in the Provisional Collection of Taxes 
Act, 19'31 to 129 days as a temporary measure. 
NEW DZLHI; 
The 11th MCifl., 1917, 
T. T. KRISHNAl\4ACHARI. 

ANNEXURE 
EATRACT FROM THE PROVISIONAL COLLECTION OF TAXES ACT, 1931. 
No. XVI OF 1931. 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, a "declared provision" means a provision 1n a DefinitioD 
sm in respect of which a declaration has been made under section 3 . 
• • • • • 
4. (1) A declared provision shall have the force of law imme-
diately on the expiry of the day on which the Bill containing it is ~~iO; sf 
introduced. under till, Act, an,t 
(2) A declared prOVISIon shall cease to have the force of law 
under the provisions of this Act-
(a) when it comes into 'operation as an enactment, with or 
without amendment, or 
(b) when the Central Government, in pursuance of a motion 
passed by the Parliament, directs, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, that it shall cease to have the force of law, or 
(c) if it has not already ceased to have the force of law 
under clause (a) or clause (b), then on the expiry of the slxtieth 
day after the day on which the Bill containing it was introduced. 
duratil'n 
Ihereof. 
5. (1) Where a declared provision comes into operation as an fuDdCertain ro-. • • to bl 
enactment 1D an amended form before the expIry of the sixtieth day made whel. 
after the day on which the Bill containing it was introduced, refunds :~~~ 
shall be made of all duties collected which would not have been have eft'~. 
collected if the provision adopted in the enactment had been the 
declared provision: 
Provided that the rate at which refunds of any duty may be 
made under this sub-section shall not exceed the difference between 
the rate of such duty proposed in the d'eclared provision and the 
rate of such duty in force when the Bill was introduced. 
(2) Where a declared provision ceases to have the force of law 
under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4. refunds 
shall be made of all duties collected which would not have been 
collected if the declaration in respect of it had not been made. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act. 1931. for 
a temporary period. 
The President has. in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article II7 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution 
of India, recommended to Lok Sabha. the introduction 
and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL. 
Secretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Ministe1' of Finance.) 
GMGIPND-L8-I-324 L.S.-17-S-S7-1.75o. 