BJII .. 1'7 of 1_ 
THE 8A.LAlUES AND ALLOWANCES OF OFFICERS OF 
PARLIAJ4ENT BILL, 1953 
.. (As DfTllODtJCM) Df I'JJB Hou81: OF TO PBoP~) 
A 
BILL 
to pro1'icN /M the ~ari .. Clnd allowancfI 0/ c"tain tlfficer. 0/ ParUam.ftt. 
:8. it ~nacted by Parliament 88 follows:-
1. 1Ja011 title ad commencement.-(l) Thia Act may be called the 
Salaries and allowances of Officerl of Parfiament Act, 1958. 
(2) It Ihall come into force on the lirst day of May, 1958. 
So DelllitlOll.-ln this Act "officer of Pw-liament" meanl any of the 5 
followiog officers, namely, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the 
Council of States Qnd the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House 
of the People. 
. 3. 8aI&r1e1 or ofBcen 01 PaIllament.-There ah&1l be paid to the 
Olallnlwa ucl the Speaker a Alary of two thOuaDcl two handfed 1Dd.' 10 
., npee. per meDHm, and to the Deput)' 0bairmaD and the Dapa" 
.peaker a Ml&IJ of two thouaan(l. rupees per meuem. 
,. B8IldeDce for oIlcel'l or Parll&ment.-Each officer of Parliament 
lhall be entitled without pa'ment of rent to the use of a furnished resi-
dence throughout. his term of office and for a period of fifteen da.rs 15 
immediately thereafter, and no charge sha.II faU on the officer personally 
in respect 01 the maintenance of such residence. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this sootion, "residence" includee 
'he staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto and the garden 
thereof, and "maintenance" in relation to a ~esidence includes the pay- 2() 
rnent of local rates anel taxes "nel t.he provision of electricity and water. 
6. Bumptuary allowance to the Ohalrman and the Bpeate.-Thare 
.&1l be paid to the Chairman and the Speaker a sumptuary allowance of 
!lve hundred rupees per menle.m. 

I 
2 
6. 'l'rAYeJ1iDc &Dd daily aUowancII to oiIct1'I 01 ParI1&1D11lt.--{l) Sub-
ject t') any rules made in this behalf under .ectJion 11, an officer of Par-
liament ahaU b~ entitled to- -
(aJ travelling allowances for himself and the members of hie 
family and for the transport of his and his family's efteote-
(i) in respect of the journey to Delhi from his usual place 
of residence outside Delhi for assuming oftice, and 
,p) in respect of the journey from Delhi to his u.ual place 
of residence outside Delhi on relinquishing office; and 
10 (b) ~ayelijP,g and daily a.llowanoes in respect of tours undertaken 
15 
by him in the dischar,e of his official duties, whether by 88&, land or 
~. 
(2) Any travelling .llowan~ undtu' ~ ,ec~J;l fAAy be paid in caIh 
or freo Gfticial transporll niay '1»& proVided in lieU thereof. 
7. Medical ~~Uea tp otBpeII pi 1ar~~~.--.&ubiect to any rul .. 
made ill this behalf under SectjOll 11, an officer of Parliament and the 
members en bis family shall be entitled free of charge to accommodation 
in hospitals maintained, by the Government and also to medical treatment. 
S. Adv~~ to ollleara of Plrl1&meDt for purobaae of motor-cara.-
20 There mlly be paid'to any officer of Parliament by wliy of 8. repayable 
advance such IUD! of money RS may be n~termin~d by rulf's ma~ ip .this 
behalf under section 11 for the purchase of a motor-car in order that he 
may be able to discharge cO~I"fniently Ilnd efficiently tpe duties of his office. . . 
:20 9. omeera of ~~ent not to draw Alary or allowance, as ~be1'8 
of Parllament.-No officer of PHrliament in receipt of Ii Biliary or allow-
ance under this Ac~ shall be entitled to receive any BUrp. out of funda 
provided by }'arliament by way of salary or allowance in respect of ~ 
membership of either House of Parliament. . 
10 .0tiAcatlon reapec:tlDg appolDtment, etc" of omeara of .PatI1ament 
30 to be conclUlive evidence thereof.-The date on which any person became 
or ceased to' be an officer of Parliament shall be published in the Official < 
Gazette and any such notification shall be conclusive evidence of the facfl 
that ha became, or ceaBed to be. an officer of Parliament on that date foio 
35 all the purposes of this Act. 
11. 'ower to mak~ rule •. -(l) 'l'he Central Government may, in con-
sultation with ~he' ()hairinan and the Bpea1eer. make rule. for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. -
(2) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before both Houses of 
40 Parliament a8 soon as may be after they are made. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASON6' 
Und~r artlole 97 of the Constit,ution, read with paragraph 7 of the 
.second Schedule, the Chairman and the Speaker are each at present 
entitled to the lapi8 lalary and .uowances as were payable to the Speaker 
01. tIlle Constituent Assembly' (Legislative) before the 26th January, 19W, 
~&t it to I&!. a salary of :&,8.~/· per menaem, a sumptU&l7 allowance 
.of RII. 5(J(), - per mensem and the uae 01 a fully furnished residence In 
New Delhi free of rent throughout his term of alice. Similarly ~ 
Deputy Chairman and tho Deputy Sp,eaker are entUl8d to the same I&lar'y 
and allowanoes as were payable to the Deputy E}>eaker of the Constituent 
Alsembly (LegisJat.ive). namely, a salary of Rs. 1.500/- per mensem for 
the period during which he ia engaged on 'work connected with the busineu 
of the HOUle and a daily allowance of ThI. 40/- as admissible to a Mem· 
ber of the Houae. All tbesH officera of Parliament are also entitled in 
reapecn of journeys on duty to travelling and daily allowancea. 
Paragrilpb 7 of the Seoond Schedule ia a transitional proviaion and 
artiole 97 contemplates a law of Parliament providing for the salaries ana 
allowances of all these four officers of Parliament. When the salary and 
.llowance!l of thtl Speaker of the Constituent Assembly (Legislative) were 
fixed by a statutory order in February, 1945, they were equated to the 
wary and allowances of a Cabinet Minister. The present Bill has been 
-drafted in pursuanoe of artiole 97 and equates the position of the Speaker 
and th,e Chairman to that of a Cabinet Minister with respeot to their 
salaries, allowances and other faoilities as envisaged in the Salaries and 
Allowanoes of Ministers Aot, 1952. 
With resr-ect to the Deputy Speaker and the Deputy Chainnan. a 
salary of Re. 2.000/- per meneer.l is proposed and in additIon they would be 
-entitled to the USe of a fully furnished residenoe. 
c. C. BIBW AS. 
NBw DELHI; 
'The ,5th March, 1958. 

, 
FINANCI,AL MEMORANDUM 
The Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Bill, 1958, seeks. 
to fix the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Peputy ChairDiail of 
the Council of Statee and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the HouB& 
of the People and to lay down oert&in privileges euch .. free medical 
attendance and advances for the purohase of motor-carBo The annual· 
expenditure on their salariee and allowancet involved will be about 
iRa. 1.1~.OOO/· recurring. 

\. .. ...... .... .. 
• 
BILL 
to provide for the salaries and allowaDces of oertaiD officers 
of Parliament. 
The PrNident haa, ill p1ll'll1lance of claule (3) of article 117 
of the Conatitiution of India, recommended to the BoUH of the 
People the coDlideration of the BilL 
(An C. C. lJWaI. 
Mi"'*r 1M La",) 
ILN.'ICAUL, 
,.".". 