LOK SABI1A 
CORRIl£l'DA 
to 
mE EAR DRUMS AND EAR BONES (AUTHORITY FOR USE FOR 
THERAPEUTIC PURPOSES) BILL, 1978 
Df2 be/As introduced in l&k §abhsa 7 
1. Page 2, in the marginal heading to clause 3,-
.g"fter »ears" lnseIi "of" 
2. Page 4 J line 4,-
for.: "be" 
3. Page 4~ line oJ-
.i:l~ "without" ~ "anY" 
4. r'ge 4, line 9.-
fer "fo~.ln" read "the fom" -- -
5. Po.g-:: 
1 • . , 
""1' Y .... J..ue 1..L ,.'" 
ill "e ar" re c: .. ears" ---
6. Page 5, linf' 3,-
i.££. "Parkash" ~ "Prakash" 
7. Page 6, line 5 I -
for "bank, " 1:£.~d "bank and" 
NEW DELHI; 
February 23, 1978 
f.-"fialguna 4, la-9~ (S aka) 

BUl No. 17 ~ 1978 
~ INTR(;)DUCED IN L~l,{; SABHA ON 
? ~AR ISle 
THE EAR DRUMS AND EAR· BON·ES(AUTHORITY FOR USE ,FOR 
THERAPEUTIC PURPOSES) BILL, 1978 
A 
BIu.. 
.;0 provm for the use of ears of deceased persons for therapeutic pur-
poses and for 1ll4tters connected t~ewith. 
BE it enacte(iby ra.rJj~~t jn the Twenty-nintp Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ear 'Dl"ums and·.r Bones (Authority Short 
for Use for Therapeutic PUrposes) Act, 1978: title, ex-
tent and 
5 (2) It e;JUW)ds to .the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. 
(3) It shall come into force on such c;ijlte. as ~p'e Adn:1.~$trator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. . 
, 
Z. I~ this Act, unless the cor;ttext otherwise requires,:-
(a) "Administrator" means the adruin~stra~or of the Union 
10 ,e,rritory of Delhi app,0inted' by the Pr~id~nt w,der article ~!J of 
~the Co~.stitution; 
(b) "ear" includes ear drqrns and (!ar bon~Sl 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Peftni-
tions, 

Autbo-
rttJ 101' 
removal 
oftal'l 
deoeued 
paonl. 
Removal 
of ear. 
not to be 
autho-
rised in 
certain 
~8. 
• (c) "near relative", in relation to a deceased person, means any 
person related to him as spouse, parent, son, daughter, brother or 
sister and includes any otlier person who is related to him-
(i) by lineal consanguinity within three degrees or by col-
lateral consanguinity within six degrees; or 
(ii) by marriage with any of the rel&tives aforesaid. 
Explanation.-The expressions "lineal consanguinity" and 
"collateral consanguinity" shall have the meanings respectively 
Illilsigned to them in the Indian Succession Act, 1925, and degrees 
of relationship !lhall be computed in the manner laid down in 
that Act; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
5 
10 39 ot 192~. 
(e) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practi-
tioner who possesses any recognised medical qualification as defined IS 
in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, and 102 of 195~. 
who is enrolled on a State Med~cal Register as defined in clause (k) 
of that section. 
S. (1) If any person had, either in writing or oraTIy, in the presence of 
two or more witnesses (at least one of whom is a near relative of such 
person) unequivocally authorised, at any time before his death, the Ute ao 
of his ears, after his death, for therapeutic purposes (such person being 
hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the donor). the pteI'son law-
fully in possession of the dead body of the donor shall, unless he has 
any reason to believe that the donor had sUbsequently revoked the 
authorisation aforesaid, grant to a registered medical practitioner, all 25 
reasonable facilities for the removal, for therapeutic purposes, ot the 
ears from the dead body of the donor. 
(2) Where no ·such authorisation as is referred to in sub-section (1) 
was made by any person before his death but no objection was also ex-
pressed by such person to his ears being used after his death for therapeu- 30 
tic purposes, the person lawf.ully in possession of the dead body of such 
person may, unless he has reason:to believe that any near relative of the 
deceased person has objection to the deceased person's ears being used 
for therapeutic purposes, authorise the removal of the ears of the 
deceased person for their use for therapeutic purposes. ~, 
(3) Tbeauthority given under sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, 
under sub-section .. (2). shall be suffiCient warrant for the removal, for 
therapeutic purposes, of the ears from the body of the deceased person; 
but no such removal shall be made by any person other than a registered 
medical practitioner, who had satisfied .himself, before such removal, by 40 
a person~l examination of the body from which ears are to be removed. 
that life is extinct in such body. 
4. (1) No facilities shall be granted und~ sub-section (1) of section 3 
and no authority shall be given under sub-section (2) of that section for 
thE\ removal of ears from the body of a deceased person. ,if the person 45 
req:uired to grant such facilities. or empowered to give such authority, 
has reason to believe that an inquest may be required to be held in re-
lation to ~uch body in pursllance of the provisions of any law tor the 
time being in force. . 

• 3 
(2) No authority for the removal of ears kom the body of a deeeased 
person shall be given by a person to wb.Qm such body has been entrusted 
solely for the purpose of interment, cremation or other disposal. 
5. (1) In the case of a dead body lying in a hospital or prison and not 
S claimed. by any of the ,near relatives of the deceased person within sixteen 
hours from the time of the death of the concerned. person, the authority 
l.or the removal of the ears from the dead body which so remains un-
clatmed may ,be given/'.in the prescribed form, by the person 'ill charge, 
f'3r' 'the time being, of the;,management 01" control of the hospital or 
10 prison OIl" by an employee of such hospital or prison, autherised in thia 
behalf by t~e perlion in charge of the management or control thereof. 
(2) No authority shall be given under sub-section (1) if the person 
empowered to give such authority has reaSOn to believe that any near 
relative .of the deceased is likely to claim the dead body even th Jugh 
J, such near relative has not come forward to claim the body oJ the deceased 
within the time specified in sub-section (1). -
ExpUmatiOn.-For the purposes of this section, uhospital" ineludes a 
ni.lniing home, medical or 'teaching institution for therapeutic purposes or 
other like institution. 
20 6. Where the death of a person is caused by accident or any other Ult-
natural ca:use, and his dead body has been sent for post-mottem exami· 
nation for medico-legal purposes, the person competent under this Act to 
give authority for the removal of the ears from such dead body may, if he 
has reason to believe that the ears will riot be required for any medico-
25 legal purpose, authorise the removal for therapeutic purposes, of the ears 
011 such deceased person provided that he is satisfied that the deceased 
person had not expressed, before his death, any objection to his ears being 
used for therapeutic purposes after his death or, where he had granted an 
authority for the use of his ears for therapeutic purposes after his death, 
30 such authority had not been revoked by him before his death. 
t. After the removal of the ears from the body of the deceased person, 
the registered medical practitioner shall take such steps for the preserva-
tion of the ears so removed as may be prescribed. 
8. (1) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Act shall be cons-
~S trued as rendering unlawful any dealing with the body or with any part 
of the body of a deceased person if such dealing would have been lawtul 
if this Act had not been passed. 
(2) Neither the grant ot any facility or authority for 1lie-1'4mloval of 
ears forom the body of a deceased person in accordance with the provisions 
40 of this Act nor the removal of ears from the body of a deceased person in 
pursuance of such authority shall be deemed to be an offence punishable 
45 of 1860. under section 297 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Autho:' 
rity for 
removal 
of ears iIi 
case I 
of unclai-
med 
bodies 
in hospital 
or prison. 
Auth() .. 
rity f()r 
removal 
of ears 
from 
bodies 
sent for 
post 
mortem 
examina-
tion for 
medico-
legal pur-
pose.e. 
Preserva-
tion of 
ears re-
moved 
from 
dead 
bodies. 
Savin". 

Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Power 
to make 
rUles. 
4 
9. No suIt, 'prOsecution or 'other iE!gkl proceedings ~hail tie aglltnst -~ny 
person for anything whieh is in good faith ddne ()r intended to lie done 
under this Act. 
1& (1) The Administrator may, be notiftcation in the OfBcial G...tte, 
make rules for ~lDg oUt the ph»v"'~'Jol tIIis Aet. 
.. (2) In rparUcu18ll', and without any prejudiee to the geaerality of the 5 
foregoinl. power. such nalea may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, lUUltely:- • , 
,(~) lormiA whit .. removalof'.rS 'It6mifhe1afliieill«ia1es"tbay Ie 10 
authorised, as required by section 5; 
('b) the prt!servation of removed! ear, 8S requited by section 7; 
(c),'any other .u.r Whkh is required to be or may he pres-
eribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session IS 
for a tOtal period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or 'more successive sessions, and if,before the expiry of 'the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modiftcation in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 20 
thereatier have effect only in such modified 'form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; SO, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously' done 
under that rule. 

l....,l-.uOft at fit cIrmns and ear bones has been,~ .at'the 
IlIok 'tu,.k Jet Parash Naftlyan Hosptta1, 'New Delhi. with 
encOuraging results. The benefit Gf this facility cannot be made 
a'Wtilable 'to all persons who Deed it Wlleas ear drumI and 
ear' bimn rareavaillible insufticient quantities. The Bill, therefore, 
_oio provide fo:rthe donation by a, person of llis' 4111'1 ,for 
therapeutic purposes. The Bill also empowelS the pel'5On in charge « 
a dead body to donate the ears of the deceas~ person except where the 
d'eceased' 'person 'had, ~forehls death, objected to such don~Uo;r.1. or if 
any near relative of the deceased person objects to such doilatiOn: ' The 
person in charge of a hospital or prison or an authorised employee there-
of has also been empowered to give consent to the removal of the ears 
of a deceased person if the dead body of such person has not been claim-
edby his near relative within sixteen hours of the death of such person. 
However, it is provided in the Bill that authority for removal of ears, in 
!the case of an unclaimed body shall not be given where the person em .. 
powered to give su.ch authority has reason. to believe that any near 
~e1ative of the deceased is likely 10 claim 'the dead body, even though 
no such near relative has come fOll"Ward to claim the body of the deceased 
within the said period of sixteen hours. 
2. The Bill also seeks to give the necessary protection to the persons 
acting in good faIth in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th ~ember, 1977. RAJ NARAIN. 

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Administrator to mallie wles. It 
11. intended to mu. suitable rules for giving publieity to: the provisicms 
of the legislation so as to attract donations of ears. It is also proposed to 
.... e rules fer the creation of an ear bank, for the registration ot • __ ef. 
persona willing to donate ears. It is estimated that these provisions 
wOUld ,involve a non-recurring expenditure of Re. 20,000 and a reeUl'liDg 
Eixpendtture of Rs. 40,000 per year. . 
... ~. the ,pro\Tisio~s of. th~ Bill do not involve any other. ~penditure ot 
a recuning or a non-recu.rting nature. 
6 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Administrator to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of whi~ 
~les may be made rela'te to the fonn in which removal of ears of un-
claimed 'bodies may be authorised, preservation of removed ears, th~ 
manner in which publicity may be given to the provisions of the legisJa., 
tion and any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed. 
2. The matters in respedt of which rules may be made are of a~., 
tra'tive detail and procedure, and as such, the delegation of legislativ~ 
power is of nonnal character. -
• ' , , r , 
.... ,'" 
7 

';; '., 
.}, 
,,11 
• 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the use of ears of deceased persons for therapeutic purpor.~~ 
and for matters connected therewith. 