1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHW AL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2.  In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—
"Provided that the number of sittings of each House of Parliament in all sessions in a
calendar year shall not be less than one hundred and twenty days.".
Short title.
Amendment
of article 85.
Bill No. 17 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Over the years, it has been observed that the number of sittings of the two Houses of
Parliament are decreasing. India is the largest democracy in the world and Parliament is the
only institution where problems of the people are raised and discussed thereby ensuring
accountability of the Government to the people. If the trend of curtailing the number of
sittings of the two Houses continues, it will have an adverse impact on the effectiveness of
our democracy.
After independence, during the initial years, Parliament used to meet for an average of
one hundred and twenty days in a calendar year. Thereafter, it came down to one hundred
days a year, and at present, the number of sittings is less than even one hundred. The
representatives of the people in the Parliament raise the issues of public concern through
various devices available to them, but all the issues are not taken up for discussion due to
shortage of time. In a way, it is resulting in denial of opportunities to members to raise the
issues of public importance and participate in the discussions.
Thus, in order to uphold our democratic values and to ensure effective representation
and redressal of the problems of the people, it is necessary that a reasonable minimum
number of sittings of both the Houses are fixed. Taking into account all these facts, it is
proposed to amend the Constitution to ensure that the Parliament sits for at least one
hundred and twenty days in a calendar year.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
February 11, 2010.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet
at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last
sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of People.
* * * * * * *
3
Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation
and dissolu-
tion.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—718LS(S-5)—26.02.2010.