1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE ASHA WORKERS (REGULARIZATION OF SERVICE  AND
OTHER BENEFITS) BILL,  2020
By
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regularization of the services of ASHA workers and conferring the status
of permanent employee of the Government on them and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the ASHA Workers (Regularization of Service and Other
Benefits) Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No.  17 of  2020
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "ASHA worker" means accredited social health activist working as community
health worker instituted by the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare as a part of National Health Mission; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
take steps to regularize the services of ASHA workers and confer the status of Group "C"
employees of the Government on such  ASHA workers who are serving in National Health
Mission immediately before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every ASHA worker whose service has been regularized shall be entitled to such
tenure, terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund,
retirement and other terminal benefits as are available to Group "C" employees of the
Central Government.
4. The Central Government shall take steps to provide accommodation to all ASHA
workers within the vicinity of their workplace.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after expiry of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Regularization
of services of
ASHA
workers.
Accommodation
to ASHA
workers.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Provisions of
the Act to be
in addition to
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
ASHA workers the accredited social health activist are working under the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare as part of National Health Mission contributing remarkable
service in Health sector. The ASHA workers working as link between Health Department and
Common man so as to create awareness and promote health activities in the country.
The contribution of ASHA workers are helpful to improve the health standard of the country.
The ASHA workers are good promoters of various schemes of the Central Government and
State Government and ensuring the health of common man. The duties and service rendered
by the ASHA workers are very important for the protection of the health. The ASHA workers
do not have job security and the honorarium given to them are not sufficient for meet their
immediate requirement. This may adversely affect the working of the integrated child
development scheme.
The ASHA workers are one of the main link between Government and general public.
They are helping the Government for the effective implementation health programmes.
Considering the importance of their duties and service, it is highly necessary to protect their
service and welfare.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; N.K.  PREMACHANDRAN
November 8, 2019
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides the regularization of service of ASHA workers and confer
the status, wages and welfare not less than the status, wages and welfare of Group "C"
employees of the Central Government. Clause 4 provides for provision of accommodation to
ASHA workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees three
thousand crore per annum is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regularization of the services of ASHA workers and conferring the status of
permanent employee of the Government on them and for matters
connected therewith
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4501LS(S3)—13-01-2020.