THE PRIV ATE SCHOOLS (REGULATION) BILL, 2007
BY
SHRI RAMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of private schools and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Private Schools (Regulation) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  “appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Authority’’ means the Education Authority constituted by the appropriate
Government under section 3;
(c) “prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “private schools’’ means an unaided schools whether recognized or not,
which is not run by the appropriate Government, or its local authority or any other
authority designated or sponsored by appropriate Government and includes a pre-
primary, primary, middle, higher secondary and senior secondary school and also
other institutions which impart education or training below the degree level but does
not include an institute which imparts technical education.
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 17 of  2007.
h
5
10
15

2
3. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the appropriate Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority within its territorial
jurisdiction to be known as the Education Authority to regulate the functioning of the
private schools and conditions of service of teachers working in those schools.
(2) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the appropriate Government;
(b) such number of members, not exceeding ten but not less than five, to be
appointed by the appropriate Government, as it may deem fit; and
(c) such other officers and staff to assist in the functioning of the Authority
as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson and other members referred to in sub-section (2) shall be chosen
from among the persons who have special knowledge and experience in the field of education.
(4) The term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the members
shall be such as may be prescribed.
4.  (1) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Government in this behalf, it
shall be the duty of the Authority to regulate the functioning of the private schools and
conditions of service of teachers under its jurisdiction.
(2) The Authority shall also monitor the admission of students belonging to Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections of the society in the private schools.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)
and (2), the Authority may,—
(a) prescribed the student-teacher ratio for each standard;
(b) put a ceiling on the tuition fee that may be charged by a school for a particular
class;
(c) fix the hours of duty for teachers;
(d) monitor the funds collected by the schools; and
(e) perform such other function as may be prescribed.
5. ( 1) The Authority may make rules regulating the minimum qualifications for
recruitment and the conditions of service of teachers of a private school.
(2) Subject to any rule that may be made in this behalf, no teacher of a private school
shall be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank nor shall his service be otherwise terminated
except with the prior approval of the Authority.
6.  The Salary, allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident fund and
other benefits of the teachers of the private school shall not be less than those of the teachers
of the corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate Government.
7.  (1) No private school shall levy any fee or collect any other charges or receive any
other payment except those specified by the Authority.
(2) Every school shall obtain prior approval of the Authority before levying such fees
and collecting such charges.
(3) The Authority shall ensure that the amount collected by the private school is spent
on the development of the school and for no other purposes.
Constitution of
Education
Authority.
Functions of
the Education
Authority.
Conditions of
service of
teachers.
Salary,
allowances and
other benefits
to teachers.
Fees and other
charges.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. If the appropriate Government, on receipt of a report from the Authority, is satisfied
that the managing committee of any private school, has neglected to perform any of the
duties imposed on it by or under this Act or any rule made thereunder and that it is expedient
in the interest of school education to close down such school, it may, after giving reasonable
opportunities of showing cause against the proposed action, close down such school for
such period as may be prescribed:
Provided that if the school is a recognized private school, the appropriate Government
shall also withdraw the recognition and stop all assistance to such school.
9. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to schools run by religious or linguistic
minorities.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law or rules made thereunder.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the
difficulty.
12. The Central Government may, after consultation with the State Governments, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Act not to
apply to
minority
schools.
Power to make
rules.
Closing down
of school.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nowadays running an unaided private school has become a business. There are a
number of unaided private schools throughout the country being run by a handful of
persons. The main aim of these persons is to earn money rather than imparting good
education. These schools are charging hefty tuition fee besides other charges in the name of
donations, building funds, computer fee, etc. Not only this, these schools, after availing the
necessary tax concession, are not investing the fund for the development of the schools. The
teachers in these schools are underpaid and have no service benefits like medical facilities,
provident fund, etc. There are cases of arbitrary retrenchment and suspension of teachers.
The management works in connivance with officials. The teachers, particularly the female
teachers, are subjected to various kinds of harassments.
Education is not safe in the hands of such unscrupulous persons. Overcharging of fee
on one hand and under payment to teachers on the other hand is the modus operandi of these
people. The tax laws are violated with impunity.
Therefore, it has become necessary to set up adequate mechanism to monitor, regulate
and control the thriving education business not only to ensure that children get good
education but also to protect people from exploitation.
N
EW DELHI; RAMDAS  ATHAW ALE
December 15, 2006.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall, within its
territorial jurisdiction, establish an Education Authority to regulate the functioning of the
unaided private schools. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees eighty lakhs will be involved
as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten lakhs is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules in consultation
with the State Governments for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters for which
the rules will be made are the matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power, therefore, is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of private schools and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—219LS(S-5)—14-02-2007.