5३०५५ ८५.५

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

THE COTTON GROWERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri R. Sampasiva Rao, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of cotton growers.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (/) This Act may be called the Cotton Growers (Welfare) Act, 2004,
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “cotton grower" means any person who cultivates cotton;

(b) "small and marginal cotton growers" shall mean cotton growers who are
declared as such under this Act; and

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Short title,

extent and

Commence-
‘ment

Definitions


Central
Government
to procure
cotton and fix
remunerative
price thereof

Export of
excess cotton

Insurance.

Establishment
of Cotton
Growers
Welfare Fund,

Power 16
make rules,

2

3. The Central Government shall procure through the Cotton Corporation of India
the entire quantity of cotton produced in the country and shalll also fix remunerative price
of cotton every year after taking into consideration the increase in prices of cotton seeds,
pesticides and fertilizers, total investment capacity of cotton growers and such other factors,
‘as may be prescribed.

4. The Central Government shall endeavour to export all the excess cotton produced in
the country during a year.

5. The entire cotton grown by the small and marginal cotton growers shall be
compulsorily insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities,
decline in yields of cotton produced, fall in prices of cotton and such other eventualities, as
may be prescribed.

6. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Fund to be known as the Cotton
Growers Welfare Fund.

(2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio, as may be prescribed,

(3) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—

(a) to extend financial help to the small and marginal farmers in such cases, as
may be prescribed:

(b) giving financial assistance to cotton growers for purchasing cotton seeds,
pesticides and fertilizers and in cases of low yields or fall in prices of cotton or destruction
of their crops due to rains, cyclones and floods.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The market fluctuations, nature's fury and Government's neglect have driven the cotton
| into a crisis. Declining yields and falling prices are making the lives of the poor
farmers miserable. Andhra Pradesh is one of the three major cotton producing States along-
with Gujarat and Maharashtra. Cotton is mainly produced in Guntur, Prakasham, Kurnool,
Mahbub Nagar, Warangal and Adilabad districts of Andhra Pradesh. The costs of cotton
inputs have shot up increasing the total capital investment of cotton growers. But instead of
getting remunerative prices, the cotton growers have to face shocking experiences as prices

in different markets in the State have generally declined by 20 per cent as compared to the
previous year.

‘The main reason behind the cotton growers getting non-remunerative prices is
ayailability of excess stock of cotton in the market. There is, therefore, an urgent need 10
bring a law assuring the cotton growers of Government's help in the event of excess production
or fall in prices and also to ensure that their minimum needs are looked after by the Government.
The creation ofa fund and the provision of insurance cover for cotton growers will help them
immensely.

Hence this Bill,

‘New Det; R. SAMBASIVA RAO
June 22,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the purchase of cotton from cotton growers by the
Central Government through the Cotton Corporation of India. Clause 5 provides that the
entire cotton grown by small and marginal cotton growers shall be compulsorily insured free
of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, etc. Clause 6 provides for the
establishment ofa Cotton Growers Welfare Fund to which the Central Government and State
Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees three hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
‘out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of cotton growers.

(Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1631LS—2.08 2004.