As introbuceD IN Lok Sana

20 APR 2m

Bill_No.17 of 2000

THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL, 2000
By
Suet Susopk Mourre, M.P.
A
BILL

| ensure freedom of having access to and obtaining public information for the citizens and
‘for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)-Fhis Act may be called the Freedom of Information Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Act for the time being in force,
no citizen of India shall be denied the freedom to have access to or to obtain information
relating to public affairs save as otherwise provided in this Act.

3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute such number of agencies to be called
the National Information Bureau (hereinafter referred to as Bureau) in every State and
Union territory as it may consider necessary for ensuring the freedom of having access to
and obtaining public Information for the citizens.

Short title,
extent id
‘commencement.

Citizens not to
be denied
freedom of
information.
Constitution of
National
Information
Bureau.


Classification
of Information,

Exemption of
certain types
of information
from
disclosure,

Reports.

Obligation to
supply
information.

Fees for
information,

Officers and
staff.

Power to make
rules.

2

(2 Each Bureau shall consist of such number of advisors as the Central Government
may determine from time to time.

(S) Each Bureau shall have a Chief of Bureau to function as its head who shail be
appointed by the Central Government.

4. Each Bureau shall classify all information available with it or to be made available
to it, in such manner as it may deem practicable and convenient keeping in view the nature
and source of the information.

5. Certain types of information may, by Executive Order, be declared by the Central
Government or the Government of a State or the Administrations of a Union territory, as
secret in the interest of national defence or foreign policy or judicial Process or maintenance
of public peace or law and order or such other matters as may be so declared from time to
time and shall be exempt from disclosure under this Act,

6. Each Bureau shall submit a quarterly report on its working to the Governor |
State or the Lieutenant Govemor or other such authority of a Union territory who shall
forward the same to the President, as early as practicable, with his comments and
recommendations thereon.

7. Subject to the provisions of section 5, it shall be obligatory on the part of each
Bureau to make available the maximum possible information to the citizens and also on the
Part of the Central Government and Governments of the States and the Administration of
the Union territories to make available to the respective Bureau as much information as
possible on priority basis.

8. In every case of denial or undue delay in the supply of information, any citizen
Fequesting for the information shall have the opportunity to make a complaint to the Chief
of Bureau in regard thereto, inthe frst instance, and to make a frst appeal to the Governee
or the Lieutenant Governor as the case may be and the Second appeal to the President,
against the decision ofthe Chief of Bureau, the Governor or the Lieutenant Governor as the
case may be.

9. Each Bureau shall charge such fees for making available any information as it may
deem adequate in respect of each class of information.

10. Each Bureau shall have a Secretary and such other officers and staff as may be
considered necessary from time to time to execute the work of the Bureau efficiently,

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules
for the purpose of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

द is widespread discontent among the masses leading to all sort of turmoil and

165 in almost all parts of the country, particularly directed against the Government
‘of the day. Among other things, one of the basic causes of this disturbing phenomenon is
or lack of adequate information available to the people leading to mistrust among.
them regarding the working and the pronouncements of the Government. It is time to recall
and act in the spirit of the famous dictum of Abraham Lincoln that democracy is Government
‘of the people, for the people and by the people.

It is therefore proposed to enact a legislation to ensure information to general public.
Hence this Bill.

SUBODH MOHITE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of such number of the National
Information Bureau in each State and Union Territory, as may be considered necessary, by
the Central Government. Clause 10 provides for the appointment of a Secretary and such
other officers and staff as may be considered necessary from time to time for efficient work
of the Bureau.

‘Though there is provision for charging fees to meet the expenses involved in carrying
out the purposes of the Bill, yet the provisions when enacted and brought into operation
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.

There is likely to be a non-recurring expenditure of approximately rupees ten crore
and recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore per year.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of the legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to ensure freedom of having access to and obtaining public information for the citizens
and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—3520LS—17.2.2000.