1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
2. In article 148 of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause (1), after the words ‘‘appointed by the President’’, the words ‘‘on
the recommendation of the Selection Committee as provided under clause (1A)’’ shall
be inserted; and
Bill No. 17 of  2018
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) after clause (1), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(1A) The Selection Committee shall consist of—
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister of Finance—Member;
(c) the Leader of Opposition or Leader of the Single Largest Party in Opposition,
as the case may be, in the House of the People—Member;
(d) the Leader of Opposition or Leader of the Single Largest Party in Opposition,
as the case may be, in the Council of States—Member;
(e) one eminent person, having experience of at least twenty years in the field of
anti-corruption policy, public administration, vigilance, policy making, finance
including insurance and banking, law and management or in such other matter as
the Chairperson and Members of the Selection Committee deem appropriate, to be
nominated by the President—Member.
(1B) The Selection Committee shall, for the purpose of selecting the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India and for preparing a panel of persons to be considered for appointment
as such, constitute a Search Committee consisting of at least five persons of standing and
having special knowledge and expertise in the matters relating to public administration,
vigilance, policy making, law and management or in any other matter which, in the opinion
of the Selection Committee, may be useful in making the selection of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India:
Provided that not less than two members of the Search Committee shall be from
amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the
Other Backward Classes, the Minorities or women:
Provided further that the Selection Committee may also consider any person
other than the persons recommended by the Search Committee.
(1C) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a transparent manner
for selecting the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(1D) The term of the Search Committee referred to in clause (1B), the salary and
allowances payable to its members and the manner of selection of panel of names shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Selection Committee.’’.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The framework of the Constitution has established the office of Comptroller and
Auditor-General (CAG) who is entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring transparency
and accountability in Government finances and policies.
The genesis on the importance of CAG can be ascertained from the observation made
by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly on May 30, 1949. Accordingly to
Dr. Ambedkar, this officer was ‘‘probably the most important officer in the Constitution of
India’’ because he is the one man who is going to see that the expenses voted by Parliament
are not exceeded or varied. ‘‘If this functionary is to carry out the duties—and his duties,
I submit, are far more important than the duties even of the judiciary.............I personally feel
that he ought to have far greater independence than the Judiciary itself’’.
Without exception, every member of the Constituent Assembly who spoke on the
articles relating to the CAG, including Shri T.T. Krishnamachari, Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru,
Shri K.T. Shah and Shri R.K. Sidhva—fully endorsed Dr. Ambedkar's sentiments. The primary
objective of the assembly appeared to be to cloth the CAG with such powers that the
executive would in no circumstances be able to weaken his independence and objectivity. As
a result, the first amendment moved that day was to change the nomenclature of the Auditor-
General to Comptroller and Auditor-General, because as Shri T.T. Krishnamachari said, the
function of the Auditor General is not merely to audit but to have a control over the expenses
of Government. The nomenclature, he said, should be in consonance with the duties that are
entrusted to him by the Constitution.
The absence of any proper crafted procedure and independent mechanism for
appointment to such crucial post under the Constitution hampers its status and authority.
A change in the selection procedure for the appointment of such Constitutional authorities
are necessary. It would add prestige to the post, if the people heading it are chosen through
a procedure in which the President has the benefit of getting a recommendation from a
committee shall will reflect a bipartisan consensus. As there is no separate law nor any
prescribed procedure, in the scheme of things currently in force, these appointments are
made by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
It would be in the fitness of things to incorporate a transparent procedure in respect of
the appointment of such constitutional authorities, where the credibility and independence
of the authority is of paramount importance. In order to nurture and strengthen the confidence
of the public, a change in the selection procedure for the appointment is necessary keeping
in view the changed political scenario in the country with its multiparty focus. A broad-based
Committee will greatly add to the perceived sense of impartiality, neutrality and credibility
thereby further strengthening the faith of the public in the institutional framework of such
authorities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
December 7, 2017.
S3\F\BILL 2017\LS\3642LS ENG

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Search Committee to shortlist prospective
candidates to the post of Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen lakh per annum from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh per annum is also likely to be
involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
** * * *
148. (1) There shall be a Comptroller and Auditor-General of  India who shall be appointed
by the President by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be removed from office in
like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
** * * *
5
Comptroller
and Auditor-
General of
India.

GMGIPMRND—3642LS(S3)—22-01-2018.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)