1
THE COMMISSION FOR EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF BENEFITS
OF RESERV ATION TO SCHEDULED TRIBES BILL, 2019
By
DR. PRABHAS KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish a Commission for ensuring inclusive and equitable distribution of benefits
of reservation to Scheduled Tribes.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commission for Equitable Distribution of Benefits of
Reservation to Scheduled Tribes Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 17 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Commission" means the Commission for Equitable Distribution of Benefits
of Reservation to Scheduled Tribes established under section 3;
(b) "Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups" means tribal groups categorised as
'Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups' by the Central Government; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than two months
from the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Commission to be known as the Commission for Equitable Distribution of Benefits of
Reservation to Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a)  a Chairperson, who shall be a retired Chief Justice of a High Court, to be
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) Chairperson, National Commission for Scheduled Tribes, as ex-officio
Vice-Chairperson;
(c) Director, Anthropological Survey of India, as ex-officio member;
(d) Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India, as ex-officio member;
(e) seven members representing Scheduled Tribes from the States of Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh,
to be nominated by the respective State Governments;
(f) four members representing Scheduled Tribes from eight North-Eastern
States and five Southern States, to be nominated by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed; and
(g) two members representing Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups, to be
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may appoint such number of Officers and staff to the
Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and other members, officer and staff of the Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
4. The Commission shall,—
(a) examine the extent of inequitable distribution of benefits of reservation to
the persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in admissions to educational institutions
and employment under the Central Government; and
(b)  recommend measures to be taken by the Central Government to ensure that
the benefits of reservation reach equitably to all persons belonging to the Scheduled
Tribes in different States, so as to achieve greater social justice and inclusion.
5. (1) The Commission shall, as soon as possible, but not later than six months from
the date of its constitution, prepare and submit a report to the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall, after considering the report, cause to be laid an
action taken report on the recommendations of the Commission before each House of the
Parliament.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
Commission.
5
10
15
Functions of
the
Commission.
Report.
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of
the session immediately following the sessions or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rules
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate fund.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Reservation to Scheduled Tribes (STs) in educational institutions has been provided
through article 15(5) while reservation in posts and services under the State has been provided
through article 16(4) of the Constitution. In Central Government funded higher education
institutions and in public employment under the Central Government, 7.5 per cent. of seats
and vacancies are reserved in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes.
However, this policy wrongly assumes the entire Scheduled Tribes population as a
homogenous group. In reality, different Scheduled Tribes communities across different States
vary significantly in terms of social, educational and financial status. As a result, a few but
relatively advanced Scheduled Tribes communities are cornering the lion's share of the
reservation benefits, to the detriment of the interests of the overwhelming majority of Scheduled
Tribes who are really impoverished. Hence, there exists a high level of inequity in the
distribution of reservation benefits across different Scheduled Tribes communities from
different States.
For instance, one single Scheduled Tribes community from Rajasthan (Meena/Mina)
accounts for only around 4 per cent. of the total Scheduled Tribes population of India. Yet,
they grab more than 73 per cent. and 35 per cent. of the seats/vacancies reserved for STs in
Engineering Services Examination (ESE) and Civil Services Examination (CSE), respectively.
In contrast, Scheduled Tribes from Odisha get negligible seats, even when Odisha has
greater tribal population than Rajasthan as per data obtained from credible online sources
like CSE Candidates' Information, Central Press Information Bureau and  UPSC website for
ESE and CSE exams of  last three years.
Scenario for Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) is even worse.
Urgent need of the hour is to rationalize the Reservation Policy for Scheduled Tribes to
achieve greater social justice and inclusion for all Scheduled Tribes. The Central Government
should devise a system so that the benefits of reservation equitably reach to different tribes
across different States. As a first step, a Commission should be constituted to examine in
detail the extent of inequitable distribution of benefits of reservation among the Scheduled
Tribes and to recommend policy measures to address this issue.
The Commission may suggest capping of reservation quota which a State or a
Scheduled Tribe can avail, or sub-categorization of Scheduled Tribes, or any other measure.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRABHAS KUMAR SINGH
December 4, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Commission for Equitable Distribution
of Benefits of Reservation to Scheduled Tribes. It also provides for appointment of
Chairperson, members and other Officers and staff to the Commission. Clause 6 provides for
the Central Government to provide adequate funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about one thousand crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the  purposes of  the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a Commission for ensuring inclusive and equitable distribution of
benefits of reservation to Scheduled Tribes.
————
(Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3195LS(S3)—31-01-2019.