As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 180 of 2022
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
 2. After article 338B of the Constitution, the following  article shall be inserted, namely:— 
  “338C. (1) There shall be a Commission for the weavers to be known as the 
National Commission for Weavers.
Short title and 
commencement.
5 Insertion of new 
article 338C.
National 
Commission for 
Weavers.

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
  ( 2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament. 
The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and one Member 
from each State and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson,  
Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may 
by rule   determine:
  Provided that the member from each State shall be a weaver.
  (3) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Chairperson, determine the 
nature and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Commission in 
the discharge of its functions.
  (4) The  Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be 
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal:
  Provided that appointment of the other Members of the Commission shall be made on the 
recommendation of the Governor of the respective States.
  ( 5) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
  ( 6) It  shall  be  the  duty of  the  Commission —
    ( a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for  
  the weavers under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force  
  or under any order of the Government or any scheme implemented by the Government and  
  to evaluate the working of such safeguards and schemes;
    (b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of the rights and  
  benefits of the schemes of the Government;
    (c) to participate and advise on the socio-economic development of the weavers and to  
  evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State;
    (d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission  
  may deem fit, reports upon the working  of  those  safeguards  and schemes;
    ( e) to make in such reports the recommendations as to the measures that should  
  be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those  
  safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic  
  development of the weavers; and
    ( f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare,  
  development and advancement of the weavers as the President may, subject to the  
  provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
  ( 7) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament 
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non acceptance, if any, of any 
such recommendations.
  (8) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any  
State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the 
State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum 
explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the 
State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
  ( 9) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) 
or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b ) of clause (6) have all the powers of 
a  civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of  the following matters,  namely:—
    ( a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India  
  and examining him on oath;
    ( b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
2
40
45

5
    ( c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
    ( d) requisitioning  any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 
    (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and 
    (f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
  ( 10) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all 
major policy matters affecting weavers. 
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The lndian handloom industry is amongst the oldest and largest cottage industries in 
the country reflecting India’s rich culture and tradition. The sector is one of the largest 
unorganised sectors, only after agriculture, in the country providing direct and indirect 
employment to over 4.3 million people. As per the Fourth All India Handloom Census, there 
are around 35,22,512 handloom workers over the country are engaged in weaving and allied 
activities, out of which the majority are in rural areas. India is one of the largest exporters of 
handloom products which were valued at US$ 343.69 million in 2019-20.
 However,  numerous factors have affected the livelihood of weavers in the country. Some 
of these issues are increased competition from power loom sector, infrastructural constraints, 
rising input costs and lack of support for technological upgrade and skill development. The 
Central Government and various State Governments have made efforts to support weavers 
and handloom sector through its policies, schemes and programmes. Despite such efforts, 
such issues still persist. It is thus, felt that there is lack of a national commission to take 
cognisance of these long-existing issues and problems plaguing the handloom sector and to 
bring out uniform and sustained policy changes in the sector.
 With this background, it, therefore, has become imperative to have a permanent commission 
for weavers on similar lines as that of the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and 
the National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes. This Commission shall have the work of 
monitoring the existing safeguards,  make recommendations  as  to  the  measures that should be 
taken by the Union or any State for their implementation, inquire into specific complaints of the 
weavers amongst others.
 Hence this Bill.
    New Delhi;                              SANJEEV KUMAR SINGARI
4 July, 2022.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the constitution of  National Commission for Weavers 
with a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members. It  also provides for officers and other 
employees for the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of 
about rupees thirty crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
5

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari, M.P.) 
                         