Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 180 of 2024
THE SPECIALLY ABLED CHILDREN 
(WELFARE) BILL, 2024
By
Sඁඋං Bඁൺඋඍඋඎඁൺඋං Mൺඁඍൺൻ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for certain measures to be undertaken by the Central and 
the State Governments for the welfare of specially abled children 
and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Specially Abled Children (Welfare) Act, 2024.
 ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
 ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
Notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(i) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) “child” means a boy or girl who is below the age of  eighteen years;
(iii) “Committee” means the Residential Schools Management Committee 
constituted by the appropriate Government under section 6;
(iv) “prescribed”means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(v) “residential school” means an institution or home which is run by private 
or Government aid for the education and protection of specially abled children; 
and 
(vi) “specially abled child” means a child with a condition of arrest 
or incomplete development of mind which is specially characterized by 
sub-normality of intelligence;
3. The  appropriate  Government shall  from time to time hold, within its 
jurisdiction, a census for collecting all relevant data relating to specially abled 
children.
 4. The appropriate Government shall,–
(i) establish residential school for specially abled  children in every 
district;
(ii) provide food, adequate care, protection, lodging and boarding, 
books,  stationery items and uniform free of cost;
(iii) provide job oriented professional education and training for 
self-employment to specially abled  children after they complete their 
school education according to their capability; and
(iv) pay subsistence allowance or financial assistance to such specially 
abled children as are not able to earn livelihood.
 5. The appropriate Government shall provide such monthly allowance 
to the guardian or caretaker of every specially abled child for his livelihood, 
healthcare and treatment, as may be prescribed.
 6. (1) The  appropriate Government  shall  set  up a local  Committee  in 
every district to be known as the Residential Schools Management Committee 
to look into issues relating to admissions  specially abled children and 
management of residential schools for the purpose.
 (2) The Committee shall consist of—
   ( a) the District Magistrate who shall be the Chairperson ex-officio; 
 and 
   (b) not more than five members, of whom at least two members shall 
 be women, from amongst the persons living in that district and have 
 knowledge in the field of child welfare to be nominated by the Chairperson
 7. The appropriate Government shall provide to the Committee such 
number of officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning 
of the Committee.
Definitions.
2
Setting up 
of residential 
Schools and 
providing 
Education and 
employment 
to specially 
abled children.
Monthly allowance to the guardian or caretaker of the specially abled children
Census for 
specially 
Abled 
children.
Residential 
Schools 
Management 
Committee. 
Facilities to 
be provided 
in residential 
schools.

 8. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint–
   ( i) well trained teachers who have experience of teaching specially 
 abled children and of addressing their special needs; and 
   ( ii) such administrative personnel for better management of 
residential schools as it may be deem necessary.
 ( 2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions 
of service of the teachers and non-teaching staff of residential schools shall be 
such as may be prescribed.
 9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by 
Parliament in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
 11. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
 ( 2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total Period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such Modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule.
 ( 3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds.
3
Overriding 
effect of the Act. 
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The number of specially abled children is continuously increasing in the 
country. They become specially and physically dependent due to mental retardation. 
The families of specially abled children are forced to live in difficulty because of 
non-availability of scientific knowledge for the upbringing, care and livelihood 
of specially abled children in the country. The specially abled children and their 
families bear this torture without any fault of theirs. The families are forced to 
bear the unbearable cost of care and health services for specially abled children. 
Several guardians disown these children considered as burden on the family and 
leave them alone on bus stands, railway stations, temples and masjids for begging. 
Anti-social elements take advantage of this situation. Several welfare institutions 
for the specially abled children in the country are facing difficulty in keeping them 
under their protection after their having attained eighteen years of age. They need 
more protection and support at this point of their age. Therefore, the Governments 
should come forward for welfare of specially abled children and take care of their life 
and livelihood. The provisions of financial assistance to the guardians or caretakers 
will help them to bring these specially abled children in social mainstream and 
setting up of residential schools will help in addressing their special needs. The 
Government should take sole responsibility of specially abled children and provide 
protection to them in order to remove their dependence on social institutions in 
view of their plight. The provision for affording an opportunity to specially abled 
children to live with pride is expected to be made by the Government.
 Therefore, it is extremely necessary to provide for the welfare measures of 
specially abled children in the country.
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                  BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
November 7, 2024
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides that a child census may be conducted to collect 
all relevant data of specially abled children. Clause 4 provides for setting up of 
residential schools to impart education and training to specially abled children.
Clause 5 provides for monthly allowance to the guardian/caretaker of the specially 
abled children. Clause 6 provides for setting up of a Residential School Management 
Committee in every district. Clause 7 provides for appointment of teachers and non-
teaching staff along with all basic facilities in residential schools. Clause 8 provides 
for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 
The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of 
the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union Territories shall 
be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is 
likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a sum of rupees six hundred crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per 
anum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be 
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, 
the delegation of  legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide for certain measures to be undertaken by the  Central and 
the State Governments for the welfare of specially abled children 
and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)