THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 15 of the Constitution, for clauses (4) and  (5) the following clauses shall
be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State
from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens, or for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes:
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 15.
Bill No. 180 of 2018
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Provided that the provision for the advancement of socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens shall be proportionate to their population.
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause ( g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall
prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of
any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their
admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether
aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred
to in clause (1) of article 30:
Provided that the provision for the advancement of socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens shall be proportionate to their population.
Explanation.— In this article, the expression “population” means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published.
3. In article 16 of the Constitution, for clause ( 4), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘‘(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens,
which in the opinion of the State, are not represented in the services under the State,
proportionate to their population.
Explanation.—  The expression “population” means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published.”.
Amendment
of article 16.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The enabling content of articles 15(4) and 16(4) as they stand today, empower the State
to make provisions for reservation in education and in public employment in relation to the
population of the Socially and Educationally Backward Classes (SEBCs) as identified by the
respective Backward Classes Commissions. The percentage of reservation in central
institutions, both in education and public services is twenty seven  per cent, so as to keep
the overall percentage of reservations under the judicially mandated limit of fifty per cent,
while the population of SEBCs so far identified and recognized as such, is over fifty five
per cent.
The issue of provision of reservations and affirmative action has been an on-going
debate in the country more particularly, about the adequacy of the measures taken by the
elected Government to ameliorate the conditions of socially and educationally backward
classes. Judicial dicta have limited the overall percentage of reservations to only
fifty per cent of the available educational opportunities in respect of such SEBCs including
Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs), having regard to the enabling provision
requiring the said measures on the principle of adequacy of representation enshrined under
article 16(4) of the Constitution. There have been many agitations about the sheer
inadequacy of such measures, to meet the aspirations of such classes, more particularly in
regard to educational opportunities and services.
A few States such as Tamil Nadu, have already enhanced the reservations in excess of
fifty per cent and the challenge to such measures are awaiting judicial adjudication. The
present state of affairs shows that existing opportunities in the education and services
sector are not meeting the requirements of the population of  the already identified SEBCs.
The constitutional protection granted to SCs and STs of affording reservations to them in all
sectors, such as education, services, political representation, proportional to their
population, is required to be extended to SEBCs also, having regard to the march of time,
and increase in the population of the SEBCs.
Hence this Bill.
 N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON  PRASAD  MISHRA
November  22,  2018.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE C ONSTITUTION OF I NDIA
* * * * *
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
* * * * *
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
* * * * *
4

MGIPMRND—2071LS(S3)—11.12.2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri  Bhairon Prasad Mishra,  M.P .)