1
THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND NATURAL HERITAGE
CONSERV ATION  BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI KA VITHA KALV AKUNTLA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the conservation of archaeological and
natural heritage and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the United Nations Educational Scientific and Archaeological Organization
Convention concerning the Protection of the World Archaeological and Natural Heritage
was held in Paris in 1972, which India ratified in 1977 to ensure effective and active measures
for protection, conservation and presentation of the archaeological and natural heritage
situated on the territory of each State Party;
AND WHEREAS, it is expedient and necessary to enact a law for the purpose of
implementing the decisions to take appropriate legal, scientific, technical, administrative and
financial measures necessary for the identification, protection, conservation, presentation
and rehabilitation of archaeological and natural heritage.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Archaeological and Natural Heritage Conservation
Act, 2017.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  180 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definition.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'Board' means the Archaeological and Natural Heritage Conservation Board
constituted under section 3;
(b) 'Convention' means the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Archaeological Organization Convention concerning the Protection of the World
Archaeological and Natural Heritage held in Paris in 1972 and ratified by India in 1977;
(c) 'Archaeological Heritage' includes the following:—
(i) 'ancient monument' and 'archaeological sites and remains' defined in
clauses (a) and ( d), respectively, of section 2 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958;
(ii) monuments, that is to say, architectural works, works of monumental
sculpture and painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature,
inscriptions, cave dwelling and combinations of features, which are of outstanding
universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;
(iii) groups of buildings, groups of separate or connected buildings which,
because of their architecture, homogeneity or their place in the landscape, are of
outstanding universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;
(iv) sites, that is to say, works of man or the combined works of nature and
man, and areas including archaeological sites which are of outstanding universal
value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of
view;
(d) "natural heritage" includes,—
(i) natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas which are of
outstanding value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural
beauty;
(ii) geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated
area which constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and plants
and are of outstanding value from the point of view of science or conservation;
(iii) natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or
groups of such formations, which are of outstanding value from the aesthetic or
scientific point of view; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein and
defined in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 or
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the
same meaning, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The Central Government, shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Archaeological and Natural Heritage Conservation Board for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of,
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government, from amongst the
persons having such knowledge and experience, as may be prescribed;
Constitution
of the
Archaeological
Heritage
Conservation
Board.
24 of 1958
45 of 1860
2 of 1974
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
40
45

3
(b) fourteen other members to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst the persons who have knowledge and experience in the field of archaeology,
history, architecture, conservation, science and technology, environment science,
town and country planning or public administration:
Provided that the Chairperson and the members of the Board shall be appointed
in consultation with the Leaders of Opposition of both the Houses of Parliament.
(3) The Chairperson and every member of the Board shall hold office for a period of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The terms and conditions of  the office, including the method of filling casual
vacancies in the Board, and the procedure for removal or disqualification of the Chairperson
or a member of the Board, shall be such as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify.
(6) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, make regulations for
regulating its own procedure.
(7) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of such number of officers and
employees as may be prescribed.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and employees of the secretariat shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall:—
(i) To monitor the implementation of obligations under the Convention and
issue such directions as it may consider necessary and expedient for the effective
implementation of such obligations;
(ii) To advise to the Central Government on identification, safe-keeping,
conservation and preservation of archaeological heritage and natural heritage;
(iii) To issue such directions as it considers necessary to ensure safety, security,
conservation and management of archaeological heritage and natural heritage;
(iv) to cause or undertake an inquiry and initiate legal action in consultation with
the Central Government, in case of offences relating to archaeological heritage and
natural heritage sites;
(v) to take such measures as it may consider necessary for implementation of the
provisions of this Act; and
(vi) to undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. Whoever—
(i) damages or causes any damage to archaeological heritage or natural heritage
site; or
(ii)indulges in any propaganda with the intention of causing any damage to as
archaeological heritage or natural heritage site; or
(iii) commits any offence under section 30 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958; or
(iv) commits or omits to commit any act in relation to archaeological heritage or
natural heritage sites, which is an offence under any other law for the time being in
force;
shall be guilty of committing an offence under this Act.
Functions of
the Board.
Offences.
24 of 1958
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
40
45

4
Punishment. 6. Any person who commits any offence under section 5 shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, which may
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
proceedings of committing an offence under this Act may be instituted after the expiry of the
period of limitation.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an
offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence.
9. It shall be the duty of every person holding a civil post in connection with the affairs
of the Union or a State to assist the Board in discharge of its functions.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Board shall prepare an annual report, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Central Government.
(3) The annual report shall be laid by the Central Government, as soon as may be after
it is received, before each House of Parliament:
Provided that the Board may also submit interim report or reports to the Central
Government, which shall cause the report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Proceedings
after the
expiry of the
period of
limitation.
Annual report.
An offence
under the Act
to be a
cognizable
offence.
Every person
holding a civil
post to assist
the Board.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Provisions of
the Act to be
in addition to
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in its
17th General Assembly meeting on 16th November, 1972 adopted a Convention relating to
the conservation of World Archaeological and Natural Heritage. India has ratified this
convention on 14th November, 1977. Hence, it is in our own interest to implement this
convention and enact a law to give effect to the provisions of the Convention. For the
conservation of Archaeological Heritage, a suitable mechanism for vigilance and monitoring
is needed. These purposes would be better served if a Board to be known as the Archaeological
and Natural Heritage Conservation Board is set up to work as a watchdog agency for the
conservation, upkeep and maintenance of the archaeological heritage and natural heritage
sites in the country.
The terms 'archaeological heritage' and 'natural heritage' have been given a very
comprehensive meaning to include all archaeological and natural heritage, provided for in
the Convention and the terms also cover the ancient monuments and archaeological sites
and remains defined in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
Act, 1958.
Our archaeological and natural heritage sites are vulnerable even now. We all know
that people who visit such sites are not sensitive enough to try and keep such sites well
maintained. It is a common practice to deface our monuments by inscribing names on them.
There have also been other cases of vandalism against our archaeological and natural heritage
sites. Keeping in view the increasing number of crimes against such sites, there is a need to
provide for punitive action for such crimes.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI KAVITHA  KALV AKUNTLA
July 26, 2017.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Archaeological and Natural
Heritage Conservation Board for the conservation of the Archaeological sites in the country.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred and fifty crores is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulation for regulating its own.
Clause 13 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of
the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters of
administrative details and procedure and, as such, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.
As the rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the conservation of archaeological and
natural heritage and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2240LS(S3)—23.10.2017.