1
THE CENTRAL HOMEOPATHY UNIVERSITY BILL, 2014
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a University at Kurichy in Kottayam district in the
State of Kerala for the development of Homeopathy and for the furtherance of the
advancement of learning and pursuit of research in Homeopathy.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Central Homeopathy University Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 181 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and
commencement.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University;
(b) “Board” means the Board of Management of the University;
(c) "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of the University;
(d) "Chancellor" means the Chancellor of the University;
(e) "Faculty" means Faculty of the University;
(f) "University" means the Central Homeopathy University established under
this Act;
(g) "Vice-Chancellor" means the Vice-Chancellor of the University;
(h) "Visitor" means the Visitor of the University; and
3. (1) There shall be established a University by the name of the Central Homeopathy
University.
(2) The headquarter of the University shall be at Kurichy in Kottayam district in the
State of Kerala and it may also establish campuses at such other places within its jurisdiction
as it may deem fit.
(3) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall use
and sued by the said name.
4. The objects of the University shall be—
(a) to impart education in homeopathy;
(b) to further the advancement of learning and conducting of research in
homeopathy;
(c) to promote partnership and linkages with national and international educational
institutions; and
(d) to undertake such other activities as it may, from time to time, determine.
5. The University shall have the following powers, namely:—
(i) to make provisions for instructions in Homeopathy;
(ii) to make provisions for conduct of research in Homeopathy;
(iii) to make provisions for dissemination of the findings of research and technical
information through extension programmes;
(iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as it may determine, diplomas or
certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of
examination, evaluation or any other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw
any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinction for good and
sufficient cause;
(v) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority
or institution of higher learning in such manner and for such purpose as the University
may determine;
(vi) to establish and maintain colleges relating to Homeopathy;
(vii) to establish and maintain such campuses, special centres, specialized
laboratories, libraries, museums or other units for research and institution as are, in its
opinion, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;
Definitions.
Establishment
of Central
Homeopathy
University.
Objects of the
University.
Powers of the
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(viii) to create teaching, research and extension education posts and to make
appointments thereto;
(ix) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments
thereto;
(x) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and
prizes;
(xi) to determine standards of admission to the University which may include
examination, evaluation or any other method of testing;
(xii) to provide and maintain residential accommodation for students and
employees;
(xiii) to supervise the residential accommodation of the students and employees
of the University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and general
welfare;
(xiv) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including
their code of conduct;
(xv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees
and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as it may deem necessary;
(xvi) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed;
(xvii) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government on the security of
its property, money for the purpose of the University;
(xviii) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage
and dispose of any property, movable or immovable including trust and endowment
properties, for its purposes; and
(xix) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or
conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
6. (1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with respect to teaching,
research and programmes of extension education at the University level, in the field of
Homeopathy, shall extend to whole country.
(2) All colleges, research and experimental stations or other institutions to be established
under the authority of the University shall come in as constituent units under the full
management and control of the officers and authorities and no such units shall be recognised
as affiliated units.
7. The University shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever caste, creed,
race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any person,
any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed as
a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in
the University or to graduate there at or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from
making special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities
or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens.
8. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.
(2) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made, by such person
or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories, libraries, museums,
workshops and equipments, and of any institution or college and also of the examination,
instruction and other work conducted or done by the University, and to cause an inquiry to
Jurisdiction.
University
open to all
classes, castes
and creed.
The Visitor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration and
finances of the University.
(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his intention to
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such notice,
have the right to make, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice or such other
period as the Visitor may determine, such representations to him as it may consider necessary.
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor
may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub-section (2).
(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the
University shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to appear in
person and to be heard on such inspection or inquiry.
(6) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed.
9. The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:—
(1) the Chancellor;
(2) the Vice-Chancellor;
(3) the Deans;
(4) the Directors;
(5) the Registrar;
(6) the Comptroller;
(7) the University Librarian; and
(8) such other officers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
10. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University.
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held
for conferring degrees.
11. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the
University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University
and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary
on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under
this Act and shall report to such authority the action taken by him on such matter:
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to
have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by
the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section shall have the right to appeal
against such action to the Board within three months from the date on which decision on
such action is communicated to him and thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or reverse
the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the
University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act or
that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned
to review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review
Officers of the
University.
The Chancellor.
The Vice-
Chancellor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
the decision either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of
sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties has may be prescribed.
12. Every Dean and every Director shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.
13. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and
authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may be prescribed.
14. The Comptroller shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
15. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the
University shall be such as may be prescribed.
16. The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely:—
(1) the Board of Management;
(2) the Academic Council;
(3) the Research Council;
(4) the Extension Education Council;
(5) the Finance Committee;
(6) the Faculties and Board of Studies; and
(7) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
17. The provisions of the Central Universities Act, 2009 shall, with such exceptions,
adoptions and modifications, as may be considered necessary, apply to the Central
Homeopathy University Act, 2014.
18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulties:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree  that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Deans and
Directors.
The Registrar.
The
Comptroller.
Other officers.
Authorities of
the
University.
Application
of the Central
Universities
Act, 2009.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
25 of 2009.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Homeopathy is an important system of Indian medicine. Homeopathy system of
medicine is safe and has no side effects. It is prevalently used in Germany with very good
response. In India also, Homeopathy is popular and its medicines are being used for treatment
of illness by a large number of persons. But the system has not been given the prominence
it deserves. This system of medicine needs to be popularized and promoted for the welfare of
the people of the country.
Therefore, the Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of a University at Kurichy in
Kottayam district in the State of Kerala for the development of Homeopathy and for the
furtherance of the advancement of learning and pursuit of research in Homeopathy.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
November 12, 2014.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Central Homeopathy University
in the State of Kerala with headquarter at Kurichy. Clause 9 provides for appointment of
Officers of the University. Clause 16 provides for certain authorities of the University. The
Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore would be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

GMGIPMRND—3267LS(S-3)—05.12.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a University at Kurichy in Kottayam district in the
State of Kerala for the development of Homeopathy and for the furtherance of the
advancement of learning and pursuit of research in Homeopathy.
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P .)