As IN'l'RODt1CBD IN LOIt S.AEA OK 
2 7DEC1990 
Blli No. 181 ., lHO 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Finance Act, 1990 and the lncome-taz Act, 1981. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, Short title 
1990. 
5 ~ In section 2 of the Finance Act, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as Amend· the principal Act) ,- _ •. : . ft. m.nt.ot 
10 
IS 
(a) in sub-section (5) ,-
(i) for the words "eight per cent.", wherever they occur, the 
words "twelve per cent." shall be substituted; 
(ii) the following· proviso shall be inserted and shall be 
deemed to have been inserted with eft'ect from the 15th day of 
October, 1990, namely:-
'Provided that in the case of a contractor, being a domes-
tic company, the provisions of this sub·section shall have 
e1fect, as if for the words "eight per cent:', the words "fifteen 
per cent." had been substituted.'j 
aeetion 2. 

Amend. 
Ir!entof 
First 
Schedule. 
. '.;. .. -~ ., : '~ ~ 
2 
(b) in subo-section (6) ,-
(i) for the words "eight per cent.", wherever they o~ur, the 
words "twelve per cent." shall be substituted; 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted and shall be 
deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 15th day of 5 
October, 1990, namely:-
'Provided that in the case of a buye.r, being a domestic 
company, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect, 
as if for the words "eight per cent.", the words "fifteen per 
cent." had been substituted.'; 
(c) in sub-section (7), in the second proviso, for the words 
"eight per cent.", the words "fifteen per cent:' shall be substituted 
and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 
15th day of October, 1990; 
10 
(d) in sub-section (8), in the proviso, for the words "eight per 15 
cent.". the words "twelve per cent." shall be substituted. 
3. In the First Schedule to the principal Act,-
(a) in part II, under the heading "Surcharge on Income-tax" and 
the entries relating thereto, as they existed immediately before their 
amendment by the Finance (Second Amendment) Ordinance. 1990, 20 Ord. 8 of 
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: - 1990 
"Provided that the income-tax deducted in accordance with 
the provisions of-
(i) sub-item (a) of item 1 of this Part shall be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the 25 
rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax on and from the 
date the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1990 receives as-
sent of the President; 
(ii) sub-item (a) of item 2 of this Part shall be increased 
by a surcharge calculated at the rate of fifteen per cent. of 30 
such income-tax with effect from the 15th day of October, 
1990.'" I 
(b) in Part flI.-
(i) in Paragraph A,-
(1) in Sub-Paragraph I. under the heading "S'Urcha.rge 35 
on income-tar' for the words "eight per cent.", the words 
"twelve per cent." shall be substituted; 
(2) in Sub-Paragraph II, under the heading "Surcharge 
on income-tax" for the words "eight per cent."; the words 
"twelve per cent." shall be substituted; 40 
(ii) in Paragraph B, under the heading "SuflCharge on in.. 
come-ta:r" for the words "eight per cent.", the words "twelve per 
cent." _hall be subltttuted; 

LOK SaBH.t. 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
'HiE TAXATION LAWS (Al-1ENDMENT) BILL, 1990 
(To be/As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1 . Page 1 , against line 5, inser t the mar"'inal c1 tati:Jn,-
"12 of 1990." 
2. Page 2, line 27,-
.§fter "receive s" iDsert "the" 
3. Page 3,in the marginal he ading to clause 5,-
for ".AnendIJ:Janet" ~ "Amend l'ISnt " 
4. page 7, line 7,-
omi t "21 II 
5. Page 7, line 15,-
for "de due tion" ~ "collec t1on" 
t,. Page 7, line 1';,-
.!:2r. "e ase" ~ lie ase s " 
7. Page (), line 3 from bottom,-
for "sub-tern" £!U¥! "sub-1 tem" 
8. Page 11, line 7 from bottom,-
u r "inelu(~ed" 1:~ lIincludes" 
9. Page 12, line 22,-
fo£. ''eighty per cent." read '~ight per cent." 
1 O. Page 13, line 10,-
for "purpose" £.~ad "purpose s" 
NEW DELHI; 
,p:!cember 24. 10 90 
,Fausa 3, 1912 (Saka) 

3 
(iii), in Paragraph C,-
(1) in, Sub-Paragraph I, under the heading "Surcharge 
On ,income-tax", for the words "eight per cent.", the words 
"twelve per cent." shall be substituted; 
5 (2) in Sub-Paragraph II, under the heading "Surcharge 
on income-tax", for the words "eight per cent.", the words 
"twelve per cent."' shall be substituted; 
10 
(iv) in Paragraph D, under the heading "Surcharge on 
income-ta;r", for the words "eight per cent.". the words "twelve 
per cent." shell be substituted; 
(v) in Paragraph E, under the heading "Surcharge on 
income-tax", for the words "eight per cent.", the words "fifteen 
per cent.'· shall be sUbstituted and shall be deemed to have been 
substituted with effect from the 15th day of October. 1990. 
~3 of 1961. ] 5 4. In sect:on 32 of the Income-tax Act. 1961 (hereinafter referred to Amend. 
20 
25 
30 
12 of 1990, 35 
4'0 
as the Income-tax Act). in sub-section (1), in clause (ii), after the second ment at 
proviso and before Explanation I, the following proviso shan be inserted. section 32. 
namely:-
"Provided also that the deduction in the case of any block of 
assets under this clause in respect of the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1991 shall 
be restricted to seventy-five per cent. of the amount calculated at 
the percentage. on the written dtwn value of such assets, prescribed 
under this Act immediately 'before the commencement of the 
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1990.". 
5. In section 234C of the Income-tax Act. in sub-section (1), after Amend. 
the first proviso and before the Explanatwn, the following proviso shall menet of 
be inserted, namely: - section 
"Provided further that nothing contained in this sub-section 
shall apply to any shortfall in the payment of the tax due on the 
returned income where such shortfall is on account of-
(a) restricting the amount of deduction under the third' 
proviso to clause (ii)·· of, sub-section (1) of section 32; 
(b) increase in the rate of surcharge under section 2 of the 
Finance Act. 1990. as amended by the Taxation Laws (Amend-
ment) Act, 1990. 
and the assessee ha!l paid the amount of shortfall.-
(i) where it is a domestic company and-
(1) the case falls under clause (a), as part of the instal-
ment of advance tax which is immediately due: 
(2) the case 'falls under clause (b), on or before the 15th 
day of Noverr.her. 1990 in respect of the instalment of ad~ 
vance tax due on the 15t,lot day of September. 1990j 
234<:. 

Payment 
of Sur-
charge 
~l 
and 
"vin,. 
4 
(ii) where it is not a domestic company and-
(1) the case falls under clause (a), as part of the in.tal-
ment of advance tax which is immediately due; 
.~ .. 
• ,.1 
(2) the case falls under clause (b), as part of the instal-
ment of advance tax due on or before the IMh day of March, 5 
1991. 
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Aet,-
(a) the surcharge payable under section 2 of, and Part TIl or 
the First Schedule to, the principal Act, as amended by this Act,-
(i) in the case of an assessee being a domestic company, 
shall, in respect of the instalment of "advance tax" paid or pay- 10 
able on or before the 15th day of September, 1990, be payable 
on or before the 15'th day of November, 1990; 
(ii) in the case of an assessee not being a domestic company, 
shall, in respect of the instalment of "advance tax" paid or pay-
able on or be'fore the 15th day of September, 1990 and the 15th IS 
day of December, 1990, be payable on or before the 15th day of 
March, 1991; 
(iii) in any case i.n which income-tax has to be calculated 
under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the __ . 
Income-tax Act or charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 20 
or sub-section (2) of section 174 ot' section 175 or sub-:section 
(2) of secti-on 176 of the saW Act. shall be payable only where 
such income-tax is so calculated or charged-
(1) in respect of a domestic company, after the 15th day 
of October, 1990; 25 
(2) in respect of any other assessee, after the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President, 
(b) in the case of surcharge deductible under section 2 of, and 
Part III of the First Schedule to. the principal Act, as amended by 
this Act, the person responsible for making the payment referred 30 
to in sub-::.ection (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A) or sub-
section (2B) of section 192 of the Income-tax Act shall. at the time 
of making such payment after the date on which this Act receives 
the assent of the President. adjust any deficiency arising out of any 
previous deduction resulting on account of the mcreale in the rate 3S 
of surcharge. 
'1. (1) The Finance (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1990 is hereby 0rcl.8 
repealed. of 1980. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 40 
under the principal Act. as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In order to mobilise additional resources to meet the financial cost 
of evacuating Indians from the Gulf and providing relief to them. the 
Government decided to increase the surcharge on income-tax payable 
by domestic companies. Since Parliament was not in session. a:11 it was 
necessary to take immediate action to rais? the said resources, the Finance 
(Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1900 (Ord 8 of 1990) was promulgated 
by the President on 15th October. 1990. By this Ordinance, the surcharge 
of 8 per cent. payable by domestic companieQ on income exceeding 
Rs. 75,000, during the financial year 1990-91 has been increased to 1& per 
;.;ent. .. ':' 
.. 'f', ~ J 
2. In order to meet the stringent financial situation arising out of 
the Gulf crisis, the Government has also decided to increase the sur-
charge on income-tax hitherto payable by assessees, other than com-
panies. The depreciation allowable on written down value of block of 
assets is also proposed to be restricted to 75 per cent. of the amount 
calculated at the percentage prescribed under the Income-tax Act. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the Finance (Second Amendment) 
Ordinance, 199() and to give effect to the proposals mentioned in para-
graph 2. 
NEW' DELHI; YASHW ANT SINHA. 
T17e 20th December, 1990. 
s 

Memorandum explaining the modifications contained in the Bm to 
replal~e the Finance (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1990 
The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1990. which seeks to repeal 
and replace the Finance (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1990, pro-
poses to make the following modifications in the proVisions contained in 
the said Ordinance:-
(i) sub-sect~on (2) of section 1 of the o.rdinance has been 
dropped as the provisions-of sub-clauses (a) (U), (b) (Ii) and (c) 
of clause 2 and a portion of sub-clause (a) and sub-clause \b) (v) of 
clause. 3 of the Bill will come into force retrospectively from the 15th 
day of October, 1990. The remaining provisions of the Bill will come 
into force from the date of assent of the President; 
(ii) sub-clauses (a) (i), (b) (i) and (d) c,f clause 2 and a portion 
of sub-clause (a) and sub-clause (b) (i) to (h·) of clause 3 seek to 
amend section 2' of the Finance Act, 1990 and Part II and Paragraphs 
A to D of Part III of the First Schedule to ~hat Act so as to increase 
the surcharge on income-tax presently payable by assessees, other 
than companies. The said surcharge is being increlsed from eight per 
cent. to twelve per cent.; 
(iii) clause 4 seeks to amend clause (ii) of sub-section (1) af 
section 32 of the Income-tax Act SO as to restrict the depreciation 
allowable on written down value of block of assets. in respect of the 
previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 
1st day of April, 1991, to seventy-five per cent. of the amount cal-
culated at the percentage prescribed in the Income-tax Rules, 196% 
immediately before the commencemen1 of this Amendment; 
(iv) clause 5 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 234C 
of the Income-tax Act so as to provide that the interest speclfted !n 
that sub-section shall not be payahle in re.i(J<.:ct of any shortfall in 
the payment of the tax due on the returned income where such 
shortfall is on account of restrict:ng the amount of deduction under 
the third proviso to section 32 (1) (ii) or increase in the rate of sur-
charge under section 2 of the Finance Act. 1990. as amended by 
this legislation subject to the condition that thE:' payment of tax ii 
made by the due date; 
(v) clause 6 seeks to specify the date~ ifr paYlnent of additional 
tax liability. 

2, (1) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE FINANCE ACT, 1990 
(12 OF 1990) 
... ... • • • 
CHAPTER II 
RATEs In' INCOME-TAX 
... • • 21 Income • 
tax. (5) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under section 194C of 
the Income-tax Act, the deduction shall be made at the rates specified 
in that section and shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the 
Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such deduction. 
(6) In cases in which tax has to be collected under section 206C of 
the income-tax Act, the collection shall be made at the rate specified in 
that section and shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the 
Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such deduction. 
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (8), in case in which 
lDeome-tax has to be calculated under the first proviso to sub-section (5)\ 
of secti'On 132, of the Income-tax Act Or charged under SUb-section (4) of 
section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or secdon 175 or sub-section 
(2) of section 176 of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the 
said Act from income chargeable under the he.ad "Salaries" or in which 
tht "advance tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be 
computed at the rate or rates in force, such income-tax or, as the case 
may be "advance tax" shall be so calculated, charged, deducted or com-
puted'at th~ rate or rates specified in Part III of the First Schedule and 
such tax as reduced by the rebate of income-tax calculated under Chapter 
VIU-A shall be increased,-
(a) in the cases to whicl1 Paragraphs A. B, C and D of that Part 
apply, by a surcharge for purposes of the Union; and 
(b). in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part appli_, by' 
a surcharge, .... 
(;alculatep in each case in the manner provided therein: 
Provided that in cases to which the provisions of Chapter XII or 
Chapter XII-A or sub-section (lA) of section 161 or section 164 or section 
164A Or section 167B of the Income-tax Act apply "advance tax" shall 
be computed with reference to the rates imposed by this sUb-sertion or 
the rates as specified in that Chapt~ or section, as the case may be: 
Provided further that in respect of any income chargeable to tax 
under section 11aB of the Income-tax Act, the "advance tax" computed 
Under the first proviso shall be increased by a surcharge for purpose of 
1jbe Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent of such "advance tax", . . 
7 

• 
(8) In the cases to which Sub-Paragraph 1 or Sub-Paragraph n of 
Paragraph A of Part III of the First Schedule applies, where the a ...... 
has, in the previous year or, if by virtue of any provision of the Income-
tax Act, income-tax is to be charged 1n respect of the income of a period 
other than the previous year, in such other period, any net agricultural 
income exceeding six hundred rupees, in addition to total income and 
the total income exceeds,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, twenty-
two thousand rupees, and 
(ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, twelve 
\ thGUsand rupees, 
then, in calculating income-tax under the first proviso to sub-section 
(5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or in charging inco~e-tax 
under sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) 
of section 176 of the said Act or in computing the "advance tax" payable 
under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act, at the rate or rates in force,-
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in 
the manner provided in clause (b) [that is to say, as if the net agri-
cultural income were comprised in the total income after,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub·Paragraph I applies, the 
first twenty-two thousand rupees, and 
(ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, 
thE!) first twelve. thousand rupees, 
of the total income but without being liable to tax] • only for the 
purpose of calculating, charging or computing such income-tax or as 
the case may be, "advance tax" in respect of the total incom~; and 
(b) such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall 
be so calculated, charged or computed as follows:-
(i) the total income and the net agricultural income shall 
be aggregated and the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" 
shall be determined in respect of the aggregate income at the 
rates specified in Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, Sub-
Paragraph II of the said Paragraph A, as if such aure.ate in-
come were the total income; 
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be increased,-
(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, 
by a sum of twenty-two thousand rupees; and 
(B) in a case to which the said Sub-;Paragraph' n 
applies, by a sum of twelve thousand rupees, 
and the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" shan be d.tar~ 
mined. in respect of the net agricultural income as so increued 
at the rates specified in the said Paragraph I .. , 

9 
as the case may be, the said Sub-Paragraph II as if the net agri-
cultural income as so ii1creased were the total income; 
(iii)· the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" determined 
in accordance with sub-clause (i) shall be reduced by the 
amount of income-tax. as the case may be, "advance tax" 
determined in accordance with sub-clause (ti) and the sum so 
arrived at shall be the income-tax or, as the case may be, 
"advance tax" in respect of the total income: 
1'1. 
Provided that the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" so arrived 
at shall. in the case of every person having a tOtal income exceeding 
seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes 
of the Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax 
or, as the case may be, "advance tax" and the sum so arrived at shall be 
the income-tax or. as the case may be. "advance-tax" in respect of the 
total incomE1L 
• • • • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
• • • • • 
PART II 
RATES FOR DEDUCTION O~' TAX AT SOURCE IN CERTAIN CASES 
~ every case in which under the provisions of sections 193, 194. 
194A, 194B, 194BB, 1940 and 195 of the Income-tax Act, tax is to be deduc-
ted at the rates in force, deduction shall be made from the income su.b-
jeet to deduction at the following rates:-
---- .... _---_._----
Rate of income to: 
-.. _._ .. - .. _._---- -------_.-------_._----_._-. . 
1. In the case of a person other than a company-
(a) where the person is resident in India-
• • • 
2. In the case of a company-
• 
(a) where the company is a domestic company--
• • • 
Surcharge on income-tax 
• 
• 
The amount of income-tax ded\Jcted in accordance with the provi-
sions of-
(a) sub-item (a) of item 1 of this Part shall be increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of tl:te Union. and 
(b) sub-tem (a) of item 2 of this Part shall be increased by a 
surcharge, 
calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax. 

10 
PART III 
RATEs 1'OIt. CA.J.J,:ULATUfG OIl WL\RGIN(l Df(:OM~TAX 1N CU'l'AUI CASES DDJUCT-
!NG tJll'COMB-TaX noM INCOl\(1! CH~ tlJfBWl 1111 ~ "SALAJtms" 
AND COMPUTING "ADVANCB TA&" 
In cases in which income--t&x has to be calculated Wlder the first 
proviso to sUb-sectioa (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or charged 
uader sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (Z) of section 174 or 
section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or deducted 
under section 192. ·of the said Act from income chargeable under the 
head "Salaries" or in which ·the "advance tax" payable under Chapter 
J{VJ.I-C ~f .the. said Act has to be computed at the rate or rates in force, 
s~ch income-ta~ or .. as ~e case may be, "advance tax" [not being 
''advance tax" in respect of any income chargeable to tax under Chapter 
XII er Chapter XI!-A or sub-section (lA) of section 161 f6 seetion 184 
or ieetion 1641\ or section 167B of the Income-tax Act at the rates as 
specified in that Chapter or section OP surcharge on such "advance tax" 
in respect of any income cltargeable to tax under section U5B], shall be 
calculated, charged, deducted or computed at the following rate or 
rates:-
PaTo.grar-h A 
Sub-Paragraph 1 
In the case of every individual or flindu undivided fami!y or un-
registered ftrm or other assoclation of per8f)DS or body 0{ individuals, 
whether incorporated or not, or enry artifteial juridical person l'eferred 
to in sub-clautle (vii) of dause· ('1) Gf seetton 2 of the Income-tax ~, 
Dot being a case to whieh Sub-P~ II of this Paragraph or ;tny other 
Paragraph of this Part applies,- ' . 
• • • • • • 
Surcharge on incom.e-taz 
The amount of income-ta'k computed in accordance with the preceding 
provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall,-
(i\ in the case of every individual, Hindu undivided family or 
association of persons Or body of individuals referred to in sections 
88 and 88A having a total Jneome exceeding !'eventy-five thousand 
rupees, be reduced by the amount of rebate of inc-orne-tax caJ.culRted 
under Chapter WI-A. aT'd the income-tax all so reduced, 
(ii) in the case of every person. other than those mentioned in 
item (i): having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand 
rupees. 
be increased by a surehar'te for purposes of. the Union calculate:i at the 
rate of eight per cent. of Buch income-tax: 
Provided that no fUch surcharge shall he payable bv· a nOl'-r~fident . 
• • • • • 

11 
Su.b-PaTGgTtJph II 
In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time during 
t~e previous year has at least one member whose total income oC the pre-
'VIGUs yev "levant to the 'aseel8lI1ent year oommencing em the hit day of 
April, 1991 exceeds Rs. 22,000,- ' 
• • • • • 
Su.rcharge on in;ome-'tcp; 
The amount of in.come-tax computed in accordance with the preced-
ing provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the caSe of ever;.. person 
haVlng a total income exceeding seventy-five thdusand rupees, be reduced 
by the amount of rebate' of income-tax calculated under Chapter Vm-A 
and the income-tax as So reduced be increased by a surCharge fl)r purposes 
of tbe Union calculated at the rat~ of eight per cent. of such income-tax: 
Provided that no such sureharge shall be payable by a non-re"iden,t. 
Par4graph B 
In the case of every co-operative society,-
• • • 
Surcharge on income-tax 
• • 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preced-
ing provisions of this Paragraph, sh!lll, in the cue of every person hav-
ing a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of t,he Union calculated at the rate of eight 
per 'cent. of suth income-tax.' 
" , 
Paraaraph C " 
Sub-Paragraph 1 
In the case of every reii&tered finn, not being a case to which Sub-
Paragrapb II of this Paragraph app1ies,-
• • • • • 
~'U:"CMrge on if't,COfneotl1.1: 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the prececl .. 
ing provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of every person 
having a total income exceeding seventy-ftve thousand rupees, be in-
<.'!'eased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of eight per cent. of such income-tax. 
Sub-Prlragraph II 
In. the case of every. ntsistered firm whose ,total income included 
income derived from ~ profession carried on by it and the ipcome so 
included is not less than ftfty-one per cent. of such total tncome,-
• • • • • 
Surchaf',. on fflt'ome-tIlt: 
The amount of income~tax computed ,In accordance with the preced-
ing provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shaD, in the case of every penon 

D('PlC-
ciatkm. 
12 
having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be. increa-
sed by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
eight per cent. of such income-tax. 
Exp14nation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, "registered finn" 
iDcl.udes an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm under 
clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. ~. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every local authority,-
• • • • 
(Surcharge on income-tax 
• 
The ~unt of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore· speci-
fled shall, in the case of every person having a total income exceeding 
seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes 
of the Union calculated at, the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax. 
Paragraph E 
In the case of a company,-
• • • • 
~urcharge on inc07ne.ta.:r 
• 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provi-
sions of item I of this Paragraph shan, in the case of every person hav-
ing a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased 
by a surcharge calculated at the rate of ~ighty per cent. of such inCOtne-
tax. I 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM TIlE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 
. (43 OF 1961) 
• • • • • 
32. (1) In respect of depreciation of buildings, machinery, plant or 
furni ture owned by the BSsessee and used for the purposes of the 
business or profession, the following deductions shall. subject to the pro-
visions of section 34, be a1lowed-
• • • • * 
(ii) in the case of any block of assets, such percentage on the 
written down value thereof as may be prescribed: 
Provided that where the actual cost of any machinery or plant 
does not exceed five thousand rupees, the actual cost thereof shall 
be allowed as a deduction in respect of the previous year in which 
such t:JUlchinery or plant is first put to use by the assessee for the 
purposes of his business or profession: 
Provided further that no dedUction shall be allowed under this 
clause in respect of any motor car manufact.ured outside India, 
where SloWh motor car is acquired by the. assessee after the 28th day of 
. Februal')\ 1975, and is ulled.otherwble than in .a bUSiness of running 
it on hire for tourists. . 

13 
. Explanation I.-Where the business or profession of the assessee 
18 carried on a building not owned by him but in respect at which 
the assessee holds a lease or other right of occupancy and any capi-
tal expenditure is incurred by the assessee for the purposes of the 
business or profession on the construction of any structure or do-
ing of any work in or in relation t,o, and by way of renovation or 
exte~ion of, or improvement to, the building, then, the provisions 
of this clause shall apply as if the said structure or work is a build-
ing owned by the assessee. 
Expianation 2.-For the purpose of this clause "written down 
value of the block of assets" shall have the same meaning as in 
clause (c) of SUb-section (6) of section 43; 
• • • • • 
234C. (1) Where in any financial year, the advance tax paid by the 
assessee on his current income on Or before the 15th day of September is 
less than twen.ty per cent. of the tax due on the returned income or the 
amount of such advance tax paid on or before the 151th day of December 
is less than fifty per cent. of the tax due on the returned income, then, the 
assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one and one-
half per cent. per month of the shortfall from for a period of three months 
on the amount of the shortfall from twenty per cent. or as the .-ase may 
be, fifty per cent. of the tax d!le on the returned income: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to 
any shortfall in the payment of the tax due on the returned income where 
8ueh shortfall is on account of under-estimate of failure to estimate-.. ! .r 
Ja) .. the, a~oun~ ?Ccapital gains: ,pr" .', ." 
(b) income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (ix) of clause 
(24) of section 2, 
and the assessee has paid the whole of the amount of tax payable in res.-
pect of income referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), as the case may be, 
had such income been a part of the total income, as part of the instalmen.t 
of advance tax which is immediately due or where no such instalment is 
so due, by the 31st day of March of the financial year. 
EXPLanation.-In this section, "tax due 00. the returned income" .means 
the tax chargeable on the total income declared in the return of meome 
furnished by the assessee for the assessment year commencing on the 1st 
da of April immediately following the financial year in which the advance 
~ is paid, as reduced by the amount of tax deductible or collec~ible at 
source in accordance with the provi!llions· of Chapter XVI,I o~ any mc?me 
which is subject to such deduction or collection and whlch 18 taken mto 
account in computing such total income. • 
• • • • 
Interest 
for defer-
ment Of 
sdvance 
tax. 

LOK·SABHA 
.6 
BILL 
furtber to arnen4 the J'iDance Act, 1990 and the Income-tax Act, 1181. 