Short title and 
commencement.
5
Amendment of 
article 325.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 181 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Kඎඇඐൺඋ Pඎඌඁඉൾඇൽඋൺ Sංඇ඀ඁ Cඁൺඇൽൾඅ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 325 of the Constitution, for the word, “sex”, the words “sex, poverty” shall 
be substituted.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is one of the most successful democracy in the world. It adopts dignity and 
equality of individuals with other values as an idealistic values. Every citizen has the 
right to contest elections and exercise right to vote. During historical period, certain 
classes of people were deprived of taking part in power and decisions-making. Society 
was engulfed with discriminations. However, from the very first day of the adoption 
of the Constitution, the aim of political justice has been achieved through provision 
of right to vote to every citizen of the country.
At present, Indian social structure has become more complex. A new class has come 
into existence as a result of financial complexities. The people belonging to low income 
groups have high probability of developing inferiority complex. There is a need to include 
the word “poverty” in article 325 so as to avoid discrimination on the ground of poverty 
including poor people in the general electoral roll.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
4 July, 2022
2

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ
 * * * * * *
325. There shall be one general electoral roll for every territorial constituency for 
election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature 
of a State and no person shall be ineligible for inclusion in any such roll or claim to be
included in any special electoral roll for any such constituency on grounds only of religion, 
race, caste, sex or any of them.
 * * * * * *
No person to be 
ineligible for 
inclusion in, or 
to claim to be 
included in a 
special, electoral 
roll on grounds 
of religion, race, 
caste or sex.
3

(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .) 