1
THE MUSLIM WOMEN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS ON MARRIAGE)
BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to protect the rights of married Muslim women and to prohibit divorce by pronouncing
talaq by their husbands and to provide for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage)
Act, 2018.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th September, 2018.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 181-C of  2018
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 27.12.2018
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘electronic form’’ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (r)
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(b) ‘‘Magistrate’’ means a Judicial Magistrate of the first class exercising
jurisdiction under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in the area where the married
Muslim woman resides; and
(c) ‘‘talaq’’ means talaq-e-biddat  or any other similar form of talaq having
the effect of instantaneous and irrevocable divorce pronounced by a Muslim
husband.
CHAPTER II
D
ECLARATION OF TALAQ TO BE VOID AND ILLEGAL
3. Any pronouncement of talaq by a Muslim husband upon his wife, by words, either
spoken or written or in electronic form or in any other manner whatsoever, shall be void and
illegal.
4. Any Muslim husband who  pronounces talaq referred to in section 3 upon his wife
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
CHAPTER III
P
ROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF MARRIED MUSLIM WOMEN
5. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in any other law for
the time being in force, a married Muslim woman upon whom talaq is pronounced shall be
entitled to receive from her husband such amount of subsistence allowance, for her and
dependent children, as may be determined by the Magistrate.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a
married Muslim woman shall be entitled to custody of her minor children in the event of
pronouncement of talaq by her husband, in such manner as may be determined by the
Magistrate.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,—
(a) an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable, if information
relating to the commission of the offence is given to an officer in charge of a police
station by the married Muslim woman upon whom talaq is pronounced or any person
related to her by blood or marriage;
(b) an offence punishable under this Act shall be compoundable, at the instance
of the married Muslim woman upon whom talaq is pronounced with the permission of
the Magistrate, on such terms and conditions as he may determine;
(c) no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall be released
on bail unless the Magistrate, on an application filed by the accused and after hearing
the married Muslim woman upon whom talaq is pronounced, is satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds for granting bail to such person.
8. (1) The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Ordinance, 2018, is
hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act.
Definitions.
21 of 2000.
Talaq to be
void and
illegal.
Punishment
for
pronouncing
talaq.
Custody of
minor
children.
Subsistence
allowance.
Offence to be
cognizable,
compoundable,
etc.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Repeal and
savings.
Ord. 7
of 2018.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to protect the rights of married Muslim women and to prohibit divorce by pronouncing
talaq by their husbands and to provide for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
MGIPMRND—2876LS(S3)—27-12-2018.