1
THE FARMERS AND AGRICULTURAL WORKERS SOCIAL SECURITY
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for social security and welfare measures for farmers and agricultural
workers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Farmers and Agricultural Workers Social Security
Act, 2015.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 181 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “agricultural produce” include, paddy, wheat, coarse cereals, pulses,
sugarcane, gram, cotton, oilseeds, vegetables, fruits, jute, coconut, tobacco, areca nuts
and such other agricultural produce as may be notified by the Central Government
from time to time and also "seed" as defined in the Seeds Act, 1996;
(b) “agricultural worker” means a person who is engaged in agricultural
occupations like raising crops, dairy, farming, horticulture, poultry, etc. on payment
of wages;
(c) “appropriate  Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, that Central Government;
(d) “Board” means the National Farmers and Agricultural Workers Social Security
Advisory Board constituted  under section 4;
 (e) “farmers” means a person who owns land and cultivates or causes it to be
cultivated for agricultural or horticulture purposes and includes small and marginal
farmers as identified by the appropriate Government;
  (f) “Fund” means the National Farmers and Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund
constituted under section 6;
 (g) “old age farmer or agricultural worker” means a farmer or agricultural worker
who has completed sixty years of age; and
 (h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall, from time to time, formulate suitable welfare schemes
for farmers and agricultural workers on matters relating to—
 (a) life insurance covering death as well as suicide and disability;
(b) health and maternity benefits;
(c) provident fund; and
(d) pension to old age farmers and agricultural workers.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a board to be known as the National Farmers and Agricultural Workers Social Security
Advisory Board to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions
assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) two representatives of farmers to be nominated by the Central Government;
(c) two representatives of agricultural workers to be nominated by the
Central Government; and
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India, in-charge of the Ministry of
Agriculture shall be the ex-officio Member-Secretary to the Board.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall make available to the Board such number of
officers and staff as may be required for efficient functioning of the Board.
5. The Board shall:—
(a) make recommendations to the Central Government to formulate and implement
suitable schemes for the welfare of farmers and agricultural workers;
Definitions.
Framing of
welfare
schemes for
farmers and
agricultural
workers.
Constitution of
the National
Farmers and
Agricultural
Workers Social
Security
Advisory
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Constitution
of the
National
Farmers and
Agricultural
Workers
Welfare Fund.
(b) advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the
administration of this Act as may be referred to it;
(c) advise the Central Government regarding administration of the Fund; and
(d) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
6. (1) There shall be constituted by the Board a fund to be taken as the National
Formers and Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees fifty
thousand crore to be provided by the Central Goverrnment, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf for carrying out the purpose of this act.
(2) The Central Government and State Government shall contribute to the Fund in
such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall also comprise all sums received by the Board from such other
sources as may be decided by the Central Government.
7. The fund shall be utilized to provide financial assistance to the farmers and agricultural
workers for the following purposes —
(a) compensation in case of death, suicide or accident;
(b) old age pension;
(c) disability assistance; and
(d) free healthcare facility to the farmers and agricultural workers and their family
members.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
Utilization of
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The poor farmers with small cultivable area of land and without any cultivable land live
a miserable life. They work either on their small land or on daily wages on the farms of others.
The wages of landless farmers are too low. They belong to the class of have-nots, although
they are the very backbone of our agriculture. They have a handful of children and a bagful
of debts. They are the worst victims of our society. These farmers are like seeds that give
fruits and flowers to others and not to themselves.
Our real farmers are these small farmers and agricultural workers. They are known by
their very look. It is a look of despair. They look more dead than alive. There is hardly a line
of smile on their face or a ray of hope in their heart. They are hungry and almost naked. The
National Farmers Commission has recently highlighted that nearly one lakh fifty thousand
farmers have committed suicides in the country since 1990. A large number of cases of
suicides by farmers have taken place in Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and some other States. Acute poverty and indebtedness is one of
the major factors for farmers for taking the extreme step of committing suicide. After death or
suicide of the only bread earner of the family, the family of such poor farmer or agricultural
worker leads a life in abject poverty.
Though Government has formulated a number of schemes for agricultural sector
including crop insurance, kisan credit card etc., yet in case of death or suicide, the family of
such small farmer or agricultural worker does not get any relief from the Government or any
other body and are constrained to fall in the trap of abject poverty. Hence, there is an
immediate need to formulate certain welfare measures by the Government to provide immediate
relief to the affected family of the farmer or agricultural worker. A National Farmers and
Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund is required to be constituted for removal of indebtedness
and abject poverty among small farmers and agricultural workers and their families.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
July 2, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation and implementation of certain welfare
schemes for farmers and agricultural workers for carrying out the purposes of the Act Clause 4
provides for the Constitution of the National Farmers and Agricultural Workers Social Security
Advisory Board. Clause 6 provides for the Constitution of a National Farmers and Agricultural
Workers Welfare Fund with a initial corpus of fifty thousand crore rupees to be provided by
the Central Government. It further provides that the Central Government and the State
Governments shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crores will be incurred
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crores is also likely to be incurred.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for social security and welfare measures for Farmers and agricultural workers
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1434LS(S3)—16-07-2015.