Bill No. 181-F of 2019
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA  ON 22ND  JULY, 2019
RAJYA SABHA  ON 25TH JULY, 2019)

1
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Right to Information Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 13,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office", the words "for such term as may be prescribed by the
Central Government" shall be substituted;
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 13.
22 of 2005.
Bill No. 181-F of  2019

2
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office", the words "for such term as may be prescribed by the
Central Government" shall be substituted;
(c) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions
of service of the Chief Information Commissioner and the Information
Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of
the Chief Information Commissioner or the Information Commissioners shall not
be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment:
Provided further that the Chief Information Commissioner and the
Information Commissioners appointed before the commencement of the Right to
Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 shall continue to be governed by the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder as if the Right to Information
(Amendment) Act, 2019 had not come into force.".
3.  In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office", the words "for such term as may be prescribed by the
Central Government" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office", the words "for such term as may be prescribed by the
Central Government" shall be substituted;
(c) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions
of service of the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information
Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of
the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information
Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment:
Provided further that the State Chief Information Commissioner and the
State Information Commissioners appointed before the commencement of the
Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 shall continue to be governed by
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder as if the Right to
Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 had not come into force.".
4.  In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ca) the term of office of the Chief Information Commissioner and Information
Commissioners under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 13 and the State Chief
Information Commissioner and State Information Commissioners under
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 16;
(cb) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chief Information Commissioner and the Information Commissioners under
sub-section (5) of section 13 and the State Chief Information Commissioner and the
State Information Commissioners under sub-section (5) of section 16;".
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 27.

3
The above Bill is has been passed by the Houses of  Parliament.
Dated the Chairman.
————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.

A
BILL
to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—2164RS(S3)—29-07-2019.