1
THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Act, 2017.
Short title.
2. In section 17 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:
"Provided also that a police officer investigating into an offence referred to in
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall compulsorily inquire into and, as far as
possible, find out the sources of and the manner of acquiring the pecuniary resources
Short title.
Bill No. 182 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
section 17.
49 of 1988. 5

2
or property disproportionate to the known sources of income of a public servant and
the extent of role of other public servants in commission of such offence.".
3. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be
added at the end, namely:—
"Provided that where a decision regarding granting or withholding the previous
sanction is not taken within a period of four months from the date of seeking previous
sanction, the previous sanction shall, after the expiry of the said period, be deemed to
have been given by the Central Government or the State Government or the competent
authority, as the case may be.".
Amendment of
section 19.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, corruption is the biggest problem afflicting our country. It is difficult to
assess the extent of damage that corruption has done to our country. Corruption devalues
human rights and hampers growth. It is urgently required to put in place the strongest
possible laws to check corruption. At the same time, it is also equally important that these
laws are implemented in an effective manner. Increase in quantum of punishment to and fine
on people involved in corruption will be a step in that direction.
In various raids conducted during the past few years, some public servants including
those belonging to group 'C' and 'D' categories have been found to have amassed crores of
rupees which is beyond their known sources of income. These assets are alleged to have
been acquired through illegal gratifications. Thus, a provision should be made in the Act to
find out how and from where such assets were acquired by the public servants. Obtaining
prior sanction from the competent authority to initiate the process of prosecution against
public servants accused of corruption is a major stumbling block. There is a popular perception
in the country that necessary effort must be made to prevent corruption. It is therefore,
necessary that the process of sanctioning prosecution should be completed within a
stipulated time frame.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
July 5, 2017.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(49 OF 1988)
** * * *
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no
police officer below the rank,—
(a) in the case of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, of an Inspector of Police;
(b) * * * *
(c) * * * *
Provided that if a police officer not below the rank of an Inspector of Police is authorised
by the State Government in this behalf by general or special order, he may also investigate
any such offence without the order of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first
class, as the case may be, or make arrest therefore without a warrant:
Provided further that an offence referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 13
shall not be investigated without the order of a police officer not below the rank of a
Superintendent of Police.
19. ( 1) * * * *
(2) Where for any reason whatsoever any doubt arises as to whether the previous
sanction as required under sub-section ( 1) should be given by the Central Government or
the State Government or any other authority, such sanction shall be given by that Government
or authority which would have been competent to remove the public servant from his office
at the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed.
* * * *
.
Persons
authorised to
investigate.
Previous
sanction
necessary for
prosecution.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2090LS(S3)—23-10-2017.