AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SasHa ont

18 DECI992

Bill No 182 of 1992
eet ee

THE CENSUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992
A
BILL
further to amend the Census Act, 1948.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Census (Amendment) Act, 1992. Short
title
2. For section 2 of the Census Act, 1948 (herein referred to as the substitu-

3 principal Act), the following sections shall be substituted, namely:— = ie
mn 2.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions
(०) “premises” means any land, building or part of a build-
ing and includes a hut shed or other structure or any part
thereof;
10 (0) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(c) “vehicle” means any vehicle used or capable of being
used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by
mechanical power or otherwise.
ie 2A. Any reference in this Act to the Indian Penal Code, the "ule of con
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, “ete?
shall, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, be construed “sracimeris


‘not extend-
ing to
Jammu and
‘Kashmir,

Amend-
ment of
section 4,

Inser-
tion of
new sec.
tion 4A.

Staff of
every
Jocal
authori-
ty to be
made
avail
able for
taking
census.
Inser-
tion of
new sec.
tions 7A
to 7H,
Requisi-
tioning
premises,
vehicles,
etc. for
taking of a
eensus,

‘Payment
‘of Com-
pensa-
tton.

word “census officers”, the words “with such designations as that |
ernment may deem necessary” shall be inserted.

inserted, namely: —

be inserted, namely: — : 15

2

as a reference to the corresponding enactment in force in that
State’,

3. Ih section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the

4. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be

“4A. Every local authority in a State shall, when so directed
by a written order by the Central Government or by an authority
appointed by the Central Government in this behalf, make available, 1
to any Director of Census Operations such staff as may be necessary

for the performance of any duties in conngetion with the taking of
census.”,

5. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall

‘7A, (1) If it appears to the Central Government that, in con-
nection with taking of a census —

(a) any premises are needed or are likely to be needed, er

(0) any vehicle, vessel or animal is needed or is likely to be
needed, 26

that Government may by order in writing requisition such pre-
mises, or vehicle, vessel or animal, as the case may be, and make

such further orders as 7189 appear to it to be necessary or expedient
in connection with the requisitioning,

(2) The requisition shall be effected by an order in writing 25.
addressed to the person deemed by the Central Government to be
the owner or person in possession of the property, and such order
shall be served in the prescribed manner on the person to whom it
is addressed, ? ! er |

(3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under sub-section 3@_
(1), the period of such requisition shall not extend beyond the
Period for which such property is required for any of the purposes
mentioned in that sub-section. y

7B. (1) Whenever in pursuance of section 7A the Central
Government requisitions any premises, there shall be paid to the 35.
persons interested compensation the amount of which shall be
determined by taking into consideration the following, namely:—

@ the rent payable in respect of the premises or if no
“Tent is so payable, the rent payable for similar premises in
the locality;


10

15

20

25

30

BS

45

50

3 \

(ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the premises the

Rena interested is compelled to change his residence or place of

business, the reasonable expenses (if aiy) incidental to such change:
2 that where any person interested being aggrieved by the

७६ of compensation so determined makes an application within the
preseribed time to the Central Government for referring the matter to am
arbitrator; the amount of compensation to be paid shall be such as the
arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Central Government my
determine:

Provided further than where there is any dispute 2s to the title to
receive the compensation or as to the appointment of the amount of
compensation, it shall be referred by the Central Government to an
arbitrator appointed in this behalf by that Government for determination,
and shalj be determined in accordance with the decision of such arbitrator.

Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “person inte-
rested” means the person who was in actual possession of the premises
requisitioned under section 7A immediately before the requisition, or
where no person was in such actual possession, the owner ‘of such pre-
mises,

(2) Whenever in pursuance of section 7A the Central Government
requisitions any vehicle, vessel, or animal, there shall be paid to the owner
thereof compensation the amount of which shall be determined by the
Central Government on the basis of the fares or rates prevailing in the
locality for the hire of such yehicle, vessel or animal:

Provided that where the owner of such vehicle, vessel or animal
being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so determined makes a1
application within the prescribed time to the Central Government for
referring the matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation to be
paid shail be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Cen-
tral Government may determine:

Provided further that where immediately before the requisitioning
the vehicle ०7 vessel was by yirtue of a hire-purchase agreement in the
possession of a person other than the owner, the amount determined under
this sub-section 88 the total compensation payable in respect of the requi-
sition shall be apportioned between that person and the owner in such
manner as they may agree Upon and in default or agreement, in such
manner 9s an arbitrator appointed by the Central Government in this
behalf may decide.

7C. The Central Government may. with a view to requisition-
ing any property under section 7A or determining the compensation
payable under section 7B, by order, require any person to furnish
to such authority as may be specified in the order such information
in his possession relating to stich property 28 MAY pe so specified.
7D. (1) Any person authorised in this pehalé by the Central
Government may enter into any premises and inspect such premises
and any vehicle, vessel or animal therein for the purpose of deter-
mining whether, and if so in what manner, an order under section
TA should be made in relation to such premises, vehicle, vessel or

animal, or with a view to securing compliance with any order made
under that section.

(2) In this section, the Axpressions “premises” and “vehicle”
have the same meanings as in section 7A.

Power to
obtain
infor-
mation.

Powers of
entry
into and
inspec-
tion of
premises,
ete.


Eviction
from
requisi.
tioned
premises.

Release
of pre-

‘from re-
quisition

Delega-
tion of
functions
of the
Central
Govern-
ment
with.
regard to
requisition.
ing.
Penalty
for con-
traven-
tion of
any
order re-
garding
requisi-
toning.

4

TE. (1) Any person remaining in possession of any requisition-
€d premises in contravention of any order made under section 7A.
may be summarily evicted from the premises by any officer em
Powered by the Central Government in this behalf,

(2) Any officer so empowered may, after giving to any woman
not appearing in public reasonable warning and facility to with-
draw, remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door of
any building or do any other act necessary for effecting such evic-
tion,

TF. (1) When any premises requisitioned under section 7A are
to be released from requisition, the possession thereof shall be
delivered to the person from whom possession was taken at the time
when the premises were requisitioned, or if there were no such per-
son, to the person deemed by the Central Government to be the
owner of such premises, and such delivery of possession shall be a
full discharge of the Central Government from all liabilities in
respect of suc delivery, but shall not prejudice any rights in res-
pect of the premises which any other person may be entitled by
due process of law to enforce against the person to whom possession
of the premises is so delivered.

(2) Where the person to whom possession of any premises re-
quisitioned under section 7A is to be given under sub-section (7)
cannot be found or is not readily ascertainable or has no agent or
any other person empowered to accept delivery on his behalf, the
Central Government shall cause a notice declaring that such pre-
mises are released from requisition to be affixed on some conspicu-
ous part of such premises and publish the notice in the Official
Gazette. ||

(3) When a notice referred to in sub-section (2) is published
in the Official Gazette, the premises specified in such notice shall
cease to be subject to requisition on and from the date of such pub-
Heaton and be deemed to have been delivered to the person ene
litled to possession thereof, and the Central Government shall not
be liable for any compensation or other claim in respect of such
premises for any period after the said date

7G. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, direct that any powers conferred or any duty imposed on
that Government by any of the provisions of sections 7A to 7F
shall, under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the
direction, be exercised or discharged by such officer as may be
specified, y j

TH. If any person contravenes any order made under section
TA or section 70, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may_extend to one year or with fine or with both’.

T

=

10

5!

20

a

30

35


5

6. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the
words “State Government”, the words “Central Government” shall be
substituted.

7, In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the
5 words “State Government” at both the places where they occur, the
words “Census Commissioner” shall be substituted.

8, In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1).—

6) for part (a), the following parts shall be substituted,
namely: —
10 “(a) Any census officer or any person lawfully required
to give assistance towards the taking of census who refuses to
perform any duty imposed upon him by | this Act or any rule
made thereunder. or any person who hinders or obstructs
another person in performing any such duty, or
“(aa) any census-officer or any person lawfully required
to give assistance towards the taking of a census who neglects
to use reasonable diligence in performing any duty imposed upon
him or in obeying any order issued to him in accordance with
this Act or any rule made thereunder, or any person who hin-
20 ders or obstructs another person in performing any such duty or
obeying any such order, or”;
(ii) after part (०). the following part shall be inserted,
namely:—
(ca) any local authority which fails. to comply with an
25 order made under section 4A, or”;

(iii) for the brackets, letters and words “(b) or (20) shall
also be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six
months”, the brackets, letters and words “(a), (b) or (c) shall
also be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to

30 {hree years” shall be substituted.
9. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—

tof 1974. “42, Without prejudice to the provisions of section 197 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no prosecution under this Act
35 shall be instituted except with the previous sanction,—
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or was at the
time of commission of the alleged offence employed—
6) in a company, as defined in section 3 of the Compa-
hot 1086. nies Act, 1956, in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of
40 the paid-up capital is held by the Central Government or
any company which 18 a subsidiary thereof within the
meaning of that Act, or
(ii) by a corporation or a local authority established
by or under a Central Act which is owned or controlled by
45 the Central Government,

Amend.
ment of
section
a.

Amend~
ment of
seetion
10,

Amend-
ment of
section

Substitu-
tion of



Insertion
ofnew
section
134.

Certain
offences
tobe
cogniza-
able and
triable sum-
marily,

Amend.
ment of
section
14,

Insertion
of new
sections
15A and
158.

Protec-
tion of
service
interests
of mem-
bers of
census
staff.

Protec-
tion of
action
taken
in good
faith.

Amend-
ment of
section
का.

6

of the Central Government or of an authority authorised jn |
belialf by that Government; and “sen

.
(०) in the case of a person other than referred to in clause
(a) of the State Government”.

10. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall 5
be inserted, namely;—

“13A (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, no police officer or court shall take cog-
nizance of any offence under part (a), (b) or (०0 of sub-section (1)
of section 11, except upon information received from or on a com- 10
plaint made by, as the case be, the Director of Census Uperations
or any officer authorised by him in this behalf”.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1973, every offence punishable under part (a), (b) or
(० of subsection (1) of section 11 may be tried summarily.”. 15

Al. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words “Presidency
Magistrate or a Magistrate of the second class”, the words “Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class” shall be substituted.

12, After section 15 of the principal Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:— 20

“15A. No member of the census staff shall suffer any disability
in service by reason of his being on census duty and the period spent
by him on such census duty shall be deemed to be the duty under his
lending employer and any duty performed under this Act shall not
in any manner affect the right of promotion or other advancement in 25
his original service.

15B. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Census Commissioner or any Director of Census Opera-
tions or any sensus-officer or any member of the census staff for any-
thing which isin good faith done or intended to be done under this 30
Act or the rules made thereunder.”

13. In section 17 of the principal Act, for the opening portion
beginning with the words “The Census Commissioner? and
ending with the words “authorise in this behalf”, the words “Subject
to the provisions of section 15, the Census Commissioner or any Director 35
of Census Operations” shall be substituted. 2 हर



Af

44. After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall
% be inserted, namely: —

“17A. The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, extend the provisions of this Act, with such restrictions
5 and modifications as it thinks fit, to pre-tests, pilot studies, census of
houses which precede the population count and post enumeration
check and evaluation studies or statistical surveys or any other ope-
ration as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of census.”.

15. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words

10 “and providing for the manner of service of orders regarding requisi-

tioning of premises, or vehicles; vessel or animal and the time within

which the application may be made to it by any interested person agerie-

ved by the amount of compensation determined under section 7R for
referring the matter to an arbitrator” shall be added at the end.

inser-
tion of
new
section
174.

Power to
extend
the pro-
visions

of Act

to other
operations,

Amend-
ment of
section 18.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Population Census in India is normaliy conducted once in every 10
years under the Census Act, 194g. During the 1981 and 1991 Census
Operations it was experienced that the problems needing to be tackled
could not be coped with as per the existing provisions of the Act. Some
of these problems are the local authorities do not often readily agree te
make available the staff required for census work; the staff So appoint-
ed do not perform their duties seriously; the census officials are some-
times subjected to great pressure by organised movements to record
particular responses in respect of language or caste and there are difficul-
ties in procurement of vehicles and buildings for the conduct or census,
ete. Having regard to the aforesaid difficulties, it has been found neces-
sary to amend the Census Act with a view to—

(a) make it obligatory upon every local authority to make avail-
able the staff necessary for taking census,

(b) protect the legitimate service interests of the persons
deployed on census duty,

(c) to incorporate, for census purposes, certain provisions on
the lines of the Provisions of the Representation of the People’s Act,
1951 (43 of 1951) relating to requisitioning of premises or yehicles.

(@) specify enhanced penalties for certain offences such as
refusal of performance of duties by designated census officers or
causing of obstacle to any Person in performance of such duties or
putting any offensive or improper question or making false disclosure
or removing secreting, damaging or destroying the census docu-
ments. These are proposed io be made cognizable offences so that
such offences may he punished by imprisonment for a term up to
three years or fine or both, and

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

8. B. CHAVAN.
New Deum;

The 25th November, 1992,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert mew sections 7A to 7H in the
Census Act, 1948. The new section 7B provides for the payment to be
made by the Central Government for requisitioned premises, or vehicle,
vessel or animal, The expenses to be incurred in connection with pay-
ment of such compensation would be met from the Consolidated Fund
of India, Presently it is not feasible to estimate as to how much amount
will be required for meeting such expenses. The aforesaid expenditure
will be met from the budgetary grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs.

2. No expenditure of a non-recurring nature in involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

of order tegarding tequisitioning of premises, or vehicle, vessel or animal
and to prescribe the time within which the application is to be made
to it by any interested person aggrieved by the amount of compensation
for referring the matter to an arbitrator.

10


ANNEXURE
Exrracts rrom tHe Census Acr, 1948

(87 oF 1948)

* * * * *

2. Any reference in this Act to the Indian Penal Code or the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872, shall, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir,
be construed as a reference to the corresponding enactment in force in
that State.

* * a 2 *

4, (1) * #* * * *

(2) The State Government may appoint persons as census-officers to
take, or aid in, or supervise the taking of, the census within any specified
local area and such persons, when so appointed, shall be bound to serve
accordingly.

* * * * >

8. (1) A census-officer may ask all such questions of all persons. with-
in the limits of the local area for which he is appointed as, by instructions
issued in this behalf by the State Government and published in the
Official Gazette, he may be directed to ask.

* * * ES *

16. (1) Subject to such orders as the State Government may issue
in this behalf, a census-officer may, within the local area for which he
is appointed, leave or cause to be left a schedule at any dwelling-house
or with the manager or any officer of any commercial or industrial estab-
lishment, for the purpose of its being filled up by the occupier of such
house or of any specified part thereof or by such manager or officer with
such particulars as the State Government may direct regarding the in-
mates of such house or part thereof, or the persons employed under such
manager or officer, as the case may be, at the time of the ‘taking of the
census.

* * * * *

44. (1) (a) Any census-officer or any person lawfully required to
give assistance towards the taking of a census who refuses or neglects to
use reasonable diligence in performing any duty imposed upon him or in
obeying any order issued to him in accordance with this Act or any rule
made thereunder, or any person who hinders or obstructs another person
in performing any such duty or in obeying any such order, or

के कै * * *

it

Rule of
construc-
tion
respect-
ing enact-
ments
not ex-
tending to-
Jammu
and
Kashmir,

Appoint-
ment

of census
staff.

Asking of
questions
and
obligation
to answer,

Occupier
or

manager
to fill up
schedule.

Penalties,


12

shall be fully punishable with fine which may extend to one th
Tupees and in case of a conviction under part (9) or (०) shall
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months.

(2) Whoever abets any offence under sub-section (1) shall be p

able with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

Sanction 12. No prosecution under this Act shall be instituted except with

babar Previous sanction of the State Government or of an authority autho:
prosecuv™* in this behalf by the State Government.

* * * के .
Jurisdiction. 14. No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magis-

trate of the second class, shall try, whether under this Act or under any
other Jaw, any act or omission which constitutes an offence under this
Act. या

* * * * *

Grant of 17, The Census Commissioner or any Director of Census Operations

statistical or such person as the State Government may authorise in this behalf may,

abstracts. if he so thinks fit, at the request and cost (to be determined by him) of
any local authority or person, cause abstracts to be prepared and supplied
containing any such statistical information as can be derived from the
census returns for India or any State, as the case may be, being infor-
mation which is not contained in any published report and which in his
opinion it is reasonable for that authority or person to require.

Bower.to. 18. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the

make rules, PUrposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, the Central Government may make rules providing for the
appointment of census-officers and of persons to the form any of the duties
of ensus-officers or to give assistance towards the taking of a census, and
for the general instructions to be issued to such officers and persons.

* * * * *