Bill No. 182 of 2015
THE CLOSED TEXTILE MILLS WORKERS (WELFARE AND
REHABILITATION) BILL, 2015
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare and rehabilitation of workers of closed textile mills
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Closed Textile Mills Workers (Welfare and
Rehabilitation) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Authority" means the Closed Textile Mills Workers Welfare and Rehabilitation
Authority established under section 3;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "worker" means any person engaged by or working in a textile mill on the day
of its closure.
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be known as the Closed Textile Mills Workers Welfare
and Rehabilitation Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at Ahmedabad in the State of Gujarat.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person having knowledge of and professional
experience in the textile sector, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(b) a Deputy-Chairperson, having such qualification, as may be prescribed, to
be nominated by the Central Government;
(c) three members representing workers of closed textile mills;
(d) two members, other than workers representing closed textile mills;
(e) five Members of Parliament, of whom four shall be from Lok Sabha and one
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
and
(f) one member each representing the Union Ministries of Finance, Planning,
Labour and Employment and Textiles.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(3) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such officers and members of staff
with such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed from time to time by the
Central Government.
5. (1) Subject to such guidelines as may be issued by the Central Government, the
Authority shall work in coordination with the State Governments for overall welfare of
workers and their families.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Authority shall:—
(a) formulate welfare policies for the workers;
(b) provide all necessary assistance to the workers and their families for their
rehabilitation;
(c) provide for education of the children of the workers and assist them in
earning livelihood; and
(d) perform such other functions, as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government, from time to time.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year of
the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Fund to be
known as the Closed Textile Mills Workers Welfare Fund with a corpus of rupees three
hundred crores.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from individuals, organizations or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be managed by the Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
Establishment
of Closed
Textile Mills
Workers
Welfare and
Rehabilitation
Authority.
Composition
of Authority.
Authority to
work in
coordination
with the State
Governments.
Closed
Textile Mills
Workers
Welfare Fund.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
7. The expenses incurred on the welfare of the workers and their families shall be met
out of the Fund.
8. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament the
reports submitted to it under sub-section (1).
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Annual
Report.
Power of the
Central
Government
to remove
difficulties.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
5
15
10
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The history of cotton textile industry in India has been a chequered one. There was a
time when this industry had a place of pride in the national economy. In fact this industry
flourished till 1980. Ahmedabad in the State of Gujarat was known as the Manchester of India
because of its rich contribution to the textile industries. There were more than 125 textile mills
in Ahmedabad. The mills in Ahmedabad and in other parts of western India were catering to
the cotton grown throughout the country. In those days, the textile mill owners were pro-
people and pro-workers. Lakhs of workers were employed in those textile mills in various
departments. Majority of them were poor, backward, villagers and belonged to dalit
communities. The textile mill industry was the main identity of Ahmedabad. It ensured job
opportunities to all the workers and members of their families and hence enabled them to live
with dignity.
Unfortunately, in the decade of eighties, particularly after 1985, the textile mill industry
faced crisis and a number of mills were closed down due to several reasons. In due course,
the closure also affected many reputed textile mills throughout the country. Hence, a large
number of textile mills workers became unemployed. Their families faced lot of difficulties
due to their joblessness. Their living standard also deteriorated. A few half hearted attempts
were made to help them but unfortunately they are still living in poverty and jobless condition.
The most shocking factor in this crisis was that the majority of mill owners sold their
land where mills were situated thus earning hefty amount. But they took virtually no step to
ensure that at least part of the money is given to the workers, as majority of whom, were neck
deep in debt and living below the poverty line in inhuman conditions. In view of the miserable
conditions of these workers, it is the duty of the Government to take immediate remedial
measures. The Bill, therefore, seeks to establish an Authority to be known as the Closed
Textile Mills Workers Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority to provide social security and
other financial assistance to such workers. In this way, it is hoped, that the workers of closed
textile mills of Ahmedabad and other parts of the country will be saved from starvation,
frustration, unemployment and misery in their life.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
July 3, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Closed Textile Mills Workers
Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority. Clause 4 provides for composition of the Authority
and the salary and allowances to Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other members of
the Authority. Clause 6 provides for constitution of a Fund to be known as the Closed Textile
Mills Workers Welfare Fund for the welfare of workers of the closed textile mills. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—1436LS(S3)—16-07-2015.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare and rehabilitation of workers of closed textile mills and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)