Short title and Commencement.
 Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 182 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. Hൾൾඇൺ Vංඃൺඒ඄ඎආൺඋ Gൺ ඏංඍ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows :—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Amendment 
of the Seventh 
Schedule.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List II — State List, entry 5 shall be omitted; and
(ii) in List III — Concurrent List, after entry 47, the following entry shall be 
inserted, namely:—
“48. Local Government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of 
municipal corporations, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining 
settlement authorities and other local authorities for the purpose of local 
self-government or village administration.”.
3. In article 243F of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:—
“(1A) If any person is disqualified under sub-clause (a) or (b), of clause (1), that no 
bye-election shall be held and the person who had secured the second place at the 
previous election held shall be deemed to be elected as the member of a Panchayat:
 Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply if the remainder of the term of a 
member disqualified is less than one year.”.
4. In article 243-O of the Constitution, for clause (b), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:—
“(b) No election to any Panchayat or against any member of Panchayat shall be 
called in question except by an election petition presented before an Election Tribunal 
constituted for the purpose and in such manner as provided for by or under any law 
made by the Parliament.”.
5. In article 243V of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clause shall  be 
inserted, namely:—
“(1A) If any person is disqualified under sub-clause (a) and (b), then there shall be no 
requirement of bye-polls and such office shall be held by the person who was second 
with respect to number of votes received in the elections.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply if —
(a)  the remainder of the term of a member in relation to a vacancy is less 
than one year; or
(b) the State Election Commission in consultation with the State 
Government certifies that it is difficult to hold the bye election within the said 
period.”.
6. In article 243ZG  of the Constitution, for clause (b) the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:—
“(b) No election to any Municipality or against any member of Municipality 
shall be called in question except by an election petition presented before an Election 
Tribunal constituted for the purpose and in such manner as provided for by or under 
any law made by the Parliament.”
Amendment of 
article 243F.
Amendment of 
article 243-O.
Amendment of 
article 243V .
Amendment of 
article 243ZG.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India follows a quasi-federal system to ensure separation of power in vertical stratas 
of Government to ensure good governance and equal distribution of power, discretion and 
resources. The local Government consists broadly of the Panchayats at the Village Level and 
the Municipalities at the City and Town Level thus forming a 3rd tier of Governance and 
administration. The system was introduced to empower citizens and ensure accountability 
in resource and power distribution.
According to the Report of the 12th Finance Commission, India has 3723 Urban Local 
Bodies of which 109 are Municipal Corporation, 1432 are Municipalities and 2182 Nagar 
Panchayats. Furthermore, if we shift our view on the rural local bodies, there are total of 630 
Zila Panchayat, 6614 Panchayat Samitis and 2,53,163 of Gram Panchayats as of January, 
2019. The onus for making laws and regulations for the management and governance of 
local bodies and local governance is on the State Legislatures in accordance to PART IX and 
IX-A of the Constitution of India.
The need is to reform and streamline the procedure and redressal mechanisms of 
election to the aforementioned local bodies. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to:— 
(a) include Local Government and its constitution and administration under the 
Concurrent List of Seventh Schedule, thus making it the responsibility of both Union and 
State to make laws on the subject matter; 
(b) ensure that local administration runs in a smooth manner and the office held by the 
representative of the people is not left vacant and does not require bye-polls thus saving 
exchequers expenditure on the bye-elections, ultimately saving tax-payers money; and 
(c) introduce the system of  Election Tribunals which was abolished by to ensure that 
election petitions and disputes must be settled in a speedy manner which ensures effective 
local governance as well as reduces the burden     of the Judicial System.
Hence this Bill.
 
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;            HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GA VIT
    5 July, 2022

ANNEXURE
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Sൾඏൾඇඍඁ Sർඁൾൽඎඅൾ ඍඈ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ]
     *          *             *                 *                             *                      
List II—State List
5. Local Government, that is to say, the Constitution and powers of municipal 
corporations, improvement trusts, district boards, mining settlement authorities and other 
local authorities for the purpose of local self-government or village administration.
*          *             *                 *                             *                      
List III—Concurrent List
42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property
*          *             *                 *                             *                      
243F. (1)  A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member 
of a Panchayat— 
(a)  if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for 
the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned: 
                 Provided that no person shall  be  disqualified on  the ground tha  he  is  
         less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years; 
              (b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of   
  the State.
*          *             *                 *                             *                      
243-O. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— 
(a)     *             *                *  *            * 
(b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by an 
election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for 
by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.
*          *             *                 *                             *                      
243V . (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member 
of a Municipality— 
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in 
force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned: 
      Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less 
than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years; 
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of the 
State.
*          *             *                 *                             *                      
243ZG. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— 
  (a)  *             *                *  *            * 

 (b) no election to any Municipality shall be called in question except by an 
election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by 
or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.
*          *             *                 *                             *                      
    

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit, M.P .) 