As I:rraOD'C'ClIlD IN LOK SABRA ON 
Bll1 No. 183 of 1185 
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1985 
It. 
BILL 
further to amend t1&c Citizenshilp Act, 1950. 
WHEREAS f.or the purpose of giving effect to certain provisions of the 
Mem lrandum of Settlement relating to the foreigners' issue in Assam 
(Assam Accord) which was laid before the Houses of Parliament on the 
16th dl'.y of August, 1985 it is necessary to amend the Citizenship Act, 
5 1955; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship 
1985. 
(Amendment) Act, lJhort 
title 
ad 
10 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government eom-
mence-
meAt. 
57 ot 1955. 
15 
31 ot 1846. ~o 
may, by notification in the Offici a] Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal ,Inser-
Act), after section 6, the following section shall be inserted, namely: - tion of 
new 
section 
"6A. (1) For the purpo~es of this section-· 
(a) "Assam" means the territories included in the State of 
Assam immediately before the commencement of the Citizen-
ship (Amendment) Act, 1985; 
(b) "detected to be a foreigner" means detected to be a 
foreigner in accordance with the provisions of the Foreigners 
Act, 1946 and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1984 by • 
Tribunal constituted under the said Order; 
fA;. 
Spedal 
provision, 
as to 
c:iUzen-
ahipof 
perlOJ18 
covered 
by the 
Auam 
Aoeord. 

2 
(c) "specified territory" means the territories included in 
Bangladesh immediately before the commencement ot the Citi-
zenship (Amendment) Act, 1985; 
(d) a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin, if he, 
or either of his parents or any of his grandparents was born in 5 
undivided India; 
(e) a person shall be deemed to have been detected to be a 
foreigner on the date on whirh a Tribunal constituted under the 
Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 submits its opinIOn to the 
effect that he is a foreigner to the officer or authority concerned, 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6), and (7), all 
10 
persons of Indian origin who came before the 1st day of January, 
1966 to Assam from the specified territory (including such of those 
whose names were included in the electoral rolls used for the pur-
poses of the General Election, to thC7 House of the People held in 
1967) and who have been ordinarily resident in Assam since the dates 15 
of their entry into Assam shall be deemed to be citizens of India as 
from the 1st day of January, 1966. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sectioDS (6) and (7), every 
penon. !)f Indian orilin who-
(a) came to Assam on or after the lst da, ol January, 1966 20 
but before the 25th day of March, 1971 from ~ specified terri-
tory; and !. :". 
(b) has, since the date of his entry into Assam, been ordi-
narily resident in Assam; and 
(c) has been detected to be a foreigner; 
.hall re(lister himself in accordance with the rules made by the Cen-
tral Government in this, behalf UDder section 18 with luch authority 
(hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the registering authority) 
as may be specified in such rules and if his name is included in any 30 
eJectoral roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary constituency in 
force on the date "of such detection, his name shall be deleted there-
from. ,~-J~ jjI·ll:n,~ __ ·"' 
Explanation.-In the case of every person seeking registration 
under this sub-section, the opinion of the Tribunal constituted under 35 
the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 holding such person to be a 
foreigner, shall be deemed to be sufficient ·proof of the reqUirement 
under clause (c) of this sub-section and if any question arises as to 
whether such person complies with any other requirement under 
this Bub-section, the registering authority shal1,- 40 
(0 if such opinion contains 'a finding with respec~ to such 
other requirement, decide the question in conformity with 
such finding; '. 
(ii) if such opinion does not contain a finding with respect 
to such other requirement, refer the question to a Tribunal 45 
constituted under the said Order having jurisdiction in ac.ar-
dance with such rules as the Central Government may make in 
this behalf under section 18 and decide the question in confor-
mity with the opinion received on such reference. 

LOK SASHA 
CORRIGENDA 
tC" 
THE CIL~:ZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1985 
(To be/As introd :J"ced in L.I< S.abha) 
1. Page 2 I line 20,--
i2.;: "persons" ~_ .. " perst'ln" 
2. Page 4, line 10,-
aft~r "Assam" 1!l.~ "before the 1st January, 1966" 
3. Page 6, line 4.-
i!'.!. "before" ~ "after" 
NEW DELHI; 
Novbmber ~6. ~982 
Ka1~ika 2 • 1 07 CSaka} 

15 of 1987. 5 
10 
15 
20 
30 
35 
40 
31 of 1946. 
45 
a 
(4) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall hllve, as 
from the elate on which he has been detected to be a foreigner and 
till the expiry of a period of ten years from that date, the same 
rights and obligations as a citizen of India (including the right to 
obtain a passport under the Passports Act, 1967 and the obligations 
connected therewith), but shall not be entitled to have his name 
included in any electoral roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary 
constituency at any time before the expiry of the said period of ten 
years. 
(5) A person registered under sUb-section (3) shan be deemed 
to be a citizen of India for all purposes as from the date of expiry 
of a period of ten years from the date on which he has been detect-
ed to be a foreigner 
(6) Without prejudice tC' the prnvisions of section 8,-
(a) if any person referred to in sub-section (2) fubmits in 
the prescribed manner and form and to the prescribed authority 
within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citi-
zenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, a declaration that he does not 
wish to be a citizen of India, such person shall not be deemed to 
have become a dtizen 1)£ India under that sub-section; 
(b) if any person referred to in sub-section (3) submits in 
the prescrihed manner and form and to the prescribed autho-
rity within sixty days from th~ date of commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 or from the date on which 
he has been detected to be a foreigner, whichever is later, a 
declaration that he does not wish to be governed by the pro-
visions of that sub-section and sub-sections (4) and (5), it shall 
not be necessary ,for such person to register himself under sub-
~ection (3). 
E~lanation.-Where a person required to file a declaration 
under thi!'; sub-section does not have the capacity to enter into a 
contract, such declaration may be filed on his behalf by any person 
competent under the law for the time being in force to act on his 
behalf. 
'(7) Nothing in sub-sections (2) to (6) shall apply in relation to 
any person-
(a) who. immediately before the commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, is a citizen of India; 
(b) who was expelled from India before the commencement 
of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, under the Foreignen 
Act, 1946. 
(8) S3ve as otherwise e~pressly provided in this section, the 
provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstandin~ anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force,", 
3. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause ADiend-
(e), the following clause shall be inserted. namely: _ ment 
II (ep.) the manner And form in which and tht'" authority to 
whom decJarations referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section 
(Ii) of section 6A shall be submitted and other matters connected 
with such de~lliraftions;". 
of'sec-
tlon 18. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The core of the Memorandum of Settlement (Auam Accord) 
relates to the roreigners' issue, since the agitation launched by the 
A.A.S.U. arose out of their apprehensions regarding the continuing 
influx of foreign nationals into Assam and the fear about adverse effects 
upon the political, Bocial, cultural and e::'onomic life of the State. 
2. Assam Accord being a political settlement, legislation is required 
to give effect to the relevant clauses of. the Assam Accord relating to 
the foreigners' issue. I 
" .. :., . ," .. " 1',".' 
3. It is intended that all persons of Indian origin who came to Assam 
(im:luding luch of those whose names were included in the electoral 
rolls used for the purpose of Genera! Election to the House of the 
People held in 1967) and who have been ordinarily resident in Assam 
ever since shall be deemed to be citizens of India as from the 1st day 
of January, 1966. Further, every person of Indian origin who came 
on or after the 1st January, 1966 but before the 25th March, 1971 from 
territories presently included. in BaHgladesh and who has been ordinari-
ly resident in Assam ever since and who has been detected in 
accordance with the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 and the 
Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 shall, upon registratio.n, be deemed 
to be a citizen for all purposes as from the date of expiry of a perIOd ot 
ten years from the date of detection as a foreigner. It is also intended 
that in the intervening period of 10 years, these persons should not suffer 
from any other disability vis-a-vis citizens, excepting the right to vote 
and that proper record should be maintained of such persons. To inspire 
confidence, judicial element should be associated to determine eligibility 
in each and every case under this category. 
4. The Bill seeks to ar.oend the Cit\zenship Act, 1955 to achieve the 
above objectives. 
NEW DETJlI; ARUN NEHRU. 
The 15th November, 1985. 

FINANCIAL·. MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 6A in the Citizen-
IShip Act, 1955. Under sub-section (3) of the new section foreigners who 
came to Assam trom erstwhile East Pakistan, now Bangladesh on or 
after the 1st January, 1966 but before the 25th March, 1971 who are de-
tected in accordance with the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 and 
the F'oreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 have to be registered 
in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government in this 
behalf. As envisaged !n the Assam Accord, this will require strengthen-
ing of the machinery established for the purpose. This will involve 
some expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
not poss~ble at this stage to precisely quantify the expenditure t'1at is 
likely to be incurred on this account as this would depend upon the 
volume of the work which will be involved. As no prectse information 
as to the number of people who came in duting th;s period is available, 
it is not possible to estimate the volume of work of detection and 
registration. 
2. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring 
or non-recurring nature. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-section (3) of new section 6A as directed to be inserted by clause 
2 of the Bill in the Citizenship Act, 1955 requires that every person of 
Indian origin who has entered Assam on or before the 1st day of January, 
1966 but before the 25th day of March, 1971 from the territory now- com-
prised in Bangladesh and who has since the date of entry into Assam 
been ordinarily resident in Assam and who has been detected to be a 
!foreigner, should register himseU, in accordance with such rules as the 
Central Government may make with s~h authority as may be specifted 
in those rules. 
2. Sub-section (6) of the new section 6A seeks to enable a person who 
does not wish to be a citizen of India under the provisions of sub-section 
(1) of that section or, as the ('ase may be, to be ~verned by the provi-
sions of sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) of that section to submit a declara-
tion to that effect in the prescribed manner and form and to the prescrib-
ed authority. 
3. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to make necessary consequential amend-
ment in section 18 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 relating to the power to 
make rules. 
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the afore-
mentioned provisions pertain to matters of procedure and detail. The 
delegation of legis~ative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
6 

ANNEXURE 
Ex'DtA.CT FROM THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955 
(57 OF 1955) 
• • • • • • 
18. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the forego-
ing power, such rules may provide for-
• • • • • • 
7 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

LOK SABRA 
BILL 
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955. 
(Shri Arun Nehru, 
Minister of State in the 
Department of Internal 
Security.) 