Short title and 
commencement.
5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 182 of 2024
THE DIGITAL PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2024
By
Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Digital Personal Data Protection (Amendment) Act, 
2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In section 2 of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“ (f) child” means an individual who has not completed the age of sixteen years or 
such lower age not below thirteen years as the Central Government, for the purpose of 
the Act, notify;”.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, after clause (i), the following clause shall be 
inserted:—
“(j) for advancing and protecting the individual rights and best interest of children, 
gender minorities and persons with disabilities.
(k) for the transference, upon the request of the data subjects’ legal guardians or 
parents, as the case may be, to another authorized data fiduciary.”.
4. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (2) the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) A Data Fiduciary shall undertake only such processing of personal data 
of child which is in the best interest of the child, as may be prescribed based on the 
cognitive development levels.”; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:
“(3) The Central Government may, upon an assessment of factors pertaining to 
the best interest of children based on the cognitive development levels, including the 
nature of digital products or service and associated risks from processing personal 
data, restrict Data Fiduciaries from undertaking tracking, behavioural monitoring 
or targeted advertising, for certain prohibited purposes, directed at children.”;
(c) for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) shall not be applicable to a data 
fiduciary who undertakes a self-assessment to adhere to the best interest of the 
child in such manner prescribed.
(4A) The self-assessment under sub-section (4) may be presented to the Data 
Protection Board in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4) and ( 4A), the 
Central Government may approve any self-assessment practice submitted by 
an industry or trade association, an association representing the best interest of 
children, any sectoral regulator or statutory Authority, or any departments or 
ministries of the Central or State Government.”; and 
(d) in sub-section ( 5), for the words “sub-sections (1) and ( 3)”, the words  
“sub-section (1)” shall be substituted.
5. In section 40 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (j), the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ja) self-assessment process and the conditions relating to presentation of  the same to 
Data Protection Board under sub-sections (4) and (4A) of section 9; and
(jb) the manner and conditions to determine verifiably safe the personal data of children 
under sub -section (5) of section 9.”.
 
Amendment of 
section 2.
Amendment of 
section 7.
25
30
35
40
5
Amendment of 
section 9.
22 of 2023
10
15
20
Amendment of 
section 40.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 has been enacted to provide for the 
processing of digital personal data in a manner that recognises both the right of individuals 
to protect their personal data and the need to process such personal data for lawful purposes. 
However, the default stance within the legislation should assert that all entities designated 
as Data Fiduciaries (DFs) bear equivalent responsibilities when processing the data of 
children. These responsibilities are primarily oriented towards preventing any harm to the 
well-being of the child. Consequently, compelling reasons exist necessitating an amendment 
to adopt a more refined approach to safeguarding children’s privacy. Among these reasons 
are the pervasive low levels of digital literacy among children and an undue dependence on 
parental consent.
Estimates from the National Statistical Office (78th Round 2020-21) reveals that less 
than forty per cent. Indians know how to copy or move files on a computer, with an even 
lesser proportion having knowledge of internet use. The survey also found that digital 
literacy is better in lower age groups and reduces among older populations and is worse off 
in rural households, compared to urban ones. Despite this context, the proposed Bill relies 
on parental consent, assuming parents to be better placed to understand the potential risks 
of online data processing.
The proposed Bill curiously is willing to provide exemptions from parental consent 
requirements for certain DFs who will be certified as being ‘verifiably safe’, Such DFs 
will be permitted to process data of children above a certain age without having to obtain 
parental consent or complying with prohibitions on tracking and monitoring. This has two 
issues. It increases bureaucratic entanglement in the dynamic digital economy and is likely 
to affect innovation and incremental changes by platforms who seek to create more value 
for children using their products or services. It also discriminates among DFs who may 
be offering equally strong protections while processing children’s data, but may not have 
applied for the ‘verifiably safe’ certification, for reasons of resource constraints, limited 
administrative capacity, etc.
Across the world, technology platforms, who are DFs, have devised various means 
of protecting children’s interests on their platforms, with mechanisms for prediction, 
prevention, and remedying possible harms which may befall them. For instance, this includes 
mechanisms to track behavior and content posted by children, to review whether they are 
exposed to any content which may be promoting violence, self-harm, hate speech, etc., and 
which may be detrimental to their well-being. Instead of creating a healthy discourse around 
proactively preventing harm to children, the Bill takes refuge in the fact that it mandates 
parental consent. The Minister of State in an interview has also indicated the Government’s 
intention to push platforms towards ‘100% KYC’ of every user, meaning collection of KYC 
details of parents and of children. The underlying belief here is that once parents’ consent for 
their child to use a service, the imperative for further supervision on how the child uses the 
platform reduces. This not only dilutes the ‘data minimization’ principle, but also is likely 
to put children at immense risk of harm, and ought to be countered with serious urgency.
And lastly, the Bill’s approach also threatens the decisional autonomy of minors, 
especially of teenagers whose maturity can be reasonably distinguished from younger 
children. The proposed Bill’s approach will potentially also propagate existing gender biases 
and disadvantage young girls further, who tend to face hurdles in accessing digital devices in 
the first place, particularly in patriarchal setups. The proposal of age is directly contrary to 
various other policies and legislations like as being allowed to work from age 14 and drive 
a vehicle from age 16. The Cinematograph Act, 1952 also clearly distinguishes between 
3

the differing maturity levels of children of different age groups under 18 (7, 13 and 16). It 
would be wise if different laws addressing the same category of people i.e., children reflect 
the same level of nuance when assessing their maturity levels. A law regulating access to 
new age tech must be even more attuned to the needs and the agency of young users of the 
internet.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                              DR. T. SUMATHY (A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN  
November 13, 2024
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill vide proposed amendment to section 40 provides for the  
Central Government to make rules regarding self-assessment process and the conditions 
relating to presentation of the same to Data Protection Board under sub-sections (4) and 
(4A) of section 9 and the manner and conditions to determine verifiably safe the personal 
data of children under sub -section (5) of section 9 for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. 

ANNEXURE
[Extracts from the Digital Personal Data Protection (Amendment) Act, 2023]
*  *  *  *  * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) *  *  *  *  *
(f) “child” means an individual who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
*  *  *  *  *  
7. A Data Fiduciary may process personal data of a Data Principal for any of following 
uses, namely:—
(a) *  *  *  *  *
(h) for taking measures to ensure safety of, or provide assistance or services to, any 
individual during any disaster, or any breakdown of public order.
*  *  *  *  *
9 (1) *  *  *  *  * 
(2) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake such processing of personal data that is likely 
to cause any detrimental effect on the well-being of a child.
(3) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake tracking or behavioural monitoring of children 
or targeted advertising directed at children.
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) shall not be applicable to processing of 
personal data of a child by such classes of Data Fiduciaries or for such purposes, and subject 
to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government may, if satisfied that a Data Fiduciary has ensured that its 
processing of personal data of children is done in a manner that is verifiably safe, notify for 
such processing by such Data Fiduciary the age above which that Data Fiduciary shall be 
exempt from the applicability of all or any of the obligations under sub-sections (1) and (3) 
in respect of processing by that Data Fiduciary as the notification may specify.
*  *  *  *  *
40 (1) *  *  *  *  * 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) *  *  *  *  *
(j) the classes of Data Fiduciaries, the purposes of processing of personal data of a 
child and the conditions relating thereto, under sub-section (4) of section 9;
*  *  *  *  * *
6
Definitions.
Certain 
legitimate uses.
Processing of 
personal data of 
children.
Power to make 
rules.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. 
_______ 
(Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P .) 