THE WELFARE OF CRAFTSMEN AND ARTISANS BILL, 2016
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of craftsmen and artisans in the country
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Welfare of Craftsmen and Artisans Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “Board” means the Welfare Board constituted under section 3;
(b) “craftsmen and artisans” means persons engaged in craft of weaving,
kalamkari, banjara  embroidery, wood work, brass and bell metal, shawls, wood
carving, mat weaving, cane and bamboo textiles or leather work; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title, and
commencement.
Bill No. 182 of  2016
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Welfare Board for the welfare and protection of interests of
craftsmen and artisans in the country.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint a Chairperson and such other members to
the Board from amongst the craftsmen and artisans in the country in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowance payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board Shall —
(a) provide protection, help and assistance to craftsmen and artisans for
development of the art;
(b) make efforts to organise the craftsmen and artisans engaged in different
patterns of art under one forum;
(c) provide loans and financial assistance on such terms and conditions as may
be prescribed; and
(d) make such other provisions as it may deem appropriate for better working
conditions and other necessities of life for artisans and craftsmen.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both House agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of Welfare
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Overriding
effect to the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are nearly 48.22 lakh artisans and craftsmen living in different parts of the
country. They are scattered in different States and their welfare is not being looked after
properly by Governments. They do not have access to new technologies. The handicrafts
industry provides direct and indirect employment to nearly seventy-six lakh people in rural
areas. Therefore, it is necessary that the Government should promote and look after the
welfare of craftsmen, weavers and artisans and make provisions for improvement in their
living standards.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT RAJ
July 5, 2016

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Welfare Board for the welfare
and protection of the interests of all craftsmen and artisans in the country. It also provides
for the appointment of the Chairperson and members of the Board. Clause 4 provides that
Board shall provide loans and financial assistance as may be necessary to the needy
artisans and craftmen. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore will be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of craftsmen and artisans in the country
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1480LS(S3)—22-07-2016.