1
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 182 of  2018
THE PREVENTION OF ACID ATTACKS AND REHABILITATION OF
ACID ATTACK VICTIMS BILL, 2018
By
DR. KAKOLI GHOSH DASTIDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of acid attacks by surveillance over sale, supply and use of acid
or other such corrosive agents and rehabilitation of victims of acid attack and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Acid Attacks and Rehabilitation of Acid
Attack Victims Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "acid" means any substance which has acidic or corrosive character or
burning nature, that is capable of causing bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement
or temporary or permanent disability;
(b) "acid attack victim" means a woman on whom acid has been poured or
sprinkled with the intention of causing bodily injury or disfigurement and who, as a
consequence of such act, has suffered any bodily injury or disfigurement effected by
chemical action of the acid.
(c) "appropriate Government" means,—
(i) in relation to a Union territory, the Central Government; and
(ii) in relation to a State, the Government of that State; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
R
EGULATION OF TRADE, SALE, SUPPLY AND USE OF ACID
3. (1) Every person engaged in the business or trade of acid shall maintain records of
sale, purchase and supply of acid and its quantity, concentration and chemical composition.
(2) No person shall sell or otherwise deliver to a person an acid of higher concentration
than the prescribed degree for the intended use by such person.
(3) No person shall sell or otherwise deliver acid to a person without keeping a record
of his identity, the quantity of acid and the purpose for which the acid is to be used.
(4) Every person who sells or delivers acid to a person shall install CCTV for recording
and monitoring of sale process of acid.
4. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the
kinds and degrees of concentration of acid to be used for different purposes.
CHAPTER III
CONSTITUTION OF BOARD
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute
a Board to promote and undertake such rehabilitation and welfare measures, as it may
think fit, for the victims of acid attack throughout the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
rehabilitation and welfare measures may provide for—
(a) assessing the incidents of acid attacks in the country;
(b) payment of such compensation to victims of acid attack as may be prescribed;
(c) rehabilitation measures including employment in Government or its
organizations or providing facilities of self employment, thr.ough vocational
training; and
(d) such other facilities as may be prescribed.
(3) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a retired judge of the High Court as Chairperson; and
(b) five other members having such experience as may be prescribed,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that at least two members of the Board shall be women.
Definitions.
Regulation of
sale, purchase,
trade, or
supply of acid.
Classification
of acid
concentration
for different
purposes.
Constitution
of Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
REHABILITATION OF ACID ATTACK VICTIMS
6. Where an acid attack has caused substantial bodily harm to or resulted in
disfigurement of the victim, such victim shall be deemed to be person with disability for the
purposes of availing benefits under various schemes, including employment under the
Central Government, any State Government, any local body, autonomous bodies under any
Government or any public sector undertakings depending on percentage of burn or bodily
harm or disfigurement of the victim:
Provided that if the victim is incapable of employment,  reimbursement of expenditure
incurred on her medical treatment and compensation for rehabilitation shall be determined
by degree of burn or disability as prescribed by the Board.
CHAPTER V
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
7. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months or with fine which may
extend upto five lakh rupees or with both.
CHAPTER VI
A
MENDMENT OF THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
8.  In section 326A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code),
for the words "and with fine", the words "and with fine, which shall not be less than rupees
ten lakh" shall be substituted.
9. In section 326B of the Code, for the words "seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine", the words "ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees
three lakhs" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER VII
A
MENDMENT OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
10. In section 357C of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the following Explanation
shall be inserted at the end namely:—
"Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, any reconstructive procedures and
surgeries required shall be treated as medical treatment.".
11. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, under the heading
“I.- OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, in the entry relating to section 326B,
in column 3, for the words and number “which may extend to 7 years and with fine”, the
words and number “which may extend to 10 years and shall also be liable to fine which shall
not be less than rupees three lakh” shall be substituted.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
Acid attack
victims to be
treated as
persons with
disability in
certain cases.
Offences and
Penalties.
Amendment
of section
326A.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section
326B.
Amendment
of section
357A.
Amendment
of  the First
Schedule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40
2 of 1974.

4
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules. 5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is perturbing that there are certain forms of violence against women which emanate
from the medieval mindset of subjugation of women and still continues. One manifestation of
this mindset is incidents of acid attacks on women.
Though acid attack is a crime which can be committed against any man or women, it
has a specific gender dimension in India. Most of the reported acid attacks have been
committed on women, particularly young women for spurning suitors, for rejecting proposals
of marriage. Recently, there was a report in media of acid attack by husband on his wife.
Until 2013, there was no clear mechanism to ascertain the number of cases involving
acid attacks since the Indian Penal Code, 1860 did not recognise it as a separate offence. The
offence of acid attack was being dealt with under various sections of the Indian Penal Code
(IPC) and only estimates of figures of such attacks were available. The Criminal Law
(Amendment) Act, 2013 inserted new sections 326A and 326B in the Indian Penal Code and
made specific offences of hurt by use of acid.
Though cases of acid attacks on women have been witnessed for decades, the need to
address the legislative framework underlying the offence of acid attack was emphasised by
the Supreme Court in Laxmi versus Union of India. In this case, the court issued directions
inter alia regarding compensation to acid attack victims, effective regulation of sale of acid,
and free treatment of victims. Some of these guidelines have been incorporated in law. Still,
there is little clarity on issues such as penal provisions against dealers making unregulated
sales of acid, adequacy of the amount of compensation of victims, their status as persons
with disabilities, etc.
The Bill, with a view to facilitate rehabilitation of victims of acid attack inter alia
provides for—
(i) classification of acid on the basis of its intensity and concentration and to
prevent sale of acid of higher concentration for day-to-day purposes;
(ii) prohibition of sale of acid without verifying identity of the buyer and the
purpose of its use;
(iii) maintenance of proper records of stock, sales, supply, etc. of acid by dealers;
(iv) making unregulated sale of acid an offence punishable with six months
imprisonment and fine;
(v) treatment of acid attack victims as persons with disabilities for the purposes
of extending benefits under various schemes of the Governments, including employment
under the Central Government, State Governments or bodies thereunder;
(vi) increasing the maximum quantum of punishment for acid attack under section
326B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 to imprisonment for ten years;
(vii) stipulating the minimum amount of compensation for acid attack victims as
ten lakh in cases of grievous hurt and three lakh in other cases or such higher amount
as may be specified;
(viii) constitution of a Board to take rehabilitation and welfare measures for the
victims of acid attack; and
(ix) inclusion of reconstructive cosmetic surgeries and psychological counseling
to victims as part of medical treatment in case of acid attack.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KAKOLI GHOSH DASTIDAR
August 8, 2018.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Board to take appropriate and various
other rehabilitation and welfare measures for the victims of acid attack including payment of
compensation to the victims. Clause 6 provides for employment or facilities for self-employment
to the victims of acid attack. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give an estimate of recurring
or non-recurring expenditure involved since it would depend upon the number of eligible
acid attack victims. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of  one hundred
crore is likely to be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedure and details only and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * * * *
326A.Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns or maims
or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous hurt by
throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by using any other means with
the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such injury or hurt,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of
the treatment of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.
* * * * * * * * *
326B.Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to
administer acid to any person, or attempts to use any other means, with the intention of
causing permanent or partial damage or deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement or
disability or grievous hurt to that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * * * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
* * * * * * * * *
357C. All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government,
the State Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately, provide the first-
aid or medical treatment, free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under section
326A, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code, and shall
immediately inform the police of such incident.
* * * * * * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES
* * * * * * * * *
I. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
Section Offence Punishment Cognizable or Bailable or By what court
Non- Non-bailable triable
cognizable
123456
326B V oluntarily Imprisonment Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session
throwing or for 5 years but bailabale
attempting which may Session.
to throw acid. extend to
7 years and
with fine.
* * * * * * * * *
V oluntarily
causing
grievous hurt
by use of acid,
etc.
V oluntarily
throwing or
attempting to
throw acid.
Treatment  of
victims.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of acid attacks by surveillance over sale, supply and use of acid
or other such corrosive agents and rehabilitation of victims of acid attack and
matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1794LS(S3)—12-12-2018.