1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 183 of 2016
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF PSYCHOLOGY IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI CHANDRA PRAKASH JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of psychology in all educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Psychology in Educational
Institutions Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Advisory Council” means the Advisory Council for Psychology Education
constituted under section 6;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “educational institution” means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a
senior secondary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name
such institution is called but does not include a minority educational institution;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “psychology” means study of behaviour and mind, especially those affecting
mental characteristic or behaviour of a person or group.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the psychology shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational
institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on
the recommendation of the Advisory Council.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of psychology in all educational
institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such matters, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching psychology in educational Institutions.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of  the coming into force of
the Compulsory Teaching of Psychology in Educational Institutions Act 2016, by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Psychology Education.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having education,
special knowledge or practical experience in the field of psychology, as the Central
Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a)  recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of psychology education
for each class upto senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the
psychology shall be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching psychology;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in psychology education for the purpose of
their appointment in educational institutions; and
(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities with
a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize an educational institution which do
not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such instituton a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
Compulsory
teaching of
psychology in
educational
Institutions.
Appointment
of Psychology
Teachers.
Functions of
Advisory
Council.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
psychology in
educational
Institutions.
Constitution
of Advisory
Council for
Psychology
Education.
Derecognition
of educational
institution for
non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effects of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Psychology is the science of behaviour and congnitive processes. It is a field that
seeks to obtain scientific information on everything human think, feel or do. The human mind
is not static. It is always changing. Psychology is not merely study of as common sense,
it provides sophisticated answers to complex questions about behaviour.
To understand human mind and behaviour, every person must have to know how
human mind functions in everyday life. Through the study of psychology, students work to
understand the complex mental processes that dictate human actions. Along with presenting
an interesting academic challenge, psychology has a host of applicable uses. Those who
dedicate themselves to the study of this discipline will find that they are able to apply their
understanding of human behaviour to numerous situations and use their knowledge in their
everyday life.
Current education system in schools lay emphasis on imparting quality education.
However, our current educations is missing out on psychology education and is, therefore,
incomplete without it.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for making psychology education compulsory in
all educational institutions right from primary school level to senior secondary level in order
to make it a part of school curriculum.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRA PRAKASH JOSHI
July 1, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of psychology education teachers in all
schools. Clause 6 provides for constitution of Advisory Council for psychology education
by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds to the State for
carrying out the purpose of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give exact estimate of
expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted into a law. However, it is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores will be involved per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of psychology in all educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1483LS(S3)—22-07-2016.