5
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 183 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Kඎඇඐൺඋ Pඎඌඁඉൾඇൽඋൺ Sංඇ඀ඁ Cඁൺඇൽൾඅ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2.  In the article 25 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:—
  ‘‘Provided that no person or religious organisation shall—
Short title and commencement.Amendment of article 25.

  ( a) convert any person professing any religion to other religion by way of force, 
fraud, greed or ensnare; and
  ( b) indulge in violence even if there are ideological differences with the religion of 
others.”.
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
  The basic idea of Indian philosophy of life is peace and this idea has been an integral 
part of Indian political theory since ancient times. Though modern political theories describe 
the personal relations of the individuals and relations of the individual and the State, yet, the 
relation between the human being and the God is beyond the extent of political thinking. The 
Constitution of India provides freedom to all individuals to follow their respective religions 
and also to propagate their own religion. However, if the religious communities use force, 
fraud, greed or ensnare to convert the followers of other religions, it is likely to create a threat 
to public peace and the country will derail from the path of economic development. Indian 
culture is based on harmonious co-existence and it respects all religion but pronouncing only 
one religion as apt and causing problems and indulging in violence in front of followers of 
other religion is neither moral nor constitutional. Hence, this is the duty of the State to check 
such potential threats so that the followers of all religions may live in a cordial environment.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං; SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
4 July, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ Fඋඈආ Tඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ
* * * *
 25. (1) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of this 
Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, 
practice and propagate religion. 
* * * *
 
Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion.
4

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
 
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .) 