45
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE PERSONAL DA TA AND INFORMATION PRIVACY CODE BILL, 2019
By
DR. D. RA VIKUMAR, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
RIGHT TO PRIV ACY
3. Principles applicable to protecting privacy.
4. Right to privacy.
5. Exemption to this Act.
CHAPTER III
P
ROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA
PART A
NOTICE BY DATA CONTROLLERS
6. Transparency in form and substance in all communications by Data Controllers.
PART B
CONSENT OF DATA SUBJECTS
7. Prior consent necessary to the collection of data.
8. Special provisions in respect of data subjects lacking legal capacity to give consent.
9. Special provisions in respect to the processing of personal data of children.
10. Special provisions in respect of data subjects unable to give consent.
11. Collection of personal data.
12. Collection of personal data without prior consent.
13. Special provisions in respect of data collected prior to the commencement of this
Act.
PART C
F
URTHER LIMITA TIONS ON DATA CONTROLLERS
14. Bar on denial of subsidies, benefits and entitlements.
15. Storage and destruction of personal data.
16. Processing of personal data.
17. Security of personal data and duty of confidentiality.
Bill No. 183 of  2019

18. Transfer of personal data outside the territory of India.
19. Disclosure of personal data.
20. Special provisions for sensitive personal data.
21. Special provisions for data impact assessment.
PART D
R
IGHTS OF A DATA SUBJECT
22. Right to access for data subject.
23. Right to rectification for data subjects and obligations of data controllers.
24. Right to destruction of personal data.
25. Right to restriction of processing.
26. Right to object.
27. Right to portability of personal data.
28. Right to seek exemption from automated decision-making.
CHAPTER IV
I
NTERCEPTION AND SURVEILLANCE
29. Special provisions for competent organizations.
30. Bar against interception of communications.
31. Prior authorisation by the appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division.
32. Authorisation by the Home Secretary in emergent circumstances.
33. Duration of interception.
34. Duty to inform the person concerned.
35. Security and duty of data security and privacy.
36. Disclosure of intercepted communications.
37. Storage and destruction of intercepted communications.
38. Bar against surveillance.
39. Surveillance by the State.
40. Surveillance by private persons or entities.
41. Duration of surveillance.
42. Duty to inform the person concerned.
43. Security and duty of confidentiality and secrecy.
44. Disclosure of surveillance.
45. Storage and destruction of surveillance.
46. Exception regarding reporting of violation of provisions of this Act.
CHAPTER V
T
HE PRIV ACY COMMISSION
47. Constitution of the Privacy Commission.
48. Appointment and Qualifications of Privacy Commissioners of Privacy Commission.
49. Composition of the Office for Data Protection of the Privacy Commission.
50. Composition of the Office for Surveillance and Interception Reform of the Privacy
Commission.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

51. Officers and other employees of the Privacy Commission.
52. Term of office, conditions of service, etc. of Privacy Commissioners and Offices
constituted under the Commission.
53. Removal of Chief Privacy Commissioners and Privacy Commissioners.
54. Functions of the Privacy Commission.
55. Salaries, etc. to be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
56. Vacancies, etc. not to invalidate proceedings of the Privacy Commission.
57. Chief Privacy Commissioners, Privacy Commissioners and employees of the Privacy
Commission to be public servants.
58. Location of the Privacy Commission.
59. Jurisdiction of the Privacy Commission.
60. Procedure to be followed by the Privacy Commission.
61. Power relating to inquiries.
62. Decisions of the Privacy Commission.
63. Proceedings before the Privacy Commission to be judicial proceedings.
64. Appeals.
CHAPTER VI
S
TATE PRIVACY COMMISSIONS
65. State Privacy Commissions.
66. Jurisdiction of the State Privacy Commissions.
67. Appeals.
68. Procedure.
69. Power to make rules.
CHAPTER VII
S
URVEILLANCE AND INTERCEPTION REVIEW DIVISIONS
70. Surveillance and Interception Review Divisions.
71. Appointment, terms of service, etc.
72. Jurisdiction of the Surveillance and Interception Divisions.
73. Appeals.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
74. Punishment for offences related to personal data.
75. Punishment for offences related to interception of communication.
76. Punishment for offences related to surveillance.
77. Abetment and offenders.
78. Offences by companies.
79. Cognizance.
80. General penalty for failure to comply with notice or order issued under this Act.
81. Punishment to be without prejudice to any other action.
(iii)
C
LAUSES

CLAUSES
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
82. Power to make rules.
83. Bar of  jurisdiction.
84. Protection of action taken in good faith.
85. Power to remove difficulties.
86. Act to have overriding effect.
S
CHEDULE
(iv)

1
THE PERSONAL DA TA AND INFORMATION PRIVACY CODE BILL, 2019
By
DR. D. RA VIKUMAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish an effective regime to protect, promote and fulfil the fundamental right to
privacy of all natural persons and protect personal data concerning them, to set out
conditions upon which surveillance of natural persons and interception of
communications may be carried out, to constitute a Privacy Commission,
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the right to privacy is an inalienable fundamental right of all natural persons
indispensable to the preservation of human dignity, personal autonomy and the exercise of
constitutional liberties;
A
ND WHEREAS the need to protect privacy has only increased in the digital age, with the
emergence technologies such of big data analytics;
AND WHEREAS the delivery of goods and provision of services often entails the
collection, storage, processing and disclosure, including international transfers of personal
data;
Bill No. 183 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS good governance requires that all interception of communications and
surveillance must be conducted with due process strictly in accordance with law, in
consonance with the rights to freedoms and privacy under Part III of the Constitution and
only upon establishing the need for the same;
A
ND WHEREAS it is necessary to harmonise any conflicting interests and competing
legislation;
NOW, THEREFORE, it is expedient to provide for an enforceable means to protect the
informational privacy of natural persons.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follow:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Personal Data and Information Privacy Code Act,
2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it
applies also to any offence or contravention hereunder committed outside India by any
person, wherever located.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aggregate”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, in
relation to personal data, means adding, removing, filtering, mixing, combining or
recombining records of data;
(b) “anonymise” means, in relation to personal data, the irreversible removal or
alteration of all data that may, whether directly or indirectly in conjunction with any
other data, be used to identify a natural person or data subject;
(c) “appropriate Government” means, in relation to the Central Government or a
Union territory Administration, the Central Government; in relation to a State
Government, that State Government; and, in relation to a public authority which is
established, constituted, owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds provided
directly or indirectly:—
(i) by the Central Government or a Union territory Administration, the
Central Government;
(ii) by a State Government, that State Government;
(d) “authorised officer” means an officer of a competent organization, not below
the rank of a Gazetted Officer of an All India Service or a Central Civil Service, as the
case may be, who is empowered by the Central Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette, to intercept the communications of another person or carry out any
surveillance of another person under this Act;
(e) “biometric data” means any data relating to the physical, physiological or
behavioural characteristics of a natural person which allows the verification or
authentication of that person's identity including, but not restricted to, facial images,
fingerprints, hand prints, foot prints, iris recognition, handwriting, typing dynamics,
gait analysis and speech recognition;
(f) “Chief Privacy Commissioner” and “Privacy Commissioner” mean the Chief
Privacy Commissioner and Privacy Commissioners appointed under section 48;
(g) “collect”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means, in
relation to personal data, any action or activity that results in a person obtaining, or
coming into the knowledge or possession of, any personal data of another person,
whether directly or indirectly;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(h) “communication” means a word, signs, gestures, spoken, written or indicated,
in any form, manner or language, encrypted or unencrypted, meaningful or otherwise,
and includes visual representations of words, ideas, symbols and images, and the
metadata in relation whether transmitted or not transmitted and, if transmitted,
irrespective of the medium of transmission;
(i) “competent organisation” means an or ganisation authorised by an Act of
Parliament to carry out surveillance and/or interception, and includes a public authority
as listed in the Schedule.
(j) “consent” means it is free, informed and unambiguous indication of a data
subject's agreement;
(k) “data” means shall have some meaning as assigned in it section 2(o) of the
Information Technology Act, 2000;
(l) “data controller” means any person including appropriate Government who,
either alone, or jointly, or in concert with other persons, determines the purposes for
which and the manner in which any personal data is processed;
(m) “data processor” means any person including appropriate Government who
processes any personal data on behalf of a data controller;
(n) “data subject” means a natural person who is a citizen under the  Citizenship
Act, 1955 or who has resided in India for a period of one hundred and eighty two days
or more in the twelve months preceding the previous year.
(o) “deoxyribonucleic acid data” means all information, of whatever type,
concerning the characteristics of a natural person that are inherited or acquired during
early prenatal development;
(p) “destroy”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means,
in relation to personal data, to cease the existence of, by deletion, erasure or otherwise,
any personal data which becomes irretrievable in whole or in part, including information
about the existence of such data itself;
(q) “disclose”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means,
in relation to personal data, any action or activity that results in a person coming into
the knowledge or possession of any personal data of another person;
(r) “interception” or “intercept” means any activity intended to capture, read,
listen to or understand the communication of a person;
(s) “officer-in-charge of a police station” shall have the meaning ascribed to it
under clause (o) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(t) “person” includes a natural person or legal person including a company, a
firm, an association of persons, a public authority or a body of individuals, wherever
located, whether incorporated or not;
(u) “personal data” means any data which relates to a natural person if that
person can, whether directly or indirectly in conjunction with any other data, be identified
or identifiable from it and includes sensitive personal data:
Provided that the term “personal data” shall not include data which is a matter of
public record except details of victims in cases of sexual assault, kidnapping or
abduction.
(v) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules and regulations made under this Act;
(w) “Privacy Commission” means the body constituted under sub-section (1) of
section 47;
(x) “Privacy Officer” means the Privacy Officer designated under sub-section (3)
of section 36 and sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 43;
21 of 2000.
57 of 1955.
2 of 1974.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

4
(y) “process”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means,
in relation to personal data, any action or operation which is performed upon personal
data of another person, whether or not by automated means including, but not restricted
to, collection, aggregation, organisation, structuring, adaptation, modification, retrieval,
consultation, use, alignment or destruction;
(z) “public authority” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (h) of
section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005;
(za) “receive”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means,
in relation to personal data, to come into the knowledge or possession of any personal
data of another person;
(zb) “sensitive personal data” means data or metadata as to a person's—
(i) biometric data;
(ii) deoxyribonucleic acid data;
(iii) identification number, or any identity attributes;
(iv) location data;
(v) sexual preferences and practices;
(vi) medical history and health information;
(vii) political affiliation or opinions;
(viii ) present and past membership of a political, cultural, social
organisations including but not limited to a trade union as defined under
section 2(h) of the Trade Union Act, 1926;
(ix) ethnicity, religion, race or caste; and
(x) financial and credit information, including financial history and
transactions except in cases of public officials or when such information is
considered as a public record or its disclosure is made under any law.
(zc) “State Privacy Commission” means the body constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 65;
(zd) “Surveillance and Interception Review Division” means the bodies
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 70;
(ze) “store”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means, in
relation to personal data, to retain, in any form or manner and for any purpose or
reason, any personal data of another person;
(zf) “surveillance” means any activity, directly or indirectly intended to watch,
monitor, record or collect, or to enhance the ability to watch, record or collect, any
information, images, signals, data, movement, behaviour or actions, of a person, a
group of persons, a place or an object, for the purpose of obtaining information about
a person and their private affairs, including:
(i) directed surveillance that is covert surveillance undertaken for a specific
investigation or operation even if the person surveilled was not specifically
identified in relation to the surveillance operation;
(ii) inclusive surveillance which is covert surveillance carried out by an
individual or surveillance device in relation to anything taking place in any
private premises or private vehicle;
(ii) covert human intelligence gathering which is information obtained by
a person who establishes or maintains a personal or other relationship with a
person for a covert purpose of using it to obtain access to any personal
information about that individual;
22 of 2005.
16 of 1926.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

5
(iv) surveillance undertaken through installation and use of CCTV and
other system which capture audio-visual information to identify or monitor
individuals; but does not include collection of personal data under sections 7,
11 and 12.
(2) All other words expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the General
Clauses Act, 1897 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as the case may be, shall have the
same meanings as assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
R
IGHT TO PRIV ACY
3. In exercising the powers conferred by this Act, regard shall be had to the following
considerations, namely:—
(1) that the right to privacy is a fundamental right essential to the maintenance of
a democratic, open society and is recognised as a fundamental human right mentioned
in Part III of the Constitution and in international treaties to which India is a party;
(2) that personal data with its attributes belongs solely to the natural person to
whom it pertains who are referred to as the data subjects for the purposes of this Act;
(3) that personal data of data subjects shall be processed fairly and lawfully and
in no circumstance shall be processed unless the conditions under this Act are met
and subject to conditions under this Act are fulfilled;
(4) that intrusions into privacy shall, be for lawful purposes, measured by principles
of legality, necessity and proportionality;
(5) that unless as otherwise expressly provided the consent of data subject for
a specific purpose shall be a mandatory condition prior to storage and processing of
his personal data;
(6) that personal data is required by data controllers, and data processors, to
enable good governance and the delivery of goods and provision of services without
undue delay which may be provided by a meaningful, revocable and accountable
notice and consent framework;
(7) that the right to privacy shall not be used to limit or fetter the fundamental
right to freedom of speech and expression of journalists and the press or accountability
of the Government and public institutions under the Right to Information Laws;
(8) that privacy shall be upheld by a statutory body which is independent,
impartial, well resourced and free from influence and extraneous pressure.
4. (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained herein, all natural
persons shall have a right to privacy which shall be implemented as per principles laid down
in section 3.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1) no person shall collect, store, process, disclose
or otherwise handle any personal data of a natural person, intercept any communication of
another person or carry out surveillance of another person except in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
5. Nothing in this Act shall apply to —
(1) the collection, storage, processing or dissemination of his own personal data
by a natural person; or
(2) surveillance by a resident of his own residential property, or
(3) subject to obtaining the Privacy Commission's exemption under sub-section
(3) of section 16, the collection, storage or processing of anonymised data for non-
commercial purposes or by any entity for academic, journalistic, research, statistical or
archival purposes as required under the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
10 of 1897.
2 of 1974.
Principles
applicable to
protecting
privacy.
Right to
privacy.
Exemption.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

6
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “non-commercial purposes”
means permissible acts and omissions done in public interest which may be prescribed
by the Privacy Commission through processes of public consultation with due regard
to academics, civil society, experts and professional bodies.
CHAPTER III
P
ROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA
PART A
NOTICE BY DATA CONTROLLERS
6. (1) All communications by data controllers shall be complied with in the following
manner:
(a) in a concise, transparent, intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear
and plain language, graphics and illustrations in particular for any information addressed
specifically to a person below thirteen years of age;
(b) information shall be provided in writing, or by other means, including, where
appropriate, by electronic means and when requested by the data subject, may be
provided orally when deemed appropriate as per regulations that may be made by the
Privacy Commission;
(c) requests for information by data subjects to data controllers shall be complied
with promptly, ideally within a period of two working days noting acknowledgment of
receipt and communicating the timelines for compliance that shall have a limit of one
month from the date of receipt of the request for information:
Provided that all communications by the data controllers including but not limited
to the rights of data subjects under this Part may be refused when the data controller
may refuse to supply information to a data subject if he is unable to identify or has a
well founded basis for reasonable doubt as to the identity of the data subject or are
manifestly unfounded, excessive and repetitive, with respect to the information sought
by the data subject:
Provided further that the data controller shall, while refusing to part away any
information under foregoing provisions, provide reasons thereof;
(d) if the data controller refuses or fails to provide information, he shall specify
reasons thereof along with remedies including appeal as provided under provisions of
this Act.
(e) information shall include with a specific reference to the rights and remedies,
include availability of measures for rectification, restriction and erasure as provided to
data subjects under this Act.
(2) The Privacy Commission, shall take special measures to ensure that information to
be provided by the data controllers is accessible to all data subjects, including those who -
(a) are illiterate;
(b) suffer impaired or total lack of vision or hearing; and
(c) fall into any other category requiring special measures, as may be prescribed
by the Privacy Commission:
Provided that, in case of any dispute, ambiguities in the terms of the notice and
any privacy policies that apply shall be resolved in favour of the data subject.
(3) The Privacy Commission may frame regulations to ensure compliance by data
controllers of the rights to transparency and modalities of data subjects.
Transparency
in form and
substance in
all
communications
by data
controllers.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

7
PART B
CONSENT OF DATA SUBJECTS
7. (1) Every Data Controller shall collect data from a data subject with his prior consent.
(2) The consent of a data subject under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been
validly effected only if it is —
(a) obtained from a person competent to contract in terms of section 11 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872;
(b) obtained in a free manner, in the terms of section 14 of the Indian Contract
Act, 1872;
(c) informed and made with full knowledge of risks involved and the alternatives
available;
(d) obtained prior to all data collection, except in the cases expressly excluded by
section 12;
(e) voluntarily given through an express and affirmative Act and is recorded in
modes including writing, audio, and visual media, which may be used in isolation or in
conjunction;
Provided that effective consent shall be deemed to have been obtained where
the written declaration of consent was given in a manner where it also concerned other
matters, the request for consent shall be presented in a manner that is clearly
distinguishable from the other matters in an intelligible and easily accessible form,
using clear and plain language;
(f) a conspicuous means for its withdrawal is made available to the data subject;
and
(g) withdrawn by the same means which were employed to obtain consent;
(3) Obtaining consent of data subject for specific and limited as to purpose and duration,
and;
(4) Obtaining consent of data Subject for collection of data in a manner as prescribed
by the Privacy Commission.
Explanation 1.— Consent shall be deemed to be limited only if it is obtained in respect
of the purposes and duration strictly necessary to provide the product or service in relation
to which personal data is sought to be collected, processed or disclosed.
Explanation 2.— When the purposes for which personal data was collected are
materially altered or expanded subsequent to its collection, consent shall be deemed to be
specific only if it is obtained afresh in respect of that alteration or expansion—
(a) after duly informing the data subject of the alteration or expansion in purpose;
and
(b) prior to any use of that data for such expanded purposes; and
(c) in a manner as prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
8. (1) The consent in relation to personal data relating to data subject of unsound mind
shall be effective only if it is obtained from a legal guardian, or such other person expressly
empowered to act on behalf of such data subject under any law for the time being in force, or
if it is in consonance with decision making capacity as laid down in section 4 of the Mental
Healthcare Act, 2017:
Provided that where the unsoundness of mind is temporary, the data subject shall
entitle to withdraw consent given on his behalf during the period of such unsoundness of
mind.
Prior consent
necessary to
the collection
of data.
Special
provisions in
respect of
data subjects
lacking legal
capacity to
give consent.
10 of 2017.
9 of 1872.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

8
(2) The consent in relation to personal data relating to data subjects of any other class
of natural persons identified by the Privacy Commission shall be effective only if it satisfies
all conditions set out in rules framed by the Privacy Commission.
(3) All rights and entitlements conferred on data subjects under this Act shall be
deemed to accrue to data subject as per consent on behalf of such persons.
Explanation.—Where no person acting on behalf of a data subject falling into any of
the classes covered by this section can be identified despite the best efforts of the data
controller or data processor, the State Privacy Commission, being accountable in a fiduciary
capacity to the data subject, shall Act on behalf of such data subject.
9. (1) The processing of personal data of a child by a data controller or data processor
shall be lawful if it is in a manner that does not violate the stipulations prescribed in this
section.
(2) In respect of minors below the age of thirteen years, consent is to be obtained from
a parent, legal guardian, or such other person acting in loco parentis as the case may be, after
the minor is informed by the data controller in a simple and explanatory manner of the need
for care in handling data concerning himself.
(3) Upon attaining age of majority, the data subject shall be entitled to:—
(a) be duly informed of the terms upon which personal data relating to his has
been collected;
(b) alter or rescind the terms on consent; and
(c) require the destruction of all personal data relating to his.
(4) The data controller or data processor shall make reasonable efforts, proportionate
to the available technologies, to ensure that notice of the fiduciary's activities is served to
the parent or legal guardian of a child of the processing of personal information of a child.
(5) The notice under sub-section ( 4) shall be provided in the same manner for any
material changes to processing priorly consented to.
(6) The data controller or data processor shall make reasonable efforts, proportionate
to the available technologies in obtaining verifiable parental consent.
(7) The Data Fiduciary shall adopt appropriate methods for verifying parental consent
on the basis of the following factors:—
(a) volume of personal data processed;
(b) proportion of such personal data likely to be that of children;
(c) possibility of harm to children arising out of processing of personal data; and
(d) such other factors as may be relevant.
(8) The existing methods to obtain verifiable parental consent may include but not
limited to—
(a) in making available a consent form to be signed by the parent and returned to
the operator by postal mail, facsimile, electronic scan or through other means available;
(b) permitting the use of a credit card/debit card/other online payment means
with further verification through a confirmation call/other means to a parent/legal
guardian/other for the purpose of a monetary transaction;
(c) obtaining consent through a parent confirmation call on a toll-free telephone
number staffed by trained personnel;
(d) obtaining consent through a parent confirmation call to a trained personnel
via video-conference:
Provided that, a data controller or data processor that does not disclose a child’s
personal information may use email or an inbuilt messaging function with additional steps to
confirm that the person providing the consent is the parent:
Special
provisions in
respect to the
processing of
personal data
of children.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

9
Provided further that the information shall be provided to the parent so that consent
may be revoked by using the same or other means in the future.
(7) The data controllers or data processors shall ensure that there is no profiling,
tracking, or behavioural monitoring of, or targeted advertising directed at children and
undertaking any other processing of personal data that may cause significant harm to the
child.
10. (1) The consent in relation to personal data relating to data subjects who are
competent but temporarily unable due to any reason or circumstances to give consent shall
be effective only if such consent is obtained in relation to purposes which are strictly
necessary to uphold or advance the interests of the data subject or to the interests of the
public, and the following conditions are fulfilled:—
(a) in respect of data subjects who are declared missing under law and for the
period they are missing, it is obtained from their nearest living relative, and where all
reasonable means to contact their nearest living relative have been demonstrably
exhausted, it is obtained from any person legally empowered to act on their behalf, or
as a last resort, the appropriate State Privacy Commission in whose jurisdiction he was
last resident;
(b) in respect of data subjects who are detained, where all reasonable means to
contact them, their nearest living relative have been demonstrably exhausted, it is
obtained from any person legally empowered to act on their behalf, or as a last resort,
the appropriate State Privacy Commission in whose jurisdiction he was last resident;
(c) in respect of data subjects who are temporarily incapable for medical reasons
and for the duration of their temporary incapacity, it shall be obtained from their
nearest living relative, and where all reasonable means to contact their nearest living
relative have been demonstrably exhausted or obtained from any person legally
empowered to act in their behalf, or as a last resort, the appropriate State Privacy
Commission in whose jurisdiction he was last resident:
Provided that when the inability to consent passes and where the personal data
collected during the period of inability has not been anonymised, the data subject is
entitled to—
(i) alter or rescind the consent given on his behalf in all cases, and
(ii) request the destruction of all records of personal data relating to him.
(2) The consent in relation to personal data relating to data subjects who are unable,
for reasons of death, and have not named a nominee to give, shall be effective only if it is
obtained from—
(a) the nearest living relative; or
(b) where all reasonable measures to identify nearest living relative fail, the State
Privacy Commission of the State in which the person last resided.
11. (1) No person, including a data controller and data processor, shall collect any
personal data without obtaining the consent of the data subject to whom it pertains.
(2) Subject to sub-section (1), no person shall collect any personal data which is not
necessary for the achievement of a purpose that is connected to a stated function of the
person seeking its collection.
(3) A person seeking to collect any personal data shall, prior to its collection and as
prescribed by the Privacy Commission, inform the data subject without any direct or indirect
charges, to whom such data pertains of the following details in respect of their personal data,
namely —
(a) when it shall be collected;
(b) its content and nature;
Special
provisions in
respect of
data subjects
unable to give
consent.
Collection of
personal data.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

10
(c) the purpose of its collection;
(d) the purpose and manner in which it shall be used;
(e) the persons to whom it shall be made available;
(f) the duration for which it shall be stored;
(g) the manner in which it may be accessed, checked and modified;
(h) the security practices and other safeguards, if any, to which it shall be subject;
(i) the privacy policies and other policies, if any, that shall protect it;
(j) whether, and the conditions and procedure upon which, it may be disclosed
to others;
(k) the criteria, time and manner under which the personal data collected from the
data subject shall be destroyed;
(l) the time and manner under which the personal data collected from the data
subject shall be destroyed on withdrawal of consent;
(m) the process, procedure and ability for a meaningful recourse in case of any
grievance in relation to it; and
(n) the identity and contact details of the data controller and data processor.
(4) The personal data collected in pursuance of a grant of consent by the data subject
to whom it pertains shall, if that consent is subsequently withdrawn for any reason, be
destroyed forthwith:
Provided that the person who collected the personal data in respect of which consent
is subsequently withdrawn may, only if the personal data is necessary for the delivery of any
good or the provision of any service, except where it is an essential service as provided
under section 14, or the fulfillment of a lawful contract, not deliver that good or deny that
service or fulfill that contract to the data subject who withdrew the grant of consent easily
and at any point during the duration of a service.
12. (1) The data collector may collect or receive the personal data of a data subject
from a third party without the prior consent of the data subject concerned only if it is—
(a) necessary for the provision of an emergency medical service or essential
services as provided under section 14 to the data subject;
(b) strictly necessary to prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognizable offence
as per process initiated, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or by a law made
through an Act of Parliament or State Legislature.
(c) exempted by the Privacy commission as per provisions relating to interception
and surveillance under this Act:
Provided that for sub-sections (a) and (b) the data subject shall be duly informed in
simple language and through a medium perfectly accessible to him, in a manner as prescribed
by the Privacy Commission, at the earliest possible opportunity of the extent of personal
data collected, and the processing and uses that it was put to in the course of meeting the
purpose of the collection.
(2) All personal data collected without prior consent under this section shall be
destroyed as soon as the purpose for which it was collected is over :
Provided that where effective consent is obtained in terms and as per the safeguards
under the Act at the earliest possible opportunity and not later than seven days from the date
of the collection of the personal data, such personal data may continue to be stored and
processed.
Collection of
personal data
without prior
consent.
2 of 1974.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

11
13. (1) All data collected, processed and stored by data controllers and data processors
prior to coming into force of this Act shall be destroyed within a period of two years from the
date of coming into force of this Act.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply where—
(a) consent in terms which satisfies all the requirements as provided for under
this Act and is obtained afresh within the aforementioned period of two years; or
(b) The personal data collected prior to the commencement of this Act was
anonymised in such a manner as to make re-identification of the data subject absolutely
impossible.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section 'consent' shall be deemed to have been
obtained if the data subject does not explicitly withdraw consent, on the basis of a specific
notification in this regard, issued by data controller to the data subject, in a manner as
prescribed by the Privacy Commission, within the aforementioned period of two years.
PART C
F
URTHER LIMITATIONS ON DATA CONTROLLERS
14. (1) No essential services, shall be withheld on the ground that consent to share
personal data in a particular manner for the purpose of identification, has not been obtained
or has been withheld or such data has not been collected at the time the data subject claims
the service:
Provided that the data subject shall be entitled to damages where an essential service
has been denied:
Provided further that the data controller or data processor shall accept any alternate
means for identification, wherever available as per the choice of the data subject:
Provided also that the data subject shall be entitled to exemplary damages where an
essential service has been denied despite the existence of pre-existing alternative means of
identifying the data subject.
(2) An essential service includes the following, namely:—
(a) subsidies, benefits and entitlements which are provided on establishing the
identity of an individual under the Aadhaar Act, 2016;
(b) entitlements under the Public Distribution System including but not limited
to the provisions under the National Food Security Act, 2013;
(c) the provision of medical care to minors, expectant mothers or those requiring
emergent or life-saving care;
(d) social security benefits, including pension, gratuity and provident fund;
(e) benefits under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005;
(f) services provided to effectuate the provisions of Part III or Part IV of the
Constitution;
(g) any other service additionally prescribed by the appropriate Government by
notification in the Official Gazette or by way of a public proclamation;
(3) Where an essential service is provided under sub-section ( 1) and the service
provider of the said service provider suffers grave and irreparable injury arising directly from
the unavailability of personal data in respect of which consent was sought under this Act,
such service provider may approach the Privacy Commission for relief or seeking exemption.
15. (1) No person shall store any personal data for a period longer than is necessary to
achieve the purpose for which it was collected or received, or, if that purpose is achieved or
ceases to exist for any reason, for any period following such achievement or cessation.
Special
provisions in
respect of
data collected
prior to the
commencement
of this Act.
Bar on denial
of subsidies,
benefits and
entitlements.
18 of 2016.
20 of 2013.
42 of 2005.
Storage and
destruction of
personal data.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

12
(2) Save as provided in sub-section ( 3), any personal data collected or received in
relation to the achievement of a purpose shall, if that purpose is achieved or ceases to exist
for any reason, be destroyed forthwith:
Provided that where the purpose of collection is the provision of essential services
under section 14 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or of banking as provided under
section 5 (b) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the data subject shall be duly informed in
terms to be prescribed by the Privacy Commission of the impending destruction of the data.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any personal data may be
stored for a period longer than is necessary to achieve the purpose for which it was collected
or received, or, if that purpose has been achieved or ceases to exist for any reason, for any
period following such achievement or cessation, if—
(a) the data subject to whom it pertains grants their effective consent to such
storage prior to the purpose for which it was collected or received being achieved or
ceased to exist;
(b) it is adduced for an evidentiary purpose in a legal proceeding; or
(c) it is required to be stored for historical, statistical or research purposes under
the provisions of an Act of Parliament and specified in a manner as prescribed by the
Privacy Commission:
Provided that only such amount of personal data that is necessary to achieve the
purpose of storage under this sub-section shall be stored and any personal data that is not
required to be stored for such purpose shall be destroyed forthwith:
Provided further that any personal data stored under this sub-section shall, to the
extent possible, be anonymised.
16. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), no person shall process any personal data
that is not necessary for the achievement of the purpose for which it was collected or
received.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any personal data may be
processed for a purpose other than the purpose for which it was collected or received only
if —
(a) the data subject grants his effective consent to the processing and only that
amount of personal data that is necessary to achieve such other purpose is processed;
(b) it is necessary to perform a contractual duty to the data subject;
(c) it is necessary to prevent an imminent threat to the security of the State or
public order and the fact of such threat is recorded in writing by a competent
organization which anticipates such a threat; or
(d) it is necessary to prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognizable offence.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section personal data may be
anonymized, as a measure to enhance the security of the data and the privacy of the data
subject:
Provided that anonymized data may be processed or disseminated only if the data
controller has ensured the Privacy Commission that it is impossible to identify the data
subject to whom it relates and sought exemption:
Provided further that where the Privacy Commission is satisfied that the personal data
has been satisfactorily anonymized, the Privacy Commission may grant an extension on the
permissible period of storage and disclosures for specified purposes in addition to those in
respect of which effective consent was obtained.
17. (1) No person shall collect, receive, store, process or otherwise handle any personal
data without implementing measures, including, but not restricted to, technological, physical
and administrative measures, adequate to secure its confidentiality, secrecy, integrity and
safety, including from theft, loss, damage or destruction.
Processing of
personal data.
Security of
personal data
and duty of
confidentiality.
10 of 1949.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10
50

13
(2) Any person who collects, receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any
personal data shall maintain confidentiality and secrecy in respect of data collected, received,
stored, processed or in their possession.
(3) It shall be the duty of the data controllers and data processors to maintain
confidentiality and secrecy in respect of personal data in their possession or control.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions of this section and
notwithstanding any law for the time being in force, any person who collects, receives,
stores, processes or otherwise handles any personal data shall, if its confidentiality, secrecy,
integrity or safety is violated by theft, loss, negligence, damage or destruction, or as a result
of any collection, processing or disclosure contrary to the provisions of this Act, or for any
other reason whatsoever, as soon as he becomes aware of such violation, notify the person
to whom it pertains, the Privacy Commission and any other agencies as may be designated
for the purpose by the Central Government in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Any person, who collects, receives, stores, processes, or otherwise handles any
personal data shall report all violations of provisions of this Chapter to the Privacy Commission,
that are brought to its notice, or are reasonably expected to be known to such persons.
18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, personal data that has been collected
according to this Act may be transferred by a data controller to a data processor located in
India, if the transfer is pursuant to an agreement that  demonstrably and expressly binds the
data processor to same or stronger  conditions and measures in respect of the storage,
processing, destruction, disclosure and other handling of the personal data as are contained
in this Act.
(2) No data controller shall transfer personal data outside the territory of India or to an
international organisation unless any one of the following conditions is fulfilled—
(a) the Central Government has issued a notification indicating it has decided
that the country, territory, or international organization in question agrees to ensure an
adequate level of protection of privacy and personal data in a manner which is in no
way incompatible with the privacy principles contained in section 3:
Provided that any such notification of an adequacy decision shall only be issued by
the Central Government after due consultation with the Privacy Commission and its Office of
data protection, and after having taken inputs from such stakeholders and experts as the
later may recommend; or
(b) The transfer by the data controller to a data processor located outside India
is pursuant to an agreement that binds the recipient of the personal data to the strict
conditions and measures in respect of the storage, processing, destruction, disclosure,
and other handling of the personal data as contained in this Act; or
(c) The data controller shall assess all the circumstances relating to transfer of
personal data in question to the third country, territory, or international organization
and concluded that appropriate legal instruments and safeguards exist to protect the
data, and inform the Office of data protection of the Privacy Commission of such
transfers of data:
Provided that while informing the transfer of personal data to the Privacy Commission,
the data controller shall maintain following details, namely:—
(i) the date and time of the transfer;
(ii) the name of other pertinent information about the data processor;
(iii) the justification for the transfer;
(iv) a description of the personal data transferred; and
(v) the existing legal instruments and safeguards for data protection by which
the data processor is bound.
Transfer of
personal data
outside the
territory of
India.20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

14
(3) No data processor shall process any personal data transferred under this section
except to achieve the purpose for which it was collected.
(4) Any data controller who transfers personal data under this section shall be
responsible to the data subject for the actions of the data processor.
(5) Any data controller who transfers personal data outside the territory of India shall
comply with the provisions of this Act notwithstanding the fact that the personal data in
question is being processed outside the country.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the duties of a data collector shall
include, but not be limited to:
(a) ensure that any recipient of such transferred personal data takes appropriate
steps to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act;
(b) report any breach to the Privacy Commission notwithstanding the transfer of
such data outside the territory of India.
19. (1) Save as provided in this Chapter, no person including the data controller shall
disclose, or otherwise cause any other person to receive, the content or nature of any
personal data, including any other details in respect thereof, except to the person to whom it
pertains.
(2) No person including the data controller shall disclose any personal data without
obtaining the prior effective consent of the data subject:
Provided that consent of a data subject obtained by way of threat, under duress or
coercion or denial of service shall not be treated as a valid and effective consent
(3) For the purpose of sub-section (2), a person including the data controller seeking
to disclose any personal data shall, prior to its disclosure, inform the data subject of the
following details in respect of their personal data, namely: —
(a) when and to whom it shall be disclosed;
(b) the purpose of its disclosure;
(c) the security practices and other safeguards, if any, to which personal data
shall be subject to;
(d) the privacy policies and other policies, if any, that shall protect personal
data;
(e) the procedure for recourse in case of any grievance in relation to personal
data; and
(f) any other details prescribed by rules or by the Privacy Commission.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any person who collects,
receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any personal data may disclose it to a
person other than the data subject, whether located in India or otherwise, for the purpose of
only processing it to achieve the purpose for which it was collected:
Provided that in case disclosure is pursuant to an agreement that explicitly binds the
person receiving it to same or stronger measures in respect of its storage, processing,
destruction, disclosure or other handling as are contained in this Act.
(5) Any disclosure of personal data made contrary to the provisions of this Act shall
be notified to the data subject and Privacy Commission.
20. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and any other law for the time
being in force —
(a) no person shall collect sensitive personal data without effective consent
from the data subject;
Disclosure of
personal data.
Special
provisions for
sensitive
personal data.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

15
(b) no person shall store sensitive personal data for a period longer than is
strictly necessary to the purpose for which it was collected or received, or, if that
purpose has been achieved or ceases to exist for any reason, for any period following
such achievement or cessation;
(c) no person shall process sensitive personal data for any purpose other than
the purpose for which it was collected or received;
(d) no person shall disclose sensitive personal data to another person, or
otherwise cause any other person to come into the knowledge or possession of, the
content or nature of any sensitive personal data, including any other details in respect
thereof, except the data subject.
(2) In addition to the requirements set out under sub-clause (1), the Privacy Commission
shall set out additional protections in respect of:—
(a) sensitive personal data relating to data subjects who are minors;
(b) biometric and deoxyribonucleic acid data; and
(c) financial and credit data.
21. (1) Where the data controller uses, directly or indirectly any new technology, it
shall be the duty of data controller to assess the risks involved in using new technology to
the data protection rights under this Act.
(2) The data controller shall conduct an internal process of a data protection impact
assessment which shall include a systematic and extensive evaluation of the personal aspects
relating to data subjects especially the impact on their legal and human rights which result
from use of the new technology.
(3) The assessment shall include—
(a) a systematic description of the processing operations and the purposes for
such processing;
(b) an assessment of compliance with the principles of protecting privacy in
relation to the purposes;
(c) an assessment of the impact on the risks to the rights and freedoms of data
subjects; and
(d) the safeguards, security measures and mechanisms to address risks to
protection of personal data.
(4) All data impact assessment reports shall be submitted periodically to the State
Privacy Commission as per the rules and regulations made under this Act.
(5) The State Privacy Commission shall prepare and make public a list of the kind of
processing operations which are subject to the requirement for a data protection impact assessment.
(6) The lists prepared under sub-section( 4) shall be communicated to the Office for
Data Protection of the Privacy Commission for approval prior to adoption.
Explanation.—The term “new technology” includes any pre-existing technology used
for a new purpose through an iterative process by which any existing or pre-existing process
or output is substantially changed.
PART D
R
IGHTS OF A DATA SUBJECT
22. (1) The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the data controller information
as to whether any personal data concerning him is collected or processed, and, where any
such personal data has been collected or processed by the data controller, access to the
personal data shall be granted along with the following information—
(a) the purposes of the storage and processing personal data;
Special
provisions for
data impact
assessment.
Right to
access for data
subject.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

16
(b) the categories of the personal data concerned;
(c) the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the personal data have
been or shall be disclosed, in particular to determine that period;
(d) the existence of the right to request from the controller rectification or erasure
of personal data or restriction of processing of personal data concerning the data
subject or to object to such processing;
(e) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority;
(f) where the personal data are not collected from the data subject, any available
information as to their source;
(g) the existence of automated decision making, including profiling.
(2) When the personal data is transferred to a third country or to an international
organisation, the data subject shall have the right to be informed of the safeguards as per
provisions of this Act.
(3) The data controller shall provide a single copy of the personal data undergoing
processing to the data subject and additional copies may be subject to additional charges on
a concessional and reasonable basis.
(4) The right to access data by a data subject shall be in addition to the notifications
and existing obligations of data controllers not limited to, but including the right to seek
information of security breaches to their personal data.
23. (1) The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the data controller promptly
the rectification of inaccurate information in his personal data.
(2) Any data controller who collects, receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles
any personal data shall, to the extent possible, ensure that it is accurate and, where necessary,
is kept up to date.
(3) No data controller who collects, receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles
any personal data shall deny, to the data subject, the opportunity to review and obtain a
copy of such data and, where necessary, rectify anything that is inaccurate or not up to date.
(4) The data controller shall issue special notice to the data subject of any rectification
of personal data pertaining to the data subject unless such a move proves impossible or
involves disproportionate effort.
24. (1) The data subject shall have a right to request destruction of data at any time,
and data controllers and processors shall comply with such requests, within a timeframe,
manner and mode to be prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
(2) The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the data controller the erasure
of his personal data without any delay and the Data Controller shall have duty to erase
personal data without undue delay where one of the following grounds are applicable:
(a) the personal data is no longer necessary in relation to the purposes for which
it was collected or processed and causes actual harm;
(b) the data subject withdraws consent as per the provisions of this Act and no
other legal ground for processing continues to exist;
(c) the personal data has been unlawfully processed.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply when the storage or processing is
determined by the Privacy Commission to be:
(a) for exercising the right of speech and freedom of expression which includes
the right to receive information, especially about public personalities, officials or matters
of public interest.
Right to
rectification
for data
subjects and
obligations of
Data
controllers.
Right to
destruction of
personal data.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

17
(b) for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research
purposes or statistical purposes and the erasure is likely to be or render impossible or
seriously impair such objectives.
(c) for the establishment, exercise or defense of any legal proceedings.
(d) as per the provisions of this Act including but not limited to anonymised data
as contained under section 16.
(4) The data controller shall issue special notice to the data subject of any destruction
of his personal data unless such a move proves impossible or involves disproportionate
effort.
25. (1) The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the data controller restriction
of processing of personal data where one of the following applies—
(a) the accuracy of the personal data is contested by the data subject, for a
period enabling the data controller to verify the accuracy of the personal data;
(b) the processing is unlawful and the data subject opposes the erasure of the
personal data and requests the restriction of its use instead;
(c) the data controller no longer needs the personal data for the purposes of the
processing, but they are required by the data subject for the establishment, exercise or
defense in legal proceedings;
(d) the data subject has objected to processing pending verification whether the
legitimate grounds of the data controller override those of the data subject.
(2) When the processing has been restricted under this provision, such personal data
shall, with the exception of storage, only be processed with the data subject's consent or for
the establishment, exercise or defense in legal proceedings or for the protection of the rights
of another natural person.
(3) A data subject who has obtained restriction of processing pursuant to this section
shall be informed by the data controller before the restriction of processing is removed.
26. (1) The data subject shall have the right to object, on grounds relating to his
particular situation, at any time to processing of personal data concerning him which is
based on the principles for the protection of privacy as provided under section 3 of the Act.
(2) The data controller shall in addition to its other obligations, for communication of
notices to the data subject under this Act shall at the latest at the time of the first communication
with the data subject provide notice to the data subject of its right to object, clearly and
separately from other information.
27. (1) The data subject shall have the right to receive all personal data concerning him
from any data controller within a reasonable time and in a structured, commonly used and
machine-readable format upon request.
(2) Except where it is expressly precluded by any law for the time being in force, the
data subject shall have the additional right to receive the output of all processing of his
personal data within a reasonable time.
(3) The data controller shall not hinder in any manner the transfer by the data subject,
of the personal data, to any other person.
(4) The data subject shall have the right to request that the personal data be transmitted
directly from one controller to another, in all instances where it is technically feasible, and the
data subject be informed upon the completion of the such transmission:
Provided that no transmission shall be deemed to be complete until all records of the
data so transmitted as per the instructions of the data subject are then destroyed by the data
controller to whom request is made.
Right to
restriction of
processing.
Right to
object.
Right to
portability of
personal data.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

18
(5) Where the data controller claims that it is not technically feasible to transfer data in
the manner provided for under sub-section (4) and the data subject challenges such a claim
in terms of rules prescribed by the Privacy Commission in this regard, the burden to prove a
lack of technical feasibility to transfer falls upon the data controller.
28. ( 1) The data subject in addition to other rights with respect to processing of
personal data shall specifically have the right to seek exemption from decisions based solely
on automated processing including profiling, which produces legal effects concerning or
significantly affecting including but not limited to when it causes demonstrable harm or
injury.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply, if the automated decision:—
(a) is necessary for entering into, or performance of, a contract between the data
subject and a data controller;
(b) is based on the data subject's express and explicit consent;
(c) is provided a case by case exemption in cases by the Privacy Commission
having regard to the principles as provided under section 3.
Explanation.— The term “case by case exemption” applies to an individual person
but does not include a category or a class of personal data.
(3) The data controller shall provide additional safeguards with specific provisions for
the right of the data subject on the part of the Data controller for providing an effective
process of hearing and contesting decisions.
(4) All decisions made by way of automated decision by data controllers shall be open
to legal remedies including appeals as provided under this Act.
CHAPTER IV
I
NTERCEPTION AND SURVEILLANCE
29. (1) All provisions of Chapter III shall apply to personal data collected, processed,
stored, transferred or disclosed by competent organizations unless specifically provided or
exempted under this Chapter;
(2) A competent organization seeking to exclude the application of provisions of
Chapter III with respect to all categories of personal data collected, processed, stored,
transferred or disclosed by itself, shall prefer an application with the Privacy Commission, in
a manner prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
(3) An application under sub-section (2) shall specify—
(a) the specific personal data sought to be exempted from provisions of Chapter III
of this Act;
(b) the reasons as to why surveillance under this provision is necessary to
prevent a reasonable threat to security of the State or public order :
Provided that the reasons shall also state why the data covered under the request for
exemption has a reasonable, proximity and direct nexus with the threat:
Provided further that the reasons shall specify why a lesser restrictive measure may
not be taken; and
(c) the specific time period during which the exemption is sought.
(4) No competent organisation shall process or store any personal data without
implementing measures to ensure that the number of persons within that intelligence
organisation to whom it is made available, and the extent to which it is copied, is limited to the
minimum that is necessary to fulfill the purpose for which it is processed or stored, as the
case may be.
Right to seek
exemption
from
automated
decision
making.
Special
provisions for
competent
organizations.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

19
(5) Notwithstanding any provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 any personal
data collected, processed, stored, transferred or disclosed by a competent organization in
contravention of this Act shall be inadmissible in legal proceedings before any court of law.
30. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but save as provided in this chapter, no person shall intercept, or cause to be intercepted,
any communication of another person except in pursuance of an order by the appropriate
Surveillance and Interception Review Division.
(2) No interception of any communication shall be ordered or carried out  that is not
necessary to achieve the purpose for which the interception is sought.
31. (1) An authorised officer of a competent organisation seeking to intercept any
communication of another person shall prefer an application, in  such form and manner as
may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Privacy Commission,
to the appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division.
(2) The appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division may, if it is satisfied
that the interception is necessary to prevent a reasonable threat to security of the State or
public order, or prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence, order the interception
of communications by recording reasons in writing.
(3) The appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division shall, prior to issuing
an order for interception of any communication, satisfy itself that all other lawful means to
acquire the information sought to be intercepted have been exhausted and that the proposed
interception is necessary and proportionate, reasonable and not excessive.
(4) Any interception of any communication ordered, authorised or carried out prior to
the commencement of this Act shall, immediately upon the constitution of the Privacy
Commission, be reported to the Office for Surveillance Reform of the Privacy Commission.
(5) Any interception involving the infringement of the privacy of individuals who are
not the subject of the intended interception, or where communications relate to journalistic,
activism related to fundamental and constitutional rights, parliamentary or legally privileged
material is involved, it shall satisfy additional conditions including the provision of specific
prior justification in writing to the Office for Surveillance Reform of the Privacy Commission
as to the necessity for the interception and the safeguards providing for minimizing the
material intercepted to the greatest extent possible and the destruction of all such material
that is not strictly necessary for the purpose of the interception.
32. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 31, if the Home Secretary of the
appropriate Government is satisfied that an imminent grave threat to the security of the State
or public order exists, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, order the interception of
any communication.
(2) No order for interception of any communication made under this section shall be
valid upon the expiry of a period of seven days from the date of the order.
(3) Before the expiry of a period of seven days under this section, the person who
carried out the interception of communication shall notify the appropriate Surveillance and
Interception Review Division of the fact of such interception, the name and address of the
person whose communication is being intercepted, and the duration of the interception and,
furthermore, shall furnish a copy of the order of the Home Secretary authorising the
interception.
(4) The surveillance and Interception Review Division may, upon receipt of notification
under sub-section (3), recall the order on grounds of lack of an imminent and grave threat to
the security of State or public order, or on absence of ground mentioned in sub-section (2) of
section 31, and may also order for damages in case of abuse to be paid to the individual/
natural person whose communication was intercepted under the order so recalled.
1 of 1872.
Bar against
interception
of
communications.
Prior
authorisation
by the
appropriate
Surveillance
and
Interception
Review
Division.
Authorisation
by the Home
Secretary in
emergent
circumstances.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

20
33. (1) An order for interception of any communication shall specify the period of its
validity and upon the expiry of the period of validity of all interception carried out in relation
to that order shall cease forthwith:
Provided that no order for interception of any communication shall be valid upon the
expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of the order.
(2) The appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division, may, upon receipt
of an application from an authorised officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed by
the Central Government in consultation with the Privacy Commission, renew, for a period not
exceeding thirty days, any order for interception of any communication if it is satisfied that
the conditions upon which the original order was issued continue to exist:
Provided that where interception of communication, under orders passed under this
Chapter, including orders for renewal, has been carried out for a cumulative period of six
months, whether in succession or not, any application for further renewal, shall be accepted,
if in addition to the ground mentioned in this sub-section, the competent organization is able
to demonstrate the need for such continued interception.
34. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), before the expiry of a period of thirty days from the
conclusion of any interception of communication ordered or carried out under this Act or
any interception of communication carried out before the Act came into force, the authorised
officer who carried out the interception of communication shall, in writing in such form and
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Privacy
Commission, notify, with reference to the relevant order of the Surveillance and Interception
Review Division, each person whose communication was intercepted of the fact of such
interception and duration thereof.
(2) The Surveillance and Interception Review Division may, on an application made by
an authorised officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed, if he is satisfied that the
person(s) specified in notification under sub-section ( 1) poses a reasonable threat to the
security of the State or public order or adversely affect the prevention, investigation or
prosecution of a cognisable offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing addressed to the
authorised officer, order that such person(s) whose communication was intercepted not be
notified of the fact of such interception or the duration thereof:
Provided that any order passed preventing disclosure of interception under section (2)
shall not operate in infinity and shall record reasons in writing with the period till when the
reasonable threat is anticipated to extend, on cessation of which the duty to inform under
sub-section (1) shall operate.
35. (1) Any person who carries out any interception of any communication, or who
obtains any information, including personal data, as a result of an interception of
communication, shall have a duty of data security and privacy with respect to it.
(2) No person shall intercept any communication of another person without
implementing measures, including, but not restricted to, technological, physical and
administrative measures, to secure the data security and privacy of all information obtained
as a result of an interception of communication, including from theft, negligence, loss or
unauthorised disclosure.
(3) Every competent organisation shall, before the expiry of a period of one hundred
days from the enactment of this Act, designate as many officers as it deems fit as Privacy
Officers who shall be administratively responsible for ensuring that all interceptions of
communications carried out by that competent organisation are in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
36. (1) In addition to the existing obligations and duties for lawful interception, no
person shall disclose to any person, other than the person whose communication has been
intercepted, or otherwise cause any other person to come into the knowledge or possession
of, the content or nature of any information, including personal data, obtained as a result of
Duration of
interception.
Duty to
inform the
person
concerned.
Security and
duty of data
security and
privacy.
Disclosure of
intercepted
communications.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10
50

21
an interception of any communication including the fact that the interception of communication
was carried out.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the disclosure of any
information, including personal data, obtained as a result of an interception of any
communication is necessary to prevent a reasonable threat to the security of the State or
public order, or prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence, an authorised officer
may disclose the information, including personal data, obtained as a result of the interception
of any communication to any authorised officer of any other competent organization:
Provided that no authorised officer shall disclose any information, including personal
data, obtained as a result of the interception of any communication that is not necessary to
achieve the purpose for which the disclosure is sought.
37. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), no person shall store any data, including personal
data, obtained as a result of an interception of any communication for a period longer than
one hundred and eighty days from the date on which the last order for interception of the
communication to which the obtained information pertains expired and upon expiry of such
period, shall destroy the data so stored.
(2) The Surveillance and Interception Review Division may, on an application made in
such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Privacy Commission, if it is satisfied that
it is necessary to—
(a) prevent a reasonable threat to the security of the State; or
(b) maintain public order; or
(c) prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence in an ongoing legal
proceeding and is authorized by a court order to that effect;
for reasons to be recorded in writing, order that any information, including personal data,
obtained as a result of an interception of any communication may be stored for a period
longer than one hundred and eighty days from the date on which the last order for interception
of the communication to which the obtained information pertains expired and shall not be
destroyed.
(3) Any data obtained as a result of interception of any communication shall be stored
in a manner that complies with the provisions of section 15 with respect to such data.
38. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but save as provided in this chapter, no person shall order or carry out, or cause or
assist the ordering or carrying out of, any surveillance of another person.
(2) The appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division shall have the
power to issue appropriate directions, including for cessation of any activity, being carried
out by a person, including a statutory authority, which is in contravention of the proviso to
sub-section (1).
39. (1) No member of a competent organization shall order or carry out, or cause to be
ordered or carried out, any surveillance of another person save in  pursuance of an order by
the appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division.
(2) No surveillance shall be ordered or carried out that is not necessary to achieve the
purpose for which the surveillance is sought.
(3) An authorised officer seeking to carry out any surveillance of another person shall
prefer an application, in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government
in consultation with the Privacy Commission, to the Surveillance and Interception Review
Division.
(4) The Surveillance and Interception Review Division may, if it is satisfied that the
surveillance is necessary to prevent a reasonable threat to the security of the State or public
order, or to prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence, for reasons to be recorded
in writing addressed to the authorised officer, order the surveillance.
Storage and
destruction of
intercepted
communications.
Bar against
surveillance.
Surveillance
by the State.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10
50

22
40. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, and without prejudice to the provisions of section 37 of this Act, no person other than
a member of a competent organization shall carry out, or cause to be carried out, any
surveillance in any public place or in any property or premises that is not in his possession.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), any person who carries out any surveillance
under this section shall be subject to a duty to inform, in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government in consultation with the Privacy Commission, members of the
public of such surveillance.
41. (1) An order for surveillance shall specify the period of its validity and, upon the
expiry of the validity of the order, all surveillance carried out in relation to that order shall
cease forthwith:
Provided that no order for surveillance shall be valid upon the expiry of a period of
thirty days from the date of the order.
(2) The Surveillance and Interception Review Division, may, upon receipt of an
application from an authorised officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Privacy Commission, renew any order for
surveillance if it is satisfied that the conditions upon which the original order was issued
continue to exist:
Provided that where surveillance, under orders passed under this Chapter, including
orders for renewal, has been carried out for a cumulative period of six months, whether in
succession or not, any application for further renewal, shall be accepted, if in addition to the
ground mentioned in this sub-section, the competent organization is able to demonstrate the
need for such continued surveillance.
42. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), before the expiry of a period of thirty days from the
conclusion of any surveillance ordered or carried out under this Act or any surveillance
carried out before this Act came into operation, the authorised officer who carried out the
surveillance shall, in writing in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Privacy Commission, notify, with reference to the relevant
order of the Surveillance and Interception Review Division, each person in respect of whom
surveillance was carried out of the fact of such surveillance and duration thereof.
(2) The appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division may, on an
application made by an authorised officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed by
the Central Government in consultation with the Privacy Commission, if it is satisfied that the
persons notified under sub-section ( 1) presents a reasonable threat to the security of the
State or public order, or adversely affect the prevention, investigation or prosecution of a
cognisable offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing addressed to the authorised officer,
order that such person not to be notified of the fact of such surveillance or the duration
thereof:
Provided any order passed preventing disclosure of surveillance under section ( 2)
shall not operate indefinitely and contain reasons in writing with the period till when the
reasonable threat is anticipated to extend, on cessation of which the duty to inform under
sub-section (1) shall operate.
43. (1) Any person who carries out any surveillance, or who lawfully obtains any
information, including personal data, as a result of surveillance, shall be subject to a duty of
confidentiality and secrecy in respect of it.
(2) No person shall carry out any surveillance of another person without implementing
measures, including, but not restricted to, technological, physical and administrative
measures, to secure the confidentiality and secrecy of all information obtained as a result of
surveillance, including from theft, loss or unauthorised disclosure.
Surveillance
by private
persons or
entities.
Duration of
surveillance.
Duty to
inform the
person
concerned.
Security and
duty of
confidentiality
and secrecy.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

23
(3) Every competent organization shall, before the expiry of a period of one hundred
days from coming into force of this Act, designate as many officers as it deems fit as Privacy
Officers who shall be administratively responsible for ensuring that all surveillance carried
out by the Competent Organization are in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that a public authority that does not order or carry out surveillance shall not
be required to designate any Privacy Officers under this sub-section.
(4) Every person who is not a member of a competent organization and who seeks to
carry out any surveillance shall, at least seven days before the surveillance is first carried
out, designate or appoint as many persons as it deems fit as Privacy Officers who shall be
responsible for ensuring that all surveillance carried out is in compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter:
Provided that where surveillance is carried out by a single person, that person shall be
deemed to be a Privacy Officer.
44. (1) In addition to the existing obligations and duties for lawful surveillance, no
person shall disclose to any person, other than the person who is being surveilled, or
otherwise cause any other person to come into the knowledge or possession of, the content
or nature of any information, including personal data, obtained as a result of any surveillance
including the fact that the surveillance was carried out.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the disclosure of any
information, including personal data, obtained as a result of surveillance is necessary to
prevent a reasonable threat to the security of the State or public order, or prevent, investigate
or prosecute a cognisable offence, that information, including personal data, obtained as a
result of surveillance may be disclosed to an authorized officer of a competent organization
only:
Provided that no person shall disclose any information, including personal data,
obtained as a result of surveillance that is not necessary to achieve the purpose for
which the disclosure is sought.
45. (1) Subject to sub-section ( 2), no person shall store any information, including
personal data, obtained as a result of surveillance for a period longer than one hundred and
eighty' days from the date on which the surveillance to which the obtained information
pertains ceased, and upon expiry of such period, shall destroy the data so stored.
(2) The appropriate Surveillance and Interception Review Division may, on an
application made in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government
in consultation with the Privacy Commission, if it is satisfied that it is necessary to—
(a) prevent a reasonable threat to the security of the State; or
(b) public order; or
(c) prevent, investigate or prosecute a cognisable offence in an ongoing legal
proceeding and is authorized by a court order to that effect;
for reasons to be recorded in writing, order that any information, including personal data,
obtained as a result of surveillance may be stored for a period longer than one hundred and
eighty days from the date on which the last order for surveillance to which the obtained
information pertains expired and shall not be destroyed.
(3) Any data obtained as a result of surveillance shall be stored in a manner that
complies with the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 14 with respect to such data.
Disclosure of
surveillance.
Storage and
destruction of
surveillance.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10

24
46. Any communication, complaint, or evidence thereunder alleging violation of the
provisions of this Act or other applicable law , if made to the Privacy Commission, the
Surveillance and Interception Review Divisions and their legal counsel, or to the Supreme
Court, shall not be treated as a violation of this Act and applicable provisions of the Information
Technology Act, 2000.
CHAPTER V
T
HE PRIV ACY COMMISSION
47. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, issued within six months of
coming into force of this Act, constitute, with immediate effect, a body to be called the
Privacy Commission, by warrant under its hand and seal, to exercise the jurisdiction and
powers and discharge the functions and duties conferred or imposed upon it by or under
this Act.
(2) The Privacy Commission shall be consisted of at least three Privacy
Commissioners, to be appointed by the President.
(3) The Privacy Commission shall consist of two co-ordinate offices, namely the
Office for data Protection and the Office for Surveillance and Interception Reform, and
such officers, other employees, and experts as may be appointed in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
(4) The Privacy Commission shall be autonomous, independent, and free from external
interference and shall be provided with sufficient operational resources including human,
technical, and financial for the effective discharge of its duties and exercise of its powers.
(5) The exercise of financial powers shall be subject to audit by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.
48. (1) The Privacy Commission shall consist of one Chief Privacy Commissioner
and two or more than two Privacy Commissioners as may be deemed necessary:
Provided that at least one Privacy Commissioner shall be a person who has been a
Judge of the Supreme Court or has been a Chief Justice or Acting Chief Justice of a High
Court:
Provided further that at least one or more Privacy Commissioner shall be a woman or a
member of the third gender, or a transgender:
Provided also that at least one or more Privacy Commissioner shall belong to a —
(i) socially or educationally backward classes; or
(ii) Scheduled Caste; or
(iii) Scheduled Tribe; or
(iv) minority.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner and the Privacy Commissioners shall be persons
of outstanding ability, impeccable integrity and standing and who have special knowledge
of, technical expertise in, and professional or academic experience, of not less than ten years
cumulatively, in any one or more of the following domains—
(a) privacy law and policy;
(b) business and human rights;
(c) civil liberties;
(d) engineering, technology, design and ethics; or
(e) data collection, storage and protection practices, including emerging
technologies.
(3) The Central Government shall issue a public advertisement inviting applications
to fill all vacancies in the Privacy Commission.
Exception
regarding
reporting of
violation of
provisions of
this Act. 21 of 2000.
Constitution
of the
Privacy
Commission.
Appointment
and
qualifications
of Privacy
Commissioners
of Privacy
Commission.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

25
(4) The selection committee for the appointment of the members of the Privacy
Commission, shall be constituted by the President of India and the selection panel shall
consist of the following, namely :—
(a) collegium of the Supreme Court of India;
(b) the Law Minister;
(c) the Leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha or of the single largest opposition
party being one with the greatest numerical strength in the Lok Sabha;
(d) Director of Indian Institute of Science;
(e) Director of an Indian Institute of Technology as appointed by the IIT Council;
(f) one eminent person representing the private sector; and
(g) one eminent person representing the civil society.
Explanation .—The term 'civil society' mean non-Governmental and non-profit
organisations that engage in the general upliftment and interests of the people in the field of
privacy and is independent of Government funding, interference or influence.
(5) All proceedings of the selection committee shall be matters of public record and
subject to pro-active disclosures under the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(6) No Members of Parliament or Members of the Legislature of any State or Union
territory having Legislative Assembly or a member of any political party shall be eligible for
selection or appointment as a Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner:
Provided that persons holding any other office of profit or carrying on any business or
practising any profession, before he enters upon this office, shall be eligible for appointment
or selection as Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner, as the case may be,
if—
(a) he holds any office of trust or profit, resigns from such office; or
(b) he is carrying on any business, severs his connection with the conduct and
management of such business; or
(c) she is practising any profession, ceases to practise such profession.
49. (1) The office for Data Protection of the Privacy Commission shall be consisted of
a Director General of Data Protection, to be appointed by Privacy Commission through a
notification, who shall be a person of standing, ability and integrity, qualified in the field of
law and with professional experience of not less than five years, cumulatively, in one or more
of the following domains:
(a) investigation;
(b) criminal procedure;
(c) cybercrime and cyber forensics; and
(d) privacy and transparency law and policy.
(2) The number of other Additional Director General, Joint Director- General, Deputy
Director-General or Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees in the
office of Data Protection, under the Director General, and the manner of their appointments,
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
(3) Every Additional Director General, Joint Director-General, Deputy Director-General
and Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees, shall exercise such
powers, and discharge functions, subject to the general control, supervision and direction of
the Director General.
(4) The Additional Director General, Joint Director-General, Deputy Director-General
or Assistant Directors General or such officers of other employees, shall be appointed from
Composition
of the Office
for Data
Protection of
the Privacy
Commission.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10
45

26
amongst persons of integrity, ability and standing, and who have experience in law,
investigation, public administration, economics and possess such other qualifications as
may be prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
50. (1) The Office for Surveillance and Interception Reform of the Privacy Commission
shall consist of a Director General of Surveillance and Interception Reform, to be appointed
by the Privacy Commission through a notification, who shall be a person of ability, integrity
and standing, qualified in law and with professional experience of not less than five years,
cumulatively, in any or more of the following domains —
(a) civil liberties;
(b) criminal procedure;
(c) Governmental transparency, oversight and accountability;
(d) police reforms.
(2) The number of other Additional Director General, Joint Director General, Deputy
Director General or Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees in the
Office of Data Protection, under the Director General, and the manner of their appointments,
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
(3) Every Additional Director General, Joint Director General, Deputy Director General
and Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees, shall exercise his powers,
and discharge his functions, subject to the general control, supervision and direction of the
Director General.
(4) The Additional Director General, Joint Director General, Deputy Director General or
Assistant Directors General or such officers of other employees, shall be appointed from
amongst persons of integrity, ability and standing, and who have experience in law,
investigation, public administration, economics and such other qualifications as may be
prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
51. (1) The Privacy Commission may appoint such officers and other employees as it
considers necessary for its efficient functioning under this Act.
(2) The Privacy Commission may engage such number of experts and professionals
of integrity and outstanding ability, who have special knowledge of, and experience in, data,
transparency, information, law, technology, economics or such other disciplines related to
privacy, as it deems necessary to assist the Commission in the discharge of its functions
under this Act.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the officers and other employees of the Commission and the number of such officers and
other employees shall be such as may be prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
52. (1) Before appointing any person as a Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy
Commissioner, the President shall satisfy himself that the person does not, and shall not
have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially their functions as
such Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner.
(2) The Chief Privacy Commissioner and every Privacy Commissioner shall hold office
for such period, not exceeding five years, as may be specified by the President in the order of
his appointment, but shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that no person shall hold office as a Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy
Commissioner for more than two terms:
Provided further that no person shall hold office as a Chief Privacy Commissioner or
Privacy Commissioner, as the case may be, after he has attained the age of seventy-five
years.
Composition
of the Office
for
Surveillance
and
Interception
Reform of the
Privacy
Commission.
Officers and
other
employees of
the Privacy
Commission.
Term of
office,
conditions of
service, etc.
of Privacy
Commissioners
and Offices
constituted
under the
Commission.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

27
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), a Chief Privacy
Commissioner or any Privacy Commissioner may —
(a) by writing under his hand and addressed to the President resign his office at
any time;
(b) be removed from office in accordance with the provisions of section 53 of
this Act.
(4) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal of a Chief Privacy Commissioner
or Privacy Commissioner under sub-section (3) shall be filled by fresh appointments.
(5) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of a Chief Privacy
Commissioner, such one of the Privacy Commissioners as the President may, on the advice of
the selection committee under section 48(3), by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall act
as the Chief Privacy Commissioner till the date on which a new Chief Privacy Commissioner,
is appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act, to fill such vacancy, enters upon
his office.
(6) When a Chief Privacy Commissioner is unable to discharge his functions owing to
absence, illness or any other cause, such one of the Privacy Commissioners as the Chief
Privacy Commissioner may authorise in writing in this behalf shall discharge the functions of
the Chief Privacy Commissioner, till the date on which the Chief Privacy Commissioner
resumes his duties.
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of a Chief Privacy Commissioner and Privacy Commissioners shall be the same as
that of the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners respectively:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of a Chief Privacy Commissioner or any Privacy Commissioner shall be varied to their
disadvantage after their appointment.
(8) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Director General of Data Protection, the Director General of Surveillance, any
Additional Director General, Joint Director General, Deputy Director General or Assistant
Director General, Secretary, officer, employee appointed or expert or professional engaged
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Privacy Commission.
(9) The Chief Privacy Commissioners and Privacy Commissioners on ceasing to hold
office as such shall not hold any appointment under the Government of India or under the
Government of any State for a period of ten years from the date on which they cease to hold
such office.
53. (1) The President may remove from office the Chief Privacy Commissioner or any
Privacy Commissioner, who —
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties
of his office; or
(c) is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(e) is convicted for an offence which in the opinion of the President involves
moral turpitude; or
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner, or cause
Removal of
Chief Privacy
Commissioners
and Privacy
Commissioners.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10
45

28
some conflict of interest including benefits directly or indirectly to relatives or family
members, or
(g) has so abused his position as to render him continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), neither a Chief Privacy
Commissioner nor any Privacy Commissioner shall be removed from his office on the ground
specified in clause ( f) or clause ( g) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court on a
reference being made to it in this behalf by the President, has on an inquiry held by it in
accordance with such procedure as it may specify in this behalf, reported that the Chief
Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner ought, on such grounds, to be removed.
54. (1) The Privacy Commission may, through decisions arrived at by a simple majority
of its members present and voting as set out in section 59(1) of this Act, authorize, review,
investigate, make an inquiry, and/or monitor, suo motu or on a petition presented to it by any
person, group of persons or by someone acting on his or their behalf, the implementation
and application of this Act and give such directions or pass such orders as are necessary for
reasons to be recorded in writing.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Privacy
Commission shall perform the following functions, namely —
(a) review the safeguards provided under this Act or under other laws for the
time being in force for the protection of personal data and recommend measures for
their effective implementation or amendment, as may be necessary from time to time;
(b) review and/or monitor any measures taken by any competent organization,
company, person or other entity for the protection of privacy and take such further
action as it deems fit;
(c) authorize, review and/or monitor any action, code, certification, policy or
procedure of any competent organisation, company, person or other entity to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this Act and rules made hereunder;
(d) enforce the provisions of this Act at its own or on the basis of complaints
received by it or by way of issuing of appropriate orders and directions, the pursuit of
binding settlements with offending persons and the levy of fines;
(e) formulate, through transparent, inclusive and pervasive public consultations
with experts, other stakeholders, and the general public, norms and rules for the effective
protection of privacy by competent organisations, companies, persons or other entities;
(f) promote awareness and knowledge of personal data protection through any
means necessary and to all stakeholders with special attention to children, including
providing information to any data subject regarding their rights under this Act as
requested and undertaking training and knowledge building for data controllers,
including those involved in the provision of essential services and law enforcement;
(g) undertake and promote research in the field of protection of personal data
and privacy;
(h) encourage the efforts of non-Governmental organisations and institutions
working in the field of personal data protection and privacy;
(i) ensure the speedy and efficient redressal of all complaints, whether made by
a data subject or a group of data subjects or on their behalf, whose cause of action
arises on implementation of this Act;
(j) undertake efforts to facilitate international co-operation with regards to data
protection, and allied subjects, including enforcement;
(k) advise the Central Government on the grant of adequacy status in respect of
cross border data flows;
Functions of
the Privacy
Commission.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

29
(1) co-ordinate in writing across State Privacy Commissions, State Governments
and regulatory bodies including the Bureau of Indian Standards which may also be
concerned with data protection in order to harmonize and classify standards for data
including open data sets which contain personal data;
(m) such other functions as it may consider necessary for the protection of
privacy, personal data, the prevention of the abuse of the criminal process, both
investigatory and judicial, by the State, and enforcement of this Act;
(n) make a public, freely available publication of annual reports providing
description of performance, findings, conclusions or recommendations of any or all of
the functions assigned to the Privacy Commission in this Chapter.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Office of Data
Protection within the Privacy Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) investigate data controllers and processors, whether initiated on complaint
of a data subject or a group of them or on their behalf or on direction of the Privacy
Commission or suo motu , for the purpose of identifying activities which are in
contravention of the provisions of this Act, either at its own instance or upon receipt
of credible information or complaint;
(b) obtain access from data controllers and processors, to all personal data and
to all information necessary for the performance of its tasks.
(c) publish and make publicly available periodic reports concerning the incidence
of compliance including violations of this Act and data breaches as reported under
this Act;
(d) assist the Privacy Commission in policy formulation and other activities for
effective protection of privacy;
(e) coordinate with the office for Surveillance and Interception Reform in such
manner as is necessary or may be useful to the achievement of the purposes of this
Act;
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Office for
Surveillance and Interception Reform in the Privacy Commission shall perform the following
functions, namely:
(a) assist the Privacy Commission in the formulation of policy and other activities
for bringing about reforms in carrying out interception and surveillance by competent
organization, companies, persons or other entities;
(b) collection of data from competent organizations on interception and
surveillance carried out by those and analyze the same for the purpose of preparing
periodic reports on compliance with provisions of this Act, including comprehensive
data concerning violations of the processes of interception of communications and
surveillance;
(c) advise on appointments of Public Advocates, as provided under sub-section
(4) of section 70, for the purpose of defending the person being surveilled or intercepted
before the Surveillance and Interception Review Division;
(d) to appear before a Surveillance and Interception Review Divisions to provide
expert evidence and testimony;
(e) ensure the speedy and efficient redressal of all complaints, whether made by
a data subject or a group of data subjects or in their behalf, whose cause of action
arises from this Act;
(f) co-ordinate with the office of Data Protection in such manner as is necessary
or may be useful to the achievement of the purposes of this Act;
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10
45

30
(5) The Periodic Reports published by the Privacy Commission, stipulated under sub-
section 3(c) of section 54, shall be tabled before both Houses of Parliament during the
Parliamentary Session that succeeds the publication of any Periodic Report and the same
shall be made publicly available, immediately thereafter.
(6) The Chief Privacy Commissioners, Privacy Commissioners and Directors General
shall appear before a special ad hoc Committee, constituted by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha
and comprising of members from both the governing and the opposition parties from both
Houses of Parliament, on a quarterly basis and the ad hoc Committee shall—
(a) be empowered to review the functioning of the Privacy Commission, and may
ask the Chief Privacy Commissioners and the Privacy Commissioners any questions in
this regard, as per procedure of the functioning of the Committee.
(b) prepare and present periodic reports to both Houses of Parliament in a manner
regulated by the Committee; and
(c) held its sitting in public in order to ensure transparency and inclusive
participation.
(7) Subject to the provisions of any rules prescribed in this behalf by the Central
Government, the Privacy Commission shall have the power to review any decision, judgment,
decree or order made by it.
(8) In the exercise of its functions under this Act, the Privacy Commission shall give
such directions or pass such orders as are necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.
(9) The Privacy Commission may, in its own name, sue or be sued.
55. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chief Privacy Commissioners, Privacy
Commissioners, Director Generals, any Additional Director General, Joint Director
General, Deputy Director General or Assistant Director General, Secretary, officer,
employee appointed or expert or professionals engaged and the administrative expenses of
the Privacy Commission shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
56. No Act or proceeding of the Privacy Commission shall be questioned on the
ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Privacy
Commission or any defect in the appointment of a person Acting as the Chief Privacy
Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner.
57. The Chief Privacy Commissioners and Privacy Commissioners and other employees
of the Privacy Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
58. The Privacy Commission shall be located in New Delhi or at such other places as
directed by the Chief Privacy Commissioner in consultation with the Central Government.
59. (1) The Privacy Commission shall cause the investigations suo motu  or on
complaints made by any person, group of persons or anyone on their behalf or take action
for enforcement in respect of cases involving—
(a) data collection or processing by or on behalf of the Central Government;
(b) a conflict between two State Privacy Commissions; or
(c) extra-territorial transfers of data pertaining to Indian data subjects.
Salaries, etc.
to be defrayed
out of the
Consolidated
Fund of India.
Vacancies,
etc. not to
invalidate
proceedings
of the
Privacy
Commission.
Chief Privacy
Commissioners,
Privacy
Commissioners
and
employees of
the Privacy
Commission
to be public
servants.
Location of
the Privacy
Commission.
Jurisdiction of
the Privacy
Commission.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10

31
(2) Any disputes as to jurisdiction shall be resolved in a manner that accords the data
subject the most timely and cost-effective access to redress, or promote the most timely and
cost effective enforcement of the provisions of this Act.
60. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Privacy Commission, in coordination
with offices constituted under it, shall have power to make rules to prescribe—
(a) the procedure and conduct of its business; and
(b) the delegation to one or more Privacy Commissioners of such powers or
functions as the Privacy Commission may specify.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the powers of the Privacy Commission shall include the power to determine the extent to
which persons interested or claiming to be interested in the subject-matter of any proceeding
before it may be allowed to be present or to be heard, either by themselves or by their
representatives or to cross-examine witnesses or otherwise take part in the proceedings:
Provided that any such procedure as may be prescribed or followed shall be guided by
the principles of natural justice.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent either office in the Privacy Commission from
making rules in respect of matters of procedure exclusively concerning it.
61. (1) The Privacy Commission, including offices constituted under it, shall, for the
purposes of any inquiry or for any other purpose under this Act, have the same powers as
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying suits in respect of
the following matters, namely—
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining his on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object
producible as evidence;
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavit;
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office;
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) The Privacy Commission shall have power to require any person, subject to any
privilege which may be claimed by that person under any law for the time being in force, to
furnish information on such points or matters as, in the opinion of the Privacy Commission,
may be useful for, or relevant to, the subject-matter of an inquiry and any person so required
shall be deemed to be legally bound to furnish such information within the meaning of
section 176 and section 177 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(3) The Privacy Commission or any other officer, not below the rank of a Gazette
Officer, specially authorized in this behalf by the Privacy Commission may enter any building
or place where the Privacy Commission has reason to believe that any document relating to
the subject-matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document or take
extracts or copies therefrom subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, in so far as it may be applicable.
(4) The Privacy Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court and when any offence
as is described in section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 is committed in the view or presence of the Privacy Commission, the
Privacy Commission may, after recording the facts constituting the offence and the statement
of the accused as provided for in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, forward the case to
a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and the Magistrate to whom any such case
is forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the accused as if the case had been
forwarded to him under section 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Procedure to
be followed by
the Privacy
Commission.
Power
relating to
inquiries.5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10
45

32
62. (1) The decisions of the Privacy Commission shall be taken by majority and be
binding and enforceable as a decree of a court as per the provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
(2) In its decisions, the Privacy Commission shall have the power to —
(a) require a competent organisation, company, person or other entity to take
such steps as may be necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of this Act;
(b) require a competent organisation, company, person or other entity to
compensate any person for any loss or detriment suffered; and
(c) impose penalties.
63. The Privacy Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and every proceeding
before the Privacy Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning
of section 193 and section 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
64. Subject to any conditions prescribed by rules made in this regard by the Central
Government, in consultation with the Attorney General of India and the Chief Justice of
India, all appeals from Privacy Commission shall lie to a Bench of the Supreme Court,
specifically designated by the Chief Justice of India for the purpose.
CHAPTER VI
S
TATE PRIVACY COMMISSIONS
65. (1) Every State Government shall, within a year of coming into force of this Act, by
notification in the Official Gazette, with immediate effect, constitute a body to be known as
the (name of the State) Privacy Commission to exercise the powers conferred on, and to
perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.
(2) Every State Privacy Commission shall consist of at least one Privacy Commissioner,
to be appointed by the Governor of that State.
(3) Every State Government shall issue a public advertisement inviting applications to
fill all vacancies in the State Privacy Commission.
(4) The selection committee for the appointment of the members of the State Privacy
Commission shall be constituted by the Governor of that State and shall comprise of the—
(a) the Chief Justice and two senior most judges of the State High Court;
(b) the Law Minister of the State Government;
(c) the Leader of the Opposition or the Leader of the single largest opposition
party with the greatest numerical strength in the Legislative Assembly of the State;
(d) one eminent person with experience in technology and academic or public
interest research;
(e) representing the private sector; and
(f) one eminent person representing the civil society.
(5) All proceedings of the selection committee shall be matters of public record.
Explanation.—The term 'Civil Society' means non-Governmental and non-profit
organisations that engage in the activities for the general upliftment and interests of the
people in the field of privacy and is independent of Government funding, interference or
influence.
(4) No Members of Parliament or Members of the Legislature of any State or Union
territory having Legislative Assembly or a member of any political party shall be eligible for
selection or appointment as a State Privacy Commissioner and persons holding any other
office of profit or carrying on any business or practicing any profession, before he enters
upon this office, may be selected or appointed as State Privacy Commissioner, as the case
may be, if—
Decisions of
the Privacy
Commission. 5 of 1908.
Proceedings
before the
Privacy
Commission
to be judicial
proceedings.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
Appeals.
State Privacy
Commissions.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

33
(a) he holds any office of trust or profit, resigns from such office; or
(b) he is carrying on any business, severs his connection with the conduct and
management of such business; or
(c) he is practicing any profession, ceases to practice such profession.
(5) 'Except as provided for expressly under this Act, a State Privacy Commission shall
have powers and functions coequal and identical to those of the Privacy Commission in all
respects.
(6) A State Privacy Commission may appoint such officers and other employees, or
engage any professional or expert, as it considers necessary for the efficient performance
of its functions under this Act.
(7) Every State Privacy Commission shall be autonomous, independent, and free from
external interference and shall be provided with sufficient operational resources including
human, technical, and financial for the effective discharge of its duties and exercise of its
powers.
(8) The financial power of Privacy Commission shall be subject to audit by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
(9) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of State Privacy Commissioners shall be the same as that of the Chief Secretary to
the State Government.
(10) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of any officer, employee appointed or expert or professional engaged shall be such as
may be prescribed by the State Privacy Commission.
66. (1) Investigations or actions for enforcement may be instituted in the State Privacy
Commission, suo motu or on complaints made by, any person, group of persons or anyone
on their behalf, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction—
(a) the complainant or data subject Actually and voluntarily resides;
(b) where the data controller or data processor is physically located or  principally
carries out business; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
(2) Any disputes as to jurisdiction shall be resolved in a manner that accords the data
subject the most timely and cost-effective access to redress, or promote the most timely and
cost effective enforcement of the provisions of this Act.
67. (1) Subject to any conditions prescribed by rules made in this regard  by appropriate
State Government, all appeals from a State Privacy Commission shall lie to a Bench of the
respective High Court, specifically designated by the Chief Justice for the purpose.
(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), appeals from a State Privacy Commission shall lie
to the Privacy Commission where—
(a) there is a dispute as to jurisdiction between two or more State Privacy Commissions;
or
(b) two or more State Privacy Commissions have passed orders or directions or otherwise
taken any action in respect of the same cause of action:
Provided that in any such appeal, the Privacy Commission shall be included as a
necessary party.
68. The State Government shall, in consultation with its Advocate General, the Chief
Justice of its High Court and the Privacy Commission, prescribe rules governing the
procedures to be followed:
(a) by and before the State Privacy Commission, and
Jurisdiction of
the State
Privacy
Commissions.
Appeals.
Procedure.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10
45

34
(b) in respect of appeals to its High Court in terms of sub-section ( 1) of
section 67.
69. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every State Government may, in consultation
with the State Privacy Commission, by notification in the Official Gazette, prescribe rules in
order to bring into effect any of the provisions of this Chapter of the Act.
CHAPTER VII
S
URVEILLANCE AND INTERCEPTION REVIEW DIVISIONS
70. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute,
within a period of six months from the enactment of this Act, a division in every High Court
to be known as the Surveillance and Interception Review Division, hereinafter referred to as
the Division:
Provided that if the Division is not constituted within the stipulated time period, no
order for interception or surveillance issued after a period of ninety days from the date of the
stipulated time period for constitution of the Division gets over, shall be valid and any
interception or surveillance carried out under such an order shall be a violation of the
provisions of this Act:
Provided further that if the Division is not constituted within the stipulated time period
and till the time it is constituted, no existing order of surveillance or interception can be
renewed.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint, for a period of two years or till the retirement
of the Judge so appointed, whichever is earlier, two or more Judges of the High Court, as
publicly designated by the Chief Justice of that High Court in consultation with the appropriate
State Government, as the Division.
(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Division such information as
may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, one or more Public Advocates, shall be
appointed by the Chief Justice of the High Court of that State, in consultation with the Office
for Surveillance and Interception Reform of the Privacy Commission, the respective State
Privacy Commission, the State Legal Services Authority, and the Bar Council of that State,
for the purpose of defending the interests of the person being surveilled or intercepted,
ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Act, and advancing legal arguments that
further the protection of privacy and other fundamental rights under the Constitution:
Provided that while in appointing one or more Public Advocates, the Chief Justice of
the High Court of the State shall do so after issuing public notice inviting applications of
interest and a person shall be qualified to be appointed a Public Advocate to the Division if
he—
(a) is a citizen of India, qualified to practice law with at least seven years' experience
at the bar; and
(b) has experience with litigation on fundamental rights, criminal law and
procedure, military and policing powers and oversight, and communications and
information technology laws;
(5) The Public Advocate appointed, sub-section (4), shall—
(a) be provided copies of all ordinary applications made to and Government
orders shared with the Division under this Act, including their supporting documents
and filings;
(b) have a right to attend, be heard, and to file briefs and other filings before all
proceedings of the Division; and
(c) be empowered to file appeals with respect to orders of the Division to the
Supreme Court as provided for under this Act:
Power to
make rules.
Surveillance
and
Interception
Review
Divisions.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

35
Provided that any decision not to file an appeal shall be made only after a legal opinion
on the merits of the case and the decision for reasons recorded in writing which shall be made
available along with the complete case files including all pleadings and materials when the
disclosure of the orders of the Surveillance and Interception Review Division are made as per
the provisions under the Act.
(6) All expenses incurred in connection with the Division shall be defrayed out of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
(7) Subject to any rules made in this regard by the Central Government, in consultation
with the Privacy Commission, the Division shall have power to regulate its own procedure in
all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including.
(8) The rules framed under sub-section (7), may provide for inner-camera proceedings
of the Division, the manner in which third parties interested in the matter may make application
for attending the hearings before the Division, for making the decisions of the Division
public after a stipulated time period not exceeding one year since the date of the order and
other incidental matters.
(9) The Division shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the
same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure,1908 while
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining
him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object
producible as evidence;
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office;
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.
(10) Any proceeding before the Division shall be deemed to be a judicial  proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Division
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the
Code.
(11) Subject to provisions of this Act, the Director General of Surveillance and
Interception Reform constituted under the Privacy Commission, shall have access to the
proceedings of the Division in order to assist the Division by providing expert evidence,
legal arguments, and testimony.
71. The terms of service, removal and allied matters relating to persons appointed to
the Division shall be governed by rules made in this regard by the Central Government, in
consultation with the Privacy Commission and appropriate State Government:
Provided that no terms and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Division
shall be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
72. Subject to the provisions of Chapter IV of this Act, the Divisions, shall review,
renew or take any other action with respect to orders of surveillance or interception, within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction—
(a) the person to be surveilled or intercepted actually and voluntarily resides;
(b) where the competent organization seeking to undertake surveillance or
interception is physically located; or
(c) where the actual Act of interception or surveillance is to be carried out.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.
Appointment,
terms of
service, etc.
Jurisdiction of
the
Surveillance
and
Interception
Divisions.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10
45

36
73. Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by rules made in this regard by
the Central Government, in consultation with the Privacy Commission, and the appropriate
State Governments, all appeals from any of the Divisions shall lie to a Bench of the Supreme
Court, specifically designated by the Chief Justice of India in that regard.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
74. (1) Whoever, except in conformity with the provisions of this Act, collects, receives,
stores, processes, discloses or otherwise handles any personal data shall be liable to fine
which may extend up to one hundred crore rupees based on the proportionality of the harm
caused.
(2) Whoever commits the offence under sub-section (1) either intentionally, or with
reckless disregard, he shall be liable for a term of imprisonment extending upto three years,
and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided further that in case of companies, the penalty shall be governed by section 78.
(3) Whoever attempts to commit any offence under sub-section (1) shall be liable in
the manner and to the extent provided for such offence under that sub-section.
(4) Whoever, except in conformity with the provisions of this Act, collects, receives,
stores, processes, discloses or otherwise handles any sensitive personal data shall be liable
to fine which may extend to two hundred crore rupees:
Provided that whoever commits the offence either intentionally, or with reckless
disregard, he shall be liable for a term of imprisonment extending upto five years, and shall
also be liable to fine:
Provided further that in case of offence committed by companies, the penalty shall be
governed by section 78.
(5) Whoever attempts to commit any offence under sub-section (3) shall be punished
with imprisonment and fine as provided for such offence in that section.
75. (1) Whoever, except in conformity with the provisions of this Act, intercepts, or
causes the interception of, any communication of another person shall be liable to a fine
which may extend to one hundred crore rupees:
Provided that whoever commits the offence under sub-section (1) either intentionally,
or with reckless disregard, shall be liable for a term of imprisonment extending up to three
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever attempts to commit any offence under sub- section (1) shall be punished
with imprisonment and fine as provided in that sub-section.
76. (1) Whoever, except in conformity with the provisions of this Act, orders or carries
out, or causes the ordering or carrying out, of any surveillance of another person shall be
liable to a fine which may extend to ten crore rupees:
Provided that whoever commits the offence defined above eithis intentionally, or with
reckless disregard, shall be liable for a term of imprisonment extending upto five years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever attempts to commit any offence under sub- section (1) shall be punished
with imprisonment and fine as provided in that section.
77. Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment or fine, as the case may be, provided for that offence.
78. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time of the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company
Appeals.
Punishment
for offences
related to
personal data.
Punishment
for offences
related to
interception
of
communication.
Punishment
for offences
related to
surveillance.
Abetment and
offenders.
Offences by
companies.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

37
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offcnce has been
committed with the consent or connvance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence, and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
79. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
offences under this chapter shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
80. Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this Act, fails
to comply with any notice or order issued under any provisions thereof, including an order
of the Chief Privacy Commissioner or otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this
Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one crore rupees, and, in the case of
subsequent contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees for
every day.
81. The punishment for an offence under this Act shall be without prejudice to any
other action which has been or which may be taken under this Act with respect to such
contravention.
CHAPTER  IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
82. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act until such time as the Privacy Commission is constituted.
(2) The Privacy Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Act:
Provided that where the Privacy Commission makes rules upon a subject already
covered by the Central Government, it shall ensure that protections accorded to data subjects
by its rules are maintained or improved.
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for such measures as may be necessary to secure—
(a) all personal data related to data subjects located in India; and
(b) any personal data flowing into and out of, exported or imported out of India;
(c) the notification of theft, loss or damage under sub-section (4) of section 17;
(d) the notification of disclosure under sub-section (5) of section 19;
(e) the application by an intelligence organisation under sub-section ( 1) of
section 31;
(f) the application to intercept a communication under sub-section (1) of  section 28;
(g) the application to renew an interception of communication under
sub-section (2) of section 33;
(h) the notification of an interception of communication under sub-section (1) of
section 34;
(i) the application to not inform under sub-section (2) of section 34;
Cognizance.2 of 1974.
General
penalty for
failure to
comply with
notice or
order issued
under this
Act.
Punishment
to be without
prejudice to
any other
action.
Power to
make rules.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10
45

38
(j) the application to store information obtained as a result of any interception of
communication under sub-section (2) of section 37;
(k) the application to carry out surveillance under sub-section (3) of section 39;
(l) notification to the general public under sub-section ( 2) of section 40; the
application to renew surveillance under sub-section (2) of section 41;
(m) the notification of surveillance under sub-section (1) of section 42;
(n) the application to not inform under sub-section (2) of section 42;
(o) the application to store information obtained as a result of surveillance under
sub-section (2) of section 45;
(p) salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief
Privacy Commissioner, Privacy Commissioners, Secretaries and other members, staff
and employees of the Privacy Commission;
(q) procedure to be followed by the Privacy Commission;
(r) powers and duties of Secretaries, officers and other employees of the Privacy
Commission; and
(s) the effective implementation of this Act.
(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(5) Every rule made by the Central Government under sub-section ( 1) shall require
express assent of both Houses of Parliament:
Provided that where assent under sub-section ( 5) is not obtained, the rules shall not
be valid.
83. (1) On and from the appointed day, courts or authorities shall have, or be entitled
to exercise jurisdiction with respect to remedies provided for data subjects and against data
subjects under this Act with respect:
Provided that legal proceedings for relief in the nature of interim injunctions or
mandatory injunctions shall not be initiated against the authorities provided for under this
Act including but not limited to the State Privacy Commission and the Privacy Commission:
Provided that further provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall not
bar the Privacy Commission or the State Privacy Commission or any other body from exercising
jurisdiction under the provisions of this Act.
(2) No order passed under this Act shall be appealable except as provided therein and
no injunction shall be granted by any court or Division to any authority established under
this Act in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by
or under this Act.
84. (1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, State
Government, Privacy Commission, Chief Privacy Commissioner, Privacy Commissioner or
any person Acting under the direction either of the Central Government, State Government,
Privacy Commission, Chief Privacy Commissioner or Privacy Commissioner in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of
any rules or any order made thereunder.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
26 of 1996.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
15
10

39
(2) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for
the time being in force, any communication or complaint made in good faith made by any
person alleging a violation of the provisions of this Act, if made to the Privacy Commission,
the Surveillance and Interception Review Divisions and their Public Advocates, or to any
High Court or the Supreme Court, shall not be treated as a violation of this Act or any other
law.
85. (1) If difficulties arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of three years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall only apply in instances when it is with
respect to conflict between this Act and any existing law;
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
86. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force, including provisions in—
(a) sections 43A, 69, 69B, 72 and 72A of the Information Technology Act, 2000;
and
(b) sections 7, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 47 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of
Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016; and
(c) section 5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885; and
(d) section 21 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002; and The Census
Act, 1948.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to the provisions of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(3) Where the provisions of any law in force provide for additional safeguards that are
not inconsistent with the present Act, those provisions shall continue to apply and the Act
shall not be considered in derogation of such provisions.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
21 of 2000.
18 of 2016.
13 of 1885.
15 of 2003.
3 of 1948
43 of 1951.
22 of 2005.
20
25
30
5
15
10

40
SCHEDULE
COMPETENT ORGANISATIONS
[See section 2(i)]
(1) 'Armed force' to mean any body raised or constituted pursuant to or in connection
with, or presently governed by, the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the Indian Reserve Forces
Act, 1888 (4 of 1888), the Territorial Army Act, 1948 (6 of 1948), the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of
1957), the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), the Reserve and Auxiliary Air Forces Act, 1952 (62
of 1952), the Coast Guard Act, 1978 (30 of 1978) or the Assam Rifles Act, 2006 (47 of 2006).
(2) 'Intelligence Organisation' to mean an intelligence organisation under the Intelligence
Organisations (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1985 (58 of 1985) as on the date of this Act receiving
Presidential assent.
(3) 'Police Force' mean
(a) any body raised or constituted by the appropriate Government for the
preservation of law and order and enforcement of laws related to customs, revenue,
foreign exchange, excise, income tax and narcotics;
(b) the bodies raised or constituted pursuant to or in connection with, or
presently governed by, the Police Act, 1861 (5 of 1861), the Central Reserve Police
Force Act, 1949 (66 of 1949), the Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968), the Indo-
Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992 (35 of 1992), the Sashastra Seema Bal Act, 2007
(53 of 2007), the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 (50 of 1968), the Railway
Protection Force Act, 1957 (23 of 1957) and the National Security Guard Act, 1986 (47 of
1986);
(c) the bodies raised or constituted pursuant to or in connection with, or presently
governed by, the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), the Income
Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (34 of 2008) and
the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 (45 of 2003);
(d) The National Investigation Agency constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3 of the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (34 of 2008).
(e) Any police forces raised or constituted by the States, armed or otherwise.

41
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Supreme Court, in a landmark judgment has affirmed the fundamental right to
privacy. Such a verdict requires a comprehensive law to safeguard the privacy of citizens.
In his notes accompanying the clauses of a draft Bill of Rights, Dr. Ambedkar noted
that:
“The purpose is to protect the liberty of the individual from invasion by other
individuals which is the object of enacting fundamental rights. The connection between
individual liberty and the shape and form of the economic structure of society may not
be apparent to everyone. Nonetheless the connection between the two is real. It shall
be apparent if the following considerations are borne in mind. Political democracy
rests on four premises which may be set out in the following terms:—
1. the individual is an end in himself;
2. that the individual has certain inalienable rights which must be guaranteed to him by
the Constitution;
3. that the individual shall not be required to relinquish any of his constitutional rights
as a condition precedent to the receipt of a privilege; and
4. that the State shall not delegate powers to private persons to govern others.’’
The Bill covering data protection and surveillance reform empowers citizens by providing
autonomy and dignity through the right to privacy. The Bill creates a strong and independent
Privacy Commission to enforce the right to privacy via investigation, rule-making and
adjudication.
This Bill has been drafted keeping in mind global best practices, report of the
Justice A.P. Shah Committee of Experts and submissions by multiple lawyers to the Justice
Srikrishna Committee of Experts. The Bill has been significantly updated and incorporated
best practices from international texts such as the European Union's General Data Protection
Regulation.
The Bill is based on principles of individual rights, data protection, user privacy,
surveillance reform, and a free and open internet. The respect for individual rights is at the
core of the Personal Data and Information Privacy Code Bill, which maintains access Right to
Information while also enabling citizens to safeguard their privacy.
N
EW DELHI; D. RAVIKUMAR
June 26, 2019.

42
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 47 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Privacy
Commission to perform the functions and duties assigned to it under this Act. Clause 48(1)
provides for appointment of Privacy Commissioners to the Privacy Commission. Clause 48(3)
provides for the appointment of a Selection Committee to fill the vacancies in the Privacy
Commission. Clause 51(1) provides for appointment of officers and employees by the Central
Government to the Privacy Commission. Clause 51(2) provides for salaries and allowances
payable to such employees or officers of the Privacy Commission. Clause 52(7) provides for
salaries and allowances payable to Chief Privacy Commissioners and Privacy Commissioners
of the Privacy Commission. Clause 55 provides for Central Government to provide requisite
funds to the Privacy Commission through the Consolidated Fund of India.
Clause 65 provides for constitution of State Privacy Commission by the State
Governments. Clause 65(6) provides for appointment of officers and employees by the State
Government to the State Privacy Commission. Clause 65(7) provides for State Government to
provide requisite funds to the State Privacy Commission. The expenditure relating to States
shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of State Governments concerned. Clause 65(9)
provides for salaries and allowances payable to State Chief Privacy Commissioners and
Privacy Commissioners of the State Privacy Commission.
However, the expenditure relating to Union territories shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
five hundred crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

43
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 82 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish an effective regime to protect, promote and fulfil the fundamental right to
privacy of all natural persons and protect personal data concerning them, to set out
conditions upon which surveillance of natural persons and interception of
communications may be carried out, to constitute a Privacy Commission,
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. D. Ravikumar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1502LS(S3)—17-07-2019.