AS INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SABHA

23 FEB 200 ,

Bill No. 183 of 2000

THE COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES BILL, 2000
By
Suri 0, S. Basavaras, M.P.
A
BILL

(10 provide for compulsory registration of all marriages in the country.’]

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2000. * shorttitle,

(2) It shall come into force at once. ee
(3) It shall apply to all the citizens of the country irrespective of their caste, colour *PP!ication
or creed,

g

2, Every marriage performed after the commencement of this Act shall be

Compulsory
compulsorily registered. '

registration of
marriages


Authority for
registration of
marriage,
Declaration of
the time of
registration.

Legal siatus,

Power to make
rules.

4. The bride, bridegroom and their parents shall make a declaration at the time of
registration of the marriage in the form of affidavit that they have not violated any provision
of any existing law relating to marriage, prohibition of dowry and Prohibition of polygamy,
applicable to them.

5. (0 It shall be the duty of the bride, bridegroom and their parents or guardians to
fet the marriage registered within five days of solemnisation of the marriage.

(2) In case the parents or guardians of the bride and the bridegroom fail to apply for
the registration within the prescribed time they shall be Punished with imprisonment for a
term of one month or with fine which shall not be less than one thousand Tupees, or with
both.

6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
& marriage which is not registered under this Act, shall not be treated as a velia marriage
and shall be declared as null and void.

7. The Central or the State Government, as the case may be, may frame rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘There is no record of marriages performed in our country. Many cases of bigamy
have been reported in newspapers. Many cases of desertion of women for dowry, etc. have
also been reported. These cases are increasing due to non-registration of marriages.
A woman will have legal recourse once the marriage is registered. The registration of
marriages will also check the subsequent marriages without dissolution of earlier marriages.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI, 6.5. BASAVARAJ
November 6, 2000.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
Out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.