Bill No. 183-F of 2024 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING BILL, 2025 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
L OK SABHA ON 6TH AUGUST, 2025 
 RAJYA SABHA ON  11TH AUGUST, 2025)

THE MERCHANT SHIPPING BILL, 2025
———— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
———— 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
PART II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER I 
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL SHIPPING BOARD AND SEAFARER’S 
WELFARE BOARD 
4. Establishment of National Shipping Board.
5. Constitution of Seafarer’s Welfare Board.
6. Power to make rules.
CHAPTER II 
MARITIME ADMINISTRATION
7. Director-General of Maritime Administration.
8. Officers.
9. Surveyors.
10. Senior radio surveyors and radio inspectors.
11. Mercantile Marine Department.
12. Shipping office.
13. Body for security of vessels and port facilities.
PART III 
REGISTRATION OF VESSELS
14. Application of this Part.
15. Indian vessel and its registration.
16. Registration of Indian chartered foreign vessels.
17. Temporary registration of vessels sought to be recycled.
18. Registrar of Indian vessels.
19. Provisional registration of Indian vessel.
20. Procedure for registration of Indian vessels.
21. Temporary pass in lieu of certificate of registration.
22. Custody and use of certificate.
23. Transfer of Indian vessel or shares.
24. Transmission of property in Indian vessel on death, insolvency, etc.
Bill No. 183-F of 2024

CLAUSES 
25. Order for sale where vessel has ceased to be an Indian vessel.
26. Mortgage of vessel or share.
27. Rights of mortgagee.
28. Liability of mortgagee.
29. Mortgage not affected by insolvency.
30. Transfer of mortgages.
31. Transmission of interest in mortgage in certain circumstances.
32. Rules as to name of vessel.
33. Registration of alterations.
34. Provisional certificate and endorsement where vessel is to be
re-registered.
35. Transfer of registration.
36. Restrictions on re-registration of abandoned vessel.
37. National colours for Indian vessels.
38. Concealment of Indian or assumption of foreign character.
39. Liabilities of vessel not recognised as Indian vessel.
40. Proceedings on forfeiture of vessel.
41. Liability of owners.
42. Evidence of register book, certificate of registration and other documents.
43. Closure of registration.
44. Power to make rules.
PART IV 
MARITIME EDUCATION AND TRAINING
45. Certificates to be held by seafarers.
46. Certificate of competency and certificate of proficiency.
47. Training for grant of certificate of competency and certificate of
proficiency.
48. Examination for grant of certificates.
49. Production of certificate of competency.
50. Recognition of certificates of competency granted in other States.
51. Foreign vessel not to sail without seafarers having certificate.
52. Obligations of certain certificate holders to serve on Indian vessels.
53. Power to make rules.
PART V 
SEAFARERS 
54. Application of this Part.
55. Definitions.
56. Classification of seafarers.
57. Application of maritime labour standards to seafarers and vessels.
(ii)

CLAUSES 
58. Duties of shipping master, director and seafarer’s welfare officer.
59. Minimum age for seafarers.
60. Medical certificate.
61. Training and qualifications.
62. Recruitment and placement of seafarers.
63. Agreement with seafarers.
64. Wages.
65. Hours of rest.
66. Entitlement to leave.
67. Repatriation.
68. Compensation for vessel’s loss or foundering.
69. Manning levels.
70. Accommodation and recreational facilities.
71. Food and catering.
72. Medical care.
73. Ship owners’ liability.
74. Health and safety protection and accident prevention.
75. Social security.
76. Flag State responsibilities.
77. Port State responsibilities.
78. Rules for enforcement of Maritime Labour Convention.
79. Payment of wages.
80. Discharge of seafarers.
81. Wages and property of deceased seafarers and seafarers left behind.
82. Certain undisbursed amounts to be utilised for welfare of seafarers.
83. Shipping master to adjudicate disputes involving seafarer.
84. Power of shipping master to require production of documents.
85. Wages not recoverable outside India in certain cases.
86. Summary proceedings for wages.
87. Restrictions on suits for wages.
88. Remedies of master for wages, disbursements, etc.
89. Power to refer disputes between seafarers and employers to
Tribunal.
90. Recovery of wages, etc., of seafarers lost with vessel.
91. Relief and maintenance of abandoned seafarers.
92. Replacement crew onboard abandoned vessels.
93. Inspection by shipping master, etc.
94. Special provisions for protection of seafarers in respect of litigation.
95. Facilities for making complaint.
(iii)

CLAUSES 
96. Vessel not to be boarded without permission.
97. Misconduct endangering life or vessel.
98. Desertion and absence without leave.
99. General liability against discipline.
100. Smuggling of goods by seafarer.
101. Entry of offences in official logbook.
102. Report of desertions and absences without leave.
103. Entries and certificates of desertion abroad.
104. Facilities for proving desertion in proceedings for forfeiture of wages.
105. Application of forfeitures.
106. Decision of questions of forfeiture and deduction in suits for wages.
107. Payment of fines imposed under agreement to shipping master.
108. Seafarer not to be enticed to desert.
109. Stowaways and seafarers carried under compulsion.
110. On change of master, documents to be handed over to successor.
111. Deserters from foreign vessels.
112. Official logbook.
113. Power to make rules.
PART VI 
SAFETY AND SECURITY
114. Application of this Part.
115. Definitions.
116. Safety and security requirements.
117. Reporting of incidents.
118. Obligations to render assistance on receiving signal of distress and to
persons in danger.
119. Search and rescue services.
120. Radio communication requirements.
121. Information about vessel’s stability.
122. Submersion of load lines.
123. No vessel to carry passenger without certificate.
124. Vessel not to proceed to sea without valid safety and security certificates.
125. Penalties for certain acts.
126. Vessel not to carry cargo or passengers in contravention of Act.
127. Unseaworthy vessel not to be sent to sea.
128. Obligation of ship owner, master or agent with respect to seaworthiness.
129. Safety and security management.
130. Power to make rules.
(iv)

PART VII 
PREVENTION AND CONTAINMENT OF POLLUTION FROM VESSEL AND RESPONSE
CLAUSES 
131. Application of this Part.
132. Definitions.
133. Control of discharge or emission of harmful substances or dumping at sea.
134. Prevention and containment of pollution and response.
135. Vessel not to proceed to sea without valid pollution prevention
certificates.
136. Record books.
137. Power to deny entry, detain or move vessel.
138. Power to take measures for containment of pollution and reporting of
incidents.
139. Power of Central Government to give directions.
140. Measures for detection of pollution.
141. Appointment of analysts.
142. Reception facilities.
143. Power to make rules.
PART VIII 
SURVEY, AUDIT AND CERTIFICATION
144. Survey, audit and certification.
145. Certificates.
146. Power of surveyor.
147. Compliance of provisions of convention.
148. Recognition of certificates granted outside India.
149. Grant of certificate to foreign vessels in India and Indian vessels in
foreign States.
150. Power to call for information.
151. Power to conduct inspections.
152. Power to make rules.
PART IX 
MARITIME LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
CHAPTER I 
COLLISION, ACCIDENT AT SEA AND LIABILITY
153. Application of this Chapter.
154. Apportionment of liability.
155. Damage or loss of vessel, cargo or property.
156. Joint and several liability for loss of life or personal injury.
157. Right of contribution.
158. Duty of master of vessel to assist in case of collision.
(v)

CLAUSES 
159. Collision to be entered in official logbook.
160. Report to Director-General of accidents to vessels.
161. Notice of loss of Indian vessel to be given to Director-General.
CHAPTER II 
LIMITATION OF LIABILITY FOR MARITIME CLAIMS
162. Limitation of liability for damages in respect of certain claims.
163. Conduct barring limitation.
164. Counter claims.
165. Limits of liability.
166. Limit for passenger claims.
167. Aggregation of claims.
168. Constitution of limitation fund.
169. Limitation of liability without constitution of a limitation fund.
170. Distribution of fund.
171. Bar to other actions.
172. Compulsory insurance or other financial security for maritime claims
subject to limitation.
173. Scope of application of this Chapter.
174. Power to make rules for matters under Chapters I and II of this Part.
CHAPTER III 
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
175. Application of this Chapter.
176. Definitions.
177. Liability of ship owner.
178. Joint and several liability for ships.
179. Jurisdiction of High Court.
180. Jurisdiction where pollution damage occurs in two or more States.
181. Limitation of liability.
182. Constitution of limitation fund.
183. Claims for compensation where fund is established.
184. Acquisition of right for compensation by subrogation.
185. Consolidation of claims and distribution of fund.
186. Arrest and sale of ship if ship owner, etc., unable to satisfy claims for
compensation.
187. Restriction on enforcement of claims after establishment of fund.
188. Compulsory insurance or other financial security.
189. Acceptance of certificate granted outside India.
190. Ban on entering or leaving an Indian port without certificate.
191. Direct action against insurer or other person providing financial
security.
(vi)

CLAUSES 
192. Recognition of judgment of court of contracting parties to Civil
Liability Convention.
193. Limitation period.
194. Government ships.
195. Power to make rules.
CHAPTER IV 
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR BUNKER OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
196. Application of this Chapter.
197. Definitions.
198. Liability for bunker oil pollution.
199. Exemption from liability.
200. Right of ship owner to limitation of liability.
201. Determination of limitation of liability.
202. Consolidation of claims and distribution of amount.
203. Extinguishment of right to claim.
204. Maintenance of compulsory insurance or other financial security.
205. Direct action against insurer or other person providing financial
security.
206. Grant of certificate.
207. Ban on entering or leaving port without clearance.
208. Right of recourse.
209. Recognition of judgment of court of contracting parties to Bunker
Convention.
210. Power to make rules.
CHAPTER V 
INTERNATIONAL OIL POLLUTION COMPENSATION FUND 
211. Application of this Chapter.
212. Definitions.
213. Contribution to Fund.
214. Contribution payable by persons to Fund.
215. Liability of Fund.
216. Limitation of liability of Fund.
217. Power to call for information.
218. Claims against Fund and Jurisdiction of courts.
219. Extinguishment of claims.
220. Subrogation and right of recourse.
221. Power of Central Government to establish fund for excess claim.
222. Power to make rules.
(vii)

PART X 
MARINE INCIDENT AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
CLAUSES 
223. Application of this Part.
224. Definitions.
225. Appointment of nodal authority for marine incidents.
226. Primary response party.
227. Plans and procedures for response mechanisms.
228. Powers of nodal authority.
229. Maintenance of compulsory insurance or other financial security.
230. Power to make rules.
PART XI 
INVESTIGATION AND INQUIRIES ON MARINE CASUALTIES
231. Marine casualties and report thereof.
232. Power of Central Government to initiate proceedings.
PART XII 
WRECK AND SALVAGE 
CHAPTER I 
WRECK 
233. Application of this Chapter.
234. Definitions.
235. Receiver of wreck.
236. Duty to report wrecks.
237. Determination of hazard.
238. Locating and marking of wrecks.
239. Power to pass over 
adjoining lands.
240. Prohibition of certain acts in respect of wreck.
241. Search warrants where wreck is involved.
242. Measures to facilitate removal of wrecks.
243. Liability of ship owner.
244. Maintenance of insurance or other financial security.
245. Claims of ship owners to wreck.
246. Extinguishment of right to claim recovery of costs.
CHAPTER II 
SALVAGE 
247. Application of this Chapter.
248. Definitions.
(viii)

CLAUSES 
249. Salvage payable for saving life, cargo or wreck.
250. Salvage operations controlled by Government or port and public
authorities.
251. Salvage contracts.
252. Duties of salvor, owner and master.
253. Rights of salvors.
254. Powers and duties of Central Government in relation to salvage
operations.
255. Retention of salvors.
256. Disputes between ship owner and salvor.
257. Adjudication of disputes between ship owner and salvor.
258. Extinguishment of claims.
259. Savings.
260. Power to make rules.
PART XIII 
SAILING, FISHING AND OTHER VESSELS
261. Application of this Part.
262. Definitions.
263. Decision of question whether a vessel falls under this Part.
264. Requirements for safety, security, prevention of pollution and
insurance.
265. Manning of fishing vessels.
266. Central Government to grant certificate of proficiency.
267. Training for grant of certificate of competency and certificate of
proficiency.
268. Examination for grant of certificate.
269. Withdrawal, suspension or cancellation of certificate.
270. Production of certificate.
271. Agreements in respect of fishing vessel.
272. Fishery data to be furnished by Indian fishing vessels.
273. Vessel not to proceed without valid certificates.
274. Power of Central Government to initiate action against
non-mechanically propelled vessels.
275. Statement relating to crew of vessels to be maintained.
276. Inquiry to jettisoning of cargo.
277. Detention of vessel by proper officer.
278. Detention of unseaworthy vessels.
279. Power to exempt.
280. Power to make rules.
(ix)

PART XIV 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES 
CLAUSES 
281. Offences and penalties.
282. Authority for imposition of penalty and procedure therefor.
283. Place of trial and jurisdiction of court.
284. Special provision regarding punishment.
285. Appointment of Special Public Prosecutors.
286. Penalties in respect of masters or owners of special trade passenger
vessels.
287. Offences by companies.
288. Depositions to be received in evidence when witness cannot be
produced.
289. Power to detain foreign vessel that has occasioned damage.
290. Power to enforce detention of vessel.
291. Levy of wages, etc., by distress of movable property or vessel.
292. Service of documents.
PART XV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
293. Birth and death of persons onboard vessel during a voyage.
294. Inquiry into cause of death onboard or person missing from Indian
vessel.
295. Certain persons deemed to be public servants.
296. Power of persons authorised to investigate, inquire, etc.
297. Power to permit alternative provisions and arrangement.
298. Control of nuclear vessels and security measures.
299. Exemption of Government vessels, foreign and Indian.
300. Power to exempt.
301. Power of Director-General to give directions.
302. Special provisions with respect to defaulting ship owners.
303. Right to pursue foreign vessels in high seas.
304. Power of Central Government with respect to vessel without
nationality.
305. Protection of action taken in good faith.
306. Agreement with other States.
307. Control measures and detention of vessels.
308. Costs of detention and damages.
309. Procedure for detention of vessel other than Indian vessel.
310. Obligations of ports under conventions and monitoring thereof by
Director-General.
311. Power of Central Government in respect of abandoned vessels.
(x)

CLAUSES 
312. Power to cancel, suspend, etc., certificate of seafarers.
313. Re-hearing.
314. Maintenance of insurance or such other financial security.
315. Use and maintenance of electronic records.
316. Classification of vessels.
317. Transparency of charges.
318. Power of Director-General to call for information.
319. General power to make rules.
320. Provisions with respect to rules.
321. Power to remove difficulties.
322. Power to constitute committees.
323. Power of Central Government to protect interest of Indian shipping.
324. Repeals and savings.
PART XVI 
AMENDMENT TO THE MARINE AIDS TO NAVIGATION ACT, 2021 
325. Amendment of Act 20 of 2021.
(xi)

1 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING BILL, 2025
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to merchant shipping to ensure 
compliance with India’s obligation under the maritime treaties and 
international instruments to which India is a party and also to ensure the 
development of Indian ship ping and efficient maintenance of Indian 
mercantile marine in a manner best suited to serve the national interest and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:— 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed 
for different provisions of this Act. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
Bill No. 183-F of 2024 

2 
Application 
of Act. 
Definitions. 
2. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall apply
to,— 
(a) any vessel which is registered in India; or
(b) any vessel which is required by this Act to be so registered,
wherever it may be. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided, the provision s of this Act which apply to
vessels other than those referred to in sub -section (1) shall so apply only while 
any such vessel is within India or its coastal waters. 
(3) Subject to sub -section (2) and unless otherwise expressly provided, the
provisions of this Act shall not apply to Indian controlled tonnage vessels. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “Indian 
controlled tonnage vessel” means an Indian vessel, other than a fishing vessel or 
sailing vessel, owned by any person specified under sub-section (1) of  section 15 
and registered at a port or place in a country other than India.  
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “abandoned seafarer” means a seafarer who is deemed to have been
abandoned in violation of the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder or the seafarers’ employment agreement, where the ship owner— 
(a) fails to cover the cost of the seafarer’s repatriation; or
(b) has left the seafarer without the necessar y maintenance and
support; or 
(c) has otherwise unilaterally severed ties with the seafarer including
failure to pay contractual wages for a period of at least two months; 
(2) “abandoned vessel” includes any of the following, namely:—
(a) a vessel whic h is abandoned by the ship owner without any
hope of recovering it or without any intention of returning to it; or 
(b) a vessel whose master has no financial means for its
operation; or 
(c) a vessel whose owner is unknown or cannot be traced within
reasonable time, despite the Central Government duly notifying the 
flag State of the vessel or consulate of the country of domicile of the 
registered owner or the master; or 
(d) a vessel whose owner fails to fulfil the ship owner’s
obligations under this Act towards ensuring safety, security, prevention 
of pollution or welfare of seafarers and whose insurer, salvor or 
contractor fail to fulfil such obligations within such reasonable time as 
may be specified by the Central Government; or 
(e) a vessel restrained  by any court or public authority in India
in respect of which the public authority or the person assigned 
responsibility by the court to fulfil the ship owner’s obligations under 
this Act towards ensuring safety, security, prevention of pollution or 
welfare of seafarers, fails to do so. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub -clause (d), failure on part of 
the ship owner shall also include failure on part of the charterer, manager or 
operator of the vessel; 
(3) “agent”, in relation to a vessel, means a person authorised to act as
such by the owner and if such vessel is in port, the agent shall also have 
authorisation from the port; 

3 
80 of 1976. 
80 of 1976. 
18 of 2013. 
(4) “Anti -Fouling Systems Convention” means the International
Convention on Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships, 2001, 
signed in London on 5th day of October, 2001; 
(5) “audit” means a systematic and independent examination to
determine whether the management system as provided in the Safety 
Convention complies with the planned arrangements and such arrangements 
are implemented effectively and are sufficient to achieve the objectives of 
the said convention; 
(6) “Ballast Water Management Convention” means the International
Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Wate r and 
Sediments, 2004, signed in London on the 13th day of February, 2004; 
(7) “baseline” means the baseline referred to in sub -section (2) of
section 3 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic 
Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976; 
(8) “certificate of competency” or “certificate of proficiency” means
the certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency granted under 
sub-section (1) of section 46; 
(9) “chief ship surveyor” means the chief ship surveyor specified in
sub-clause (iii) of clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 8; 
(10) “chief surveyor” means the chief surveyor specified in
sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 8; 
(11) “Civil Liability Convention” means the Internationa l Convention
on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1992; 
(12) “coastal waters ” means any part of territorial waters of India,
along with any part of the adjoining maritime zones of India within the 
meaning of the Terriorial Waters, Continental She lf, Exclusive Economic 
Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, or any other law for time being 
in force;  
(13) “coasts” include the coasts of creeks and any part of the sea or
any part of a river within the ebb and flow of the tide at ordinary spring 
tides and not being a harbour (tidal waters); 
(14) “company” means a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2
of the Companies Act, 2013; 
(15) “convention” means an international convention to which India is
a party; 
(16) “Director -General” means the  Director-General of Maritime
Administration appointed under sub-section (1) of section 7; 
(17) “equipment”, in relation to a vessel, includes boats, tackle,
machinery, boilers, cargo handling gear, pumps and any fitting, anchor, 
propeller, apparels, furn iture, life -saving appliances of every description, 
spars, masts, rigging and sails, fog signals, lights, shapes and signals of 
distress, medicines and medical and surgical stores and appliances, charts, 
radio installations, appliances for preventing, dete cting or extinguishing 
fires, buckets, compasses, axes, lanterns, loading and discharging gears and 
appliances of all kinds and all other stores and spares or articles belonging 
to or to be used in connection with or necessary for the navigation, 
propulsion, security, pollution prevention and safety of the vessel; 

4 
(18) “fisher” means any person engaged in any capacity or performing
any work aboard a fishing vessel at sea, by whatever means they are paid, 
but not including pilots or persons in service of the Central Government or 
the State Government aboard a fishing vessel, or any person who only 
works aboard such vessel when onshore; 
(19) “fishing vessel” means a vessel which is used or intended to be
used for the purpose of fishing in the seas; 
(20) “gross tonnage” means the gross tonnage referred to in clause (b)
of sub-section (5) of section 20; 
(21) “High Court”, in relation to a vessel, means a High Court within
the limits of whose jurisdiction,— 
(a) the port of registry of the vessel is situate; or
(b) the vessel is for the time being; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises;
(22) “Indian ambassador” means the ambassador, high commissioner,
deputy ambassador, deputy high commissioner, consul -general, consul, 
vice-consul, consular agent or pro consul appointed as such by the Central 
Government and includes any person authorised by the Central Government 
to perform the functions of an Indian ambassador; 
(23) “Indian Coast Guard” means the Coast Guard constituted under
the Coast Guard Act, 1978; 
(24) “Indian vessel” means a vessel which is registered under
section 15; 
(25) “Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims Convention” means
the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims signed in 
London on the 19th day of November, 1976; 
(26) “Maritime Labour Convention” means the Maritime Labour
Convention signed in Geneva on the 23rd day of February, 2006; 
(27) “MARPOL Convention” means the International Convention for
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 including its Protocol of 1978; 
(28) “master” includes any person (except a pilot or a harbour master)
having command or charge of a vessel; 
(29) “mortgage” means the transfer of an interest in a registered vessel
or a share therein for the purpose of securing the payment of money 
advanced or to be advanced by way of loan, or other valuable consideration, 
and the instrument creating the security, an existing or future debt, or the 
performance of an agreement which may give rise to a pecuniary liability; 
(30) “nautical advisor” means the nautical advisor specified in
sub-clause (i) of clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 8; 
(31) “notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette and the term “notify” or “notified” shall be construed accordingly; 
(32) “owner”, in relation to a vessel, means the person to whom the
vessel or a share in the vessel belongs; 
(33) “passenger” means any person carried onboard a vessel, except—
(a) a person employed or engaged in any capacity onboard the
vessel on the business of the vessel; 
30 of 1978. 

5 
1 of 2021. 
(b) a person onboard  the vessel either in pursuance of the
obligations laid upon the master to carry shipwrecked, distressed or other 
persons or by reason of any circumstances which neither the master nor 
the charterer, if any, could have prevented or forestalled; and 
(c) a child under one year of age;
(34) “passenger vessel” means a vessel carrying more than twelve
passengers; 
(35) “pollution damage” means,—
(a) loss or damage caused outside the vessel resulting from the
escape, emission or discharge of cargo, oil or any  other material from 
the vessel, wherever such escape, emission or discharge may occur; or 
(b) the costs of impairment of environment or costs of
preventive measures and further loss or damage caused by preventive 
measures; 
(36) “pollution prevention convention” means any convention relating
to prevention of pollution from vessels, to which India is a party, including 
MARPOL Convention, Anti-Fouling Systems Convention and Ballast Water 
Management Convention; 
(37) “port” shall include port f acility, shipyard, ship breaking yards,
ship repair unit, offshore facilities and terminals; 
(38) “port authority”,—
(a) in relation to any major port, means the  Board of Major Port
Authority constituted under section 3 of the Major Port Authorities 
Act, 2021; 
(b) in relation to any other port, means such person or body of
persons responsible for the administration of ports under any other 
applicable law;  
(c) in relation to any terminal or place not forming a part of a
port, means the person under who se supervision the terminal or place 
is operated; 
(39) “port facility” means any location or area including anchorages
or awaiting berths or approaches from seaward as determined by the Central 
Government, or such designated authority as the Central Gover nment may 
notify, where interface between vessels or a vessel and a port takes place; 
(40) “port of registry” means the port or place notified as such under
sub-section ( 3) of section 1 5 and in relation to a vessel, sailing vessel, 
fishing vessel or any o ther vessel, means the port at which such vessel is 
registered;  
(41) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central
Government under this Act; 
(42) “principal officer” means the principal officer appointed under
sub-section (2) of section 11; 
(43) “proceeding” includes any suit, appeal or application under this
Act; 
(44) “proper officer” means the officer designated by the Central
Government to be the proper officer at the port or place and in respect of 
the matters to which reference is made in this Act; 

6 
(45) “proper return port” means such port as is agreed upon by the
seafarer and his employer, in the agreement or otherwise, or in the absence of 
an agreement, the port where the seafarer was employed or joined the vessel; 
(46) “property”, in relation to a seafarer, includes personal effects;
(47) “reception facilities”, in relation to a port, terminal, shipyard,
ship repair facility or ship recycling facility, means facilities for enabling 
vessels using the port t erminal, shipyard, ship repair facility or ship 
recycling facility to discharge or deposit any substance; 
(48) “Registrar” means the Registrar of Indian vessel referred to in
section 18; 
(49) “registered owner” means the person or persons registered as t he
owner of the vessel; 
(50) “Safety Convention” means the international convention for the
Safety of Life at Sea, signed in London on the 1st day of November, 1974 
and shall include its protocols; 
(51) “sailing vessel” means any primitive or traditional ly built
wooden vessel not primarily propelled, provided with sufficient sail area for 
navigation under sails alone, whether or not fitted with mechanical means 
of propulsion, but does not include a pleasure craft; 
(52) “salvage” means any act or activity  undertaken to assist a vessel
or any other property in danger in navigable waters or in any other waters 
whatsoever; 
(53) “Salvage Convention” means the International Convention on
Salvage, 1989, signed in London on the 28th day of April, 1989; 
(54) “sa lvor” means any person rendering services in direct
connection with salvage operation; 
(55) “sea-going”, in relation to a vessel, means a vessel proceeding or
intending to proceed beyond such waters as the Central Government or the 
State Government may, by notification, declare to be inland waters; 
(56) “seafarer” means any person who is employed or engaged or
works in any capacity onboard a sea-going vessel, but does not include,— 
(i) a person who is in the employment or engagement or work
onboard in any capacity in a warship or any Government vessel used 
for military or non-commercial purposes; or 
(ii) any other person as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify; 
(57) “seafarer’s welfare officer” means the seafarer’s welfare officer
appointed under sub-section (2) of section 12;
(58) “security”, 
in relation to maritime security, includes any
measures to protect port facility or vessels or any person or thing relating 
directly or indirectly to maritime navigation,— 
(i) against terrorism, s abotage, stowaways, illegal migrants,
asylum seekers, piracy, armed robbery, seizure or pilferage; and 
(ii) against any other hostile act or influence which threatens the
security in the maritime transport sector, 
employed by the owners or operators or persons in charge of the vessels or 
management of port facilities, offshore installations and other marine 
organisations or establishments, or undertaken by the Central Government; 

7 
(59) “ship” means any watercraft, used or capable of being used in
navigation in, above, or under the water; but does not include fishing vessel 
or sailing vessels; 
(60) “ship owner” means the owner, including the registered owner
and bareboat charterer, of the vessel; 
(61) “shipping master” means the shipping master appointed under
section 12; 
(62) “shipping office” means the shipping office established under
section 12; 
(63) “special trade passenger” means a passenger carried in special
trade passenger vessel in spaces on the weather deck or upper deck or 
between decks which accommodate more than eight passengers; 
(64) “State” means any country including India;
(65) “Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for
Seafarers Convention” means International Convention on Standards of 
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978, s igned in 
London on the 7th day of July, 1978; 
(66) “surveyor” means a person appointed under clause ( d) of
sub-section (1) of section 8, or section 9; 
(67) “tindal” means the person in command or charge of a sailing vessel;
(68) “Tribunal” means the Tribunal constituted under sub -section (1)
of section 89; 
(69) “unseaworthy vessel” means vessel, the materials of which she is
made, her construction and design, the number, description and 
qualification of the seafarers including o fficers, the weight, description and 
stowage of the cargo and ballast, the condition of her hull and equipment, 
boilers and machinery are not such as to render her in every respect fit for 
the proposed voyage or service; 
(70) “vessel” includes every description of water craft used or capable
of being used in the marine environment, such as ship, boat, sailing vessel, 
fishing vessel, submersible, semi-submersible, hydrofoils, non-displacement 
crafts, amphibious crafts, wing -in-ground crafts, pleasure craft s, barges, 
lighters, Mobile Offshore Drilling Units, Mobile Offshore Units, or of any 
other description, whether fitted with mechanical means of propulsion or not; 
(71) “voyage” means the passage between the vessel’s port or place of
departure and her fi nal port or place of arrival, including the activities 
within the port; 
(72) “wages” include emoluments;
(73) “wreck” includes the following, upon a maritime casualty, namely:—
(a) a sunken or stranded vessel; or
(b) any part of a sunken or stranded vessel, including any object
or goods or cargo that is or has been onboard such a vessel; 

8 
Establishment 
of National 
Shipping 
Board. 
(c) any object or goods or cargo that is lost at sea from a vessel
stranded, sunken or adrift at sea; or 
(d) a vessel that is in distress or is about, or may reasonably be
expected, to sink or to strand, where effective measures to assist the 
vessel or any property in danger are not already being taken to the 
satisfaction of the Director-General. 
PART II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER I 
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL SHIPPING BOARD AND SEAFARER’S WELFARE BOARD 
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be established a Board to be called 
the National Shipping Board (hereinafter referred to as the Shipping Board) for 
the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Shipping Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) six members of P arliament of whom four shall be elected from
amongst themselves by members of the House of the People and two from 
amongst themselves by the members of the Council of States; 
(b) such number of other members, not exceeding sixteen, out of
which at least four shall be women, as the Central Government may think 
fit to appoint to the Shipping Board, to represent— 
(i) the Central Government;
(ii) ship owners;
(iii) seafarers; and
(iv) such other interests as in the opinion of the Central
Government, ought to be represented on the Shipping Board: 
Provided that the Shipping Board shall include an equal number of persons 
representing the ship owners and seafarers. 
(3) The term of a member elected under clause ( a) of sub -section (2) shall
come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the House from which he 
was elected. 
(4) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members of the
Shipping Board to be its Chairperson. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Member of
Parliament referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) or nominated as 
Chairperson under sub-section (4), shall not be deemed to be holding the office of 
profit for the purposes of sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of article 102 of the 
Constitution. 
(6) The Shipping Board shall advise the Central Government,—
(a) on matters relating to Indian shipping including the development
thereof; and 
(b) on such other matters arising out of this Act as the Central
Government may refer to it for advice. 
(7) The Shipping Board shall have power to regulate its own procedure for
the conduct of its business. 

9 
(8) The term of office, manner of filling casual vacancies and travelling and
other allowances payable to, members of the Shipping Board and the service 
conditions of the Chairperson, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(9) The Shipping Board shall be assisted by such officers and other
employees and the manner of their appointment and the terms and conditions of 
their service shall be such as may be prescribed. 
5. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification specify in this behalf, there shall be constituted an advisory board to 
be called as Seafarer’s Welfare Board (hereinafter referred to as the Welfare 
Board) for the purposes of advising the Central Government on the measures to 
be taken for promoting the welfare of seafarers under this Act, generally and in 
particular on the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the establishment of hostels or boarding and lodging houses for
seafarers; 
(b) the establishment of clubs, canteens, libraries and other like
amenities for the benefit of seafarers; 
(c) the establishment of hospital and provision of medical treatment
for seafarers; 
(d) the provision of educational and other facilities for seafarers;
(e) the measures to be taken for welfare of distressed or abandoned seafarers;
(f) the measures to be taken in the case of seafarer who is a foreigner
but abandoned in the waters within the jurisdiction of India. 
(2) The composition of the Welfare Board, the term of office of member s
thereof, the procedure to be followed in the conduct of its business, the travelling 
and other allowances payable to, members of the Welfare Board, shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
(3) The fee payable by the owners of vessels for the purposes of provi ding
amenities to seafarers, the procedure by which any such fee may be collected or 
recovered and the manner in which the proceeds of such fees, after deduction of 
the cost of collection, shall be utilised, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4) The port  based welfare facility and any other measures to be taken for
promoting the welfare of seafarers shall be such as may be prescribed. 
6. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the term of office, manner of filling vacancies and the travelling
and other allowances payable to the members of the Shipping Board and the 
service conditions of the Chairperson under sub-section (8) of section 4; 
(b) the manner of appointment of officers and other employees of the
Shipping Board and the terms and conditions of their service under 
sub-section (9) of section 4; 
(c) the composition of the Welfare Board, term of office of its
members, procedure for conduct of business and the travelling and other 
allowances payable to such members under sub-section (2) of section 5;  
(d) the fee payable by owners of  vessels, procedure for collection  of
fees and the manner in which the proceeds of such fees shall be utilised 
under sub-section (3) of section 5; and 
Constitution of 
Seafarer’s  
Welfare Board. 
Power to make 
rules. 

10 
Director-
General of 
Maritime 
Administration. 
Officers. 
(e) the port based  welfare facility and other measures to be taken for
promoting the welfare of seafarers under sub-section (4) of section 5. 
CHAPTER II 
MARITIME ADMINISTRATION 
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a person to be
the Director-General of Maritime Administration for the purposes of exercising 
or discharging the powers, authority or duties conferred or imposed upon him by 
or under this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may, by ge neral or special order, direct that
any power, authority or jurisdiction exercisable by it under or in relation to any 
such provisions of this Act as may be specified in the order shall, subject to such 
conditions and restrictions as may be so specified, b e exercisable also by the 
Director-General or such other officer as may be specified in the order. 
(3) The Director -General may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, by general or special order, direct that any power or authority 
conferred upon or delegated to, and any duty imposed upon him by or under this 
Act may, subject to such conditions and restrictions as he may think fit to impose, 
be exercised or discharged also by such officer or other authority as he may 
specify in this behalf. 
(4) Every officer specified in section 8 shall discharge their functions under
the general superintendence and control of the Director-General. 
8. (1) There shall be the following officers to be appointed by the Central
Government who shall discharge the d uties and functions under this Act, 
namely:—  
(a) Additional Director-General;
(b) Deputy Director-General;
(c) Assistant Director-General;
(d) Surveyors, which shall include the following, namely:―
(i) nautical advisor;
(ii) chief surveyor;
(iii) chief ship surveyor;
(iv) principal officer;
(v) deputy nautical advisor;
(vi) deputy chief surveyor;
(vii) deputy chief ship surveyor;
(viii) nautical surveyor;
(ix) engineer and ship surveyor;
(x) ship surveyor;
(xi) junior ship surveyor;
(e) shipping ma ster which shall include deputy or assistant shipping
master; 
(f) director which shall include deputy director or assistant director;
(g) senior radio surveyor;
(h) radio inspector;

11 
(i) seafarer’s welfare officer;
(j) any other officer as may be notified by the Central Government.
(2) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
officers specified in sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed. 
9. The Central Government may, by notification, appoint, as many persons
as it may think fit to be surveyors for the purposes of this Act: 
Provided that the Central Government may , by notification, authorise any 
person or body of persons, on such terms and conditions as may be specified 
therein, to be surveyor for the purposes of this Act. 
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint, as many
senior radio surveyors and radio inspectors as it may consider necessary for the 
purpose of securing compliance with the requirements of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder relating to radio communication. 
(2) The powers and functions of the senior radio surveyors and radio
inspectors shall be such as may be prescribed. 
11. (1) The Central Government may establish and maintain at each of the
ports of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Kochi, Kandla and such other ports or places 
in India, as it may consider necessary, an office of the Mercantile Marine 
Department for the administration of this Act and the rules made thereunder.   
(2) The Central Government may , by notification, appoint a person to be
the principal officer who shall be incharge of the office of the Mercantile Marine 
Departments at the ports of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Kochi, Kandla and any 
other port or places notified by the Central Government. 
(3) The Central Government may, by noti fication, specify the office of the
Mercantile Marine Department at any other port or place  which shall be in the 
charge of such officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf. 
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish a shipping
office at every port in India in which it thinks it necessary so to do, and shall as it 
may consider necessary, appoint thereto— 
(a) a shipping master and as many deputy shipping masters and
assistant shipping masters as may be required; 
(b) a dir ector and as many deputy directors and assistant directors as
may be required; and 
(c) seafarer’s welfare officers.
(2) The Central Government may appoint seafarer’s welfare officers at such
ports in or outside India as it may consider necessary. 
(3) The Central Government may direct that at any port at which no
separate shipping office is established, the whole or any part of the business of 
the shipping office shall be conducted at such office as the Central Government 
may specify, and thereupon the same shall be conducted accordingly. 
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute a body for
the security of vessels and port facilities, with such name and to be headed by an 
officer with such designation, as may be specified therein. 
(2) The administration of the body shall vest in the officer who shall head
the body constituted under sub-section (1). 
(3) The body constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall be responsible for
carrying out the regulatory and oversight function in respect of such matters 
relating to security of vessels and port facilities as may be prescribed: 
Surveyors.
Senior radio 
surveyors and 
radio inspectors. 
Mercantile 
Marine 
Department. 
Shipping office. 
Body for 
security of 
vessels and port 
facilities.  

12 
Application of 
this Part.  
Indian vessel 
and its 
registration. 
. 
Provided that  while framing rules under th is sub-section, the Central 
Government shall take into consideration the provisions of the International Ship 
and Port Facility Security Code under the Safety Convention.  
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of  sub-section ( 3), the body
constituted under sub-section (1) shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) provide regulatory framework for security of vessels and port
facilities; 
(b) ensure timely collection and exchange of security related
information with regard to vessels and port facilities; 
(c) coordinate with other agencies;
(d) any other functions as may be prescribed.
PART III 
REGISTRATION OF VESSELS 
14. This Part shall apply to sea-going vessels.
15. (1) No vessel shall be an Indian vessel unless such vessel is owned by
any of the following persons and in such proportion of ownership as may be 
notified by the Central Government, namely:— 
(a) a citizen of  India including a Non-Resident Indian or an Overseas
Citizen of India; or 
(b) a company or a body established by or under any Central Act or State
Act having its registered office or principal place of business in India; or 
(c) such other person or body as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf. 
(2) No vessel which is wholly owned by an Overseas Citizen of India shall
be required to be registered as an Indian vessel. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, declare any port or place
as a port  of  registry under  this Act and every  Indian vessel shall be registered 
under this Part.  
(4) Any vessel registered at a port in India under any enactment repealed by
this Act shall,  at  the  commencement of  this  Act, be  deemed  to have  been 
registered under this Act and recognised as an Indian vessel. 
(5) Subject to any exemptions or  modifications  made  by  the  Central
Government, all vessels 
belonging to the Government, other than vessels of the 
Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, customs authorities, Central Armed Police
Forces and police, shall be registered under this Act. 
(6) Not
withstanding  anything contained  in this section,  an Indian vessel
m
ay be registered  in  a State  other  than I ndia  subject  to  such  conditions  as 
may
 be prescribed. 
(7) Any Indian  vessel  proceeding  to  sea  without  a  valid  certificate  of
regist
ration under this Act shall be detained until a valid certificate of registration 
is produced to the proper officer. 
(8) A vessel other than an Indian vessel abandoned in Indian w aters
which is subsequently acquired by an entity eligible to register a vessel under 

13 
49 of 2019. 
this Act may be registered under this Act in accordance with such procedure 
as may be prescribed.  
16. Any foreign vessel chartered on a bareboat charter-cum-demise contract
by an Indian charterer may be registered under this Part in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “bareboat charter-cum-demise” 
means a bareboat charter where the ownership of the vessel is intended to be 
transferred after a specified period to the charterer to whom it has been chartered. 
17. Any vessel not registered under this Act which is sought to be recycled in
India in accordance with the provisions of the Recycling of Ships Act, 2019 and the 
rules made thereunder, may be registered temporarily under this Part in such 
manner, for such duration and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
18. The principal officer of the Mercantile Marine Department or such person
as the Central Government may, by notification authorise, shall be the Registrar of 
Indian vessels at such port of registry as may be specified in the notification. 
19. (1) If, at any port or place a vessel becomes entitled to be registered as
an Indian vessel, the Registrar may grant a provisional certificate of registration 
in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed and such provisional 
certificate shall have the effect of a certificate of registration. 
(2) The procedure for validity and extension or cancellation of such
registration shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(3) The unsatisfied mortgage shall continue to be reflected in the register
book in case of deemed closure of the provisional registration. 
20. (1) An Indian vessel shall be registered in accordance with such
procedure, for such period and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed. 
(2) On the expiry of the period specified in sub -section (1), the registration
of the vessel shall be renewed in accordance with such procedure and on payment 
of such fee as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Director -General shall, by way of an order, specify certain
conditions for an Indian vessel and for different classes of vessels sought to be 
registered under this Act.  
(4) Where it appears to the Registrar that there is any doubt as to the title of
any Indian vessel, he may require evidence to be given to his satisfaction that the 
vessel is entitled to be registered as an Indian vessel in such manner and in 
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Registrar shall, on being satisf ied with the requirements of this
section, grant— 
(a) a certificate of registration containing the particulars of the vessel
as entered in the register book in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(b) a tonnage certificate containing the gross and ne t tonnage as
determined in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(6) In the event of the certificate of registration being defaced or mutilated,
a new certificate shall be granted in lieu of the original certificate in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 
Registration of 
Indian chartered 
foreign vessels. 
Temporary 
registration of 
vessels sought to 
be recycled. 
Registrar of 
Indian vessels. 
Provisional 
registration of 
Indian vessel. 
Procedure for 
registration of 
Indian vessels. 

14 
Temporary 
pass in lieu of 
certificate of 
registration. 
Custody and 
use of 
certificate. 
Transfer of 
Indian vessel 
or shares. 
(7) In the event of a registered vessel being,—
(a) actually, or constructively lost;
(b) taken by the enemy;
(c) burnt or broken up;
(d) for any reason, ceasing to be an Indian vessel; or
(e) registered under any other law for the time being in force at the
relevant time, 
every owner of such vessel shall immedi ately on obtaining knowledge of the 
event, comply with such procedure as may be prescribed. 
(8) Every Indian vessel shall be described by such name, call sign and
official number in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(9) Every Registrar shall keep a register book, make entries in that book
and maintain the records of vessels registered under the provisions of this Act, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
(10) Where there is a change in ownership of a registered Indian vessel, the
Registrar of the port of registry shall register the name of new owner and grant a fresh 
certificate of registration, in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. 
21. Where, pursuant to an application for registration made before the
Registrar, a certificate of reg istration has not been granted to a vessel within the 
specified period, but it appears to the Central Government that by reason of such 
special circumstances as may be prescribed, it is desirable that permission should 
be granted to any Indian vessel to pr oceed on a voyage, the Central Government 
may authorise the Registrar to grant a pass in such form as may be prescribed, 
and that pass shall for the period and within the limits mentioned therein have the 
same effect as a certificate of registration. 
22. (1) The certificate of registration shall be used only for the lawful
navigation of the vessel and shall at all times remain in the custody of the person 
in charge of the vessel and shall not be subject to detention by reason of any title, 
lien, charge or i nterest whatever, had or claimed by any owner, mortgagee or 
other person to, on or in the vessel. 
(2) No person, whether interested in a vessel or not who has in his
possession or under his control the certificate of registration of a vessel shall 
refuse or omit without reasonable cause, to deliver such certificate on demand, to 
the person entitled to the custody thereof for the purposes of the lawful 
navigation of the vessel or, to any Registrar or other person entitled by law to 
require such delivery.  
(3) If the master or owner of an Indian vessel uses or attempts to use for her
navigation a certificate of registration not legally granted in respect of the vessel, 
he shall be guilty of an offence under this sub -section and the vessel shall be 
liable to forfeiture.  
23. (1) No person shall transfer or acquire any Indian vessel or any share or
interest therein at any time during which the security of India or any part of the 
territory thereof is threatened by sanction, war or external aggression and a 
proclamation of emergency issued under clause ( 1) of article 352 of the 
Constitution is in operation, without the previous approval of the Central 
Government and any transaction effected in contravention of this provision shall 
be void and unenforceable. 
(2) The Central Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so
to do for the purpose of conserving the tonnage of Indian shipping, by order, 
refuse to give its approval to any such transfer or acquisition in the circumstances 
referred under sub-section (1). 

15 
(3) No transfer or acquisition of any Indian vessel shall be valid unless,—
(a) all mortgages entered in its register are satisfied or the mortgagee
has given his consent in writing for the transfer of the vessel; 
(b) all wages and other amounts due to seafarers in connection with
their employment on that vessel have been paid in a ccordance with the 
provisions of this Act;  
(c) any subsisting entry has been made of any court order prohibiting
transfer or any dealing with that vessel; 
(d) any unpaid statutory fees that may be levied on the vessel has been
paid and informed in writing to the Registrar. 
(4) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, an Indian vessel or a
share therein shall be transferred, only by an instrument, in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed. 
(5) The instrument for the transfer of an Indian ves sel or of a share therein
shall be registered by the Registrar in accordance with such procedure as may be 
prescribed. 
24. The property in an Indian vessel or share therein may be transmitted to a
person on the death or insolvency of any registered owner or by any lawful means 
other than by a transfer under this Act subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed.  
25. Where, by reason of the transmission of any property in a vessel or a
share therein on death, insolvency or otherwise, a vessel ceases to be an Indian 
vessel, it may be ordered to be sold in such manner as may be prescribed. 
26. (1) The mortgage of an Indian vessel shall be in the prescribed form and
on the production of such instrument, the Registrar of Indian vessel’s port of 
registry shall record it in the register book in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) Mortgages shall be recorded by the Registra r in the order of time in
which they are produced to him for that purpose, and the Registrar shall, by 
memorandum under his hand, notify on each mortgage that it has been recorded 
by him stating the day and hour of that record. 
(3) Except in so far as may be necessary for making a mortgaged vessel or
share available as a security for the mortgage debt, the mortgagee shall not, by 
reason of his mortgage, be deemed to be the owner of the vessel or share, nor 
shall the mortgagor be deemed to have ceased to be owner thereof.  
(4) Where a registered mortgage is discharged, the Registrar shall, on the
production of such documents as may be prescribed, make an entry in the register 
book to the effect that the mortgage has been discharged, and on that entry being 
made, the estate, if any, which passed to the mortgagee shall vest in the person in 
whom (having regard to intervening acts and circumstances, if any) it would have 
vested, if the mortgage had not been made.  
(5) If there are more than one recorded mortgage in respect of the same
vessel or share, the mortgagees shall, notwithstanding any express, implied or 
constructive notice, have priority according to the date and time on which each 
mortgage is recorded in the register book and not according to the date of  each 
mortgage itself. 
27. (1) Where there is only one registered mortgagee of a vessel or share, he
shall be entitled to recover the amount due under the mortgage by selling the 
mortgaged vessel or share without approaching the High Court:  
Transmission of 
property in Indian 
vessel on death, 
insolvency, etc. 
Order for sale 
where vessel has 
ceased to be an 
Indian vessel. 
Mortgage of 
vessel or share. 
Rights of 
mortgagee. 

16 
Liability of 
mortgagee. 
Mortgage not 
affected by 
insolvency. 
Transfer of 
mortgages. 
Transmission 
of interest in 
mortgage in 
certain 
circumstances. 
Rules as to 
name of 
vessel. 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall prevent the mortgagee 
from recovering the amount so due in the High Court as provided in sub-section (2). 
(2) Where there are two or more registered mortgagees of a vessel or share,
they shall be entitled to recover the amount due under t he mortgage in the High 
Court, and when passing a decree or thereafter the High Court may direct that the 
mortgaged vessel or share be sold in execution of the decree.  
(3) Every registered mortgagee of a vessel or share who intends to recover
the amount d ue under the mortgage by selling the mortgaged vessel or share 
under sub-section (1) shall give a notice relating to such sale to the Registrar of 
Indian vessel’s port of registry in such form as may be prescribed. 
(4) The notice under sub-section (3) shall be accompanied with the proof of
payment of the wages  due to the seafarers in connection with their employment 
on that vessel. 
28. When, during the continuance of the mortgage, the mortgagee takes
possession of the mortgaged vessel or is asserting a clai m before the court for 
possession of the vessel, he shall be responsible for— 
(a) managing the vessel as if it were his own vessel;
(b) making such necessary repairs to the mortgaged vessel as may be
required for the smooth operation and normal functioning of the vessel; 
(c) ensuring that no act is committed which is destructive or permanently
injurious to the vessel; and 
(d) such other liability as may be prescribed.
29. A registered mortgage of a vessel or share shall not be affected by any act of
insolvency committed by the mortgagor after the date of the record of such mortgage, 
notwithstanding that the mortgagor, at the commencement of his insolvency, had the 
vessel or share in his possession, order or disposition, or was the reputed owner thereof, 
and the mortgage shall be preferred to any right, claim or interest therein of the other 
creditors of the insolvent or any trustee or assignee on their behalf. 
30. (1) A registered mortgage of a vessel or share may be transferred to any
person in such m anner and the instrument effecting the transfer shall be in such 
form as may be prescribed. 
(2) The person to whom any such mortgage has been transferred shall enjoy
the same right of preference as was enjoyed by the transferor. 
31. The transmission of the interest of a mortgagee in a vessel or share on death,
or insolvency, or by any lawful means other than by a transfer under this Act shall be in 
accordance with such procedure and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
32. (1) An Indian vessel shall not be described by any name other than that
by which she is for the time being registered. 
(2) The Registrar may refuse the registration of any Indian vessel by the
name by which it is proposed if that name is already borne by another vessel or if 
the name be so similar as is calculated or likely to deceive. 
(3) A change shall not be made in the name of an Indian vessel except in
such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) If any person acts or suffers any person under his control to act in
contravention o f this section or omits to do or suffers any person under his 
control to omit to do anything required under this section, the vessel may be 
detained until the provisions of this section are complied with: 

17 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to a foreign vessel 
which has become, and is sought to be registered as, an Indian vessel.  
33. When a registered vessel is so altered as not to correspond with the
particulars relating to her tonnage or description contained in the register 
book, then, if the alteration is made at any port having a R egistrar, that 
Registrar, or if it is made elsewhere, the Registrar of the first port at which 
the vessel arrives after the alteration, shall, on an application being made to 
him by the owner stating the particulars of the alteration, either cause the 
alteration to be registered or direct that the vessel be re -registered:  
Provided that in case the vessel so altered is outside Indian port, the 
Registrar may on report of inspection of such vessel by a surveyor or the 
person authorised under sub -section ( 1) o f section 9, re -register the vessel 
without any requirement of the vessel to visit Indian port.  
34. Where any Registrar, not being the Registrar of the vessel ’s port of
registry, on an application as to an alteration in a vessel directs the vessel to 
be re -registered, he shall either grant a provisional certificate describing the 
vessel as altered, or provisionally endorse the particulars of the alteration on 
the existing certificate.  
35. The registration of any vessel may be transferred from one port or
place of registry to another on an application to the Registrar of the existing 
port or place of registry of the vessel made by declaration in writing of all 
persons appearing in the register to be interested therein as owners or 
mortgagees, but that transfe r shall not in any way affect the rights of those 
persons or any of them and those rights shall in all respects continue in the 
same manner as if no such transfer had been effected.  
36. Where a vessel has ceased to be registered as an Indian vessel by
reason of having been wrecked or abandoned, or for any reason other than 
capture by the enemy, the vessel shall not be re -registered until she has, at the 
expense of the applicant, been surveyed by a surveyor and certified by him to 
be seaworthy.  
37. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, declare the proper
national colours for all Indian vessels and for all vessels owned by the 
Government and different colours may be declared for different classes of 
vessels.  
(2) Vessels registered under this Part  shall hoist the proper national
colours, — 
(a) on a signal being made to her by any vessel of the Indian Navy
or Indian Coast Guard; 
(b) on entering or leaving any port.
(3) Any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy or an officer of the
Indian Coast Gu ard or a surveyor or an Indian ambassador may board any 
vessel on which any colours are hoisted contrary to this Act and seize and 
take away the colours which shall be forfeited to the Government.  
(4) No person onboard a vessel which is not an Indian vess el shall, for
the purpose of making it appear to be an Indian vessel, use the Indian national 
colours, unless the assumption of Indian character has been made for the 
purpose of escaping capture by the enemy or by a foreign vessel of war in the 
exercise of  some belligerent right.  
Registration of 
alterations. 
Provisional 
certificate and 
endorsement 
where vessel is 
to be 
re-registered. 
Transfer of 
registration. 
Restrictions on 
re-registration of 
abandoned 
vessel. 
National colours 
for Indian 
vessels. 

18 
Concealment 
of Indian or 
assumption of 
foreign 
character. 
Liabilities of 
vessel not 
recognised as 
Indian vessel. 
Proceedings 
on forfeiture 
of vessel. 
Liability of 
owners. 
Evidence of 
register book, 
certificate of 
registration 
and other 
documents. 
Closure of 
registration. 
38. No owner or master of an Indian vessel shall knowingly do anything
or permit anything to be done, or carry or permit to be carried any papers or  
documents, with intent to conceal the Indian character of the vessel from any 
person entitled by any law for the time being in force to inquire into the same, 
or with intent to assume a foreign character for the vessel, or with intent to 
deceive any perso n so entitled.  
39. Where it is declared by this Act that an Indian vessel shall not be
recognised as such, that vessel shall not be entitled to any privileges, benefits, 
advantages or protection usually enjoyed by Indian vessel or to use the Indian 
national colours for Indi an vessel or to assume the Indian national character 
but so far as regards the payment of dues, the liability to fine or penalty and 
forfeiture and the punishment of offences committed onboard such vessel or 
by any person belonging to her, such vessel shal l be dealt with in the same 
manner in all respects as if she were a recognised Indian vessel.  
40. Where any vessel has either wholly or as to any share therein
become subject to forfeiture under this Part, any commissioned officer of the 
Indian Navy or Ind ian Coast Guard or an Indian ambassador or any other 
officer authorised by the Central Government, may seize and detain the 
vessel, under the directions of the proper office r and bring her for 
adjudication before the High Court and the High Court may there upon 
adjudge the vessel with her equipment to be forfeited to the Government and 
make such order in the case as the High Court seems just and may award to 
the officer bringing in the vessel for adjudication such portion of the proceeds 
of the sale of the v essel or any share therein as the High Court thinks fit.  
41. Where any person is beneficially interested otherwise than by way of
mortgage, in any vessel or share in a vessel registered in the name of some 
other person as owner, the person so interested as  well as the registered owner 
shall be subject to all the pecuniary penalties or fine imposed by this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force on the owners of vessel or shares 
therein, and proceedings for the enforcement of any such penalties or f ine 
may be taken against both or either of the said parties jointly or severally.  
42. (1) A person may on application to the Registrar and on payment of
such fees as may be prescribed, inspect any register book, and may obtain a 
certified copy of any entry in the register book.  
(2) A certified copy of an entry in a register book shall be admissible in
evidence in any court and have the same effect to all intents as the original entry 
in the register book of which it is a copy. 
43. (1) The owner of an Indi an vessel may make an application to the
Registrar in such form and manner as may be prescribed, to close its registration 
if there is no—  
(a) unsatisfied mortgage entered in its register; or
(b) outstanding claims of the master or seafarer of the vessel in
respect of wages which have been intimated. 
(2) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1), the Registrar shall, if he
is satisfied, by an order, close the registration of the vessel and make an entry thereof 
in the register and forward the copy of closure report to the Director-General.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “owner” includes any 
transferee of, or any person entitled under a transmission to the property in, a n 
Indian vessel. 

19 
44. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Part. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the conditions for registration of an Indian vessel under sub-section (6) 
of section 15; 
(b) the procedure for registration of an abandoned vessel under
sub-section (8) of section 15; 
(c) the manner and conditions for registration of a foreign vessel
chartered on a bareboat charter-cum-demise contract by an Indian charterer 
under section 16; 
(d) the manner, duration and conditions for temporary registration of a
vessel sought to be recycled under section 17; 
(e) the procedure for issuance of provisional certificate of registration
under sub-section ( 1) and the procedure, validity, and extension of such 
registration or cancellation under sub-section (2), of section 19;  
(f) the procedure, period and fees for registration and renewal thereof,
of an Indian vessel under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 20; 
(g) the manner and procedure in accordance with which the Registrar
may require evidence to be given for the purposes of inquiring into the title 
of an Indian vessel under sub-section (4) of section 20; 
(h) the form and manner of grant of certificate of registration and manner
of determination of gross and net tonnage under sub-section (5) of section 20; 
(i) the manner of granting new certificate in lieu of original certificate of
registration being defaced or mutilated under sub-section (6) of section 20; 
(j) the compliance of procedure by the owner of registered vessel
under sub-section (7) of section 20; 
(k) the manner of description of the name, call sign and official
number of Indian vessels under sub-section (8) of section 20; 
(l) the manner of keeping the register book and making entries therein
and maintenance of the records of vessels registered under this Act under 
sub-section (9) of section 20; 
(m) the procedure for registration and issuance of a fresh certificate
under sub-section (10) of section 20; 
(n) the special circumstances for grant of temporary pass and the form
in which such pass shall be granted under section 21; 
(o) the form and manne r of instrument by which an Indian vessel or
share therein shall be transferred under sub-section (4) of section 23; 
(p) the procedure for registration of the instrument by which an Indian
vessel or a share therein shall be transferred under sub-section (5) of section 23; 
(q) the procedure for transmission of property in Indian vessel on
death, insolvency, etc., under section 24; 
(r) the manner in which a vessel ceas ing to be an Indian vessel is
ordered for sale under section 25; 
(s) the form of mortgage and the procedure and manner in which the
Registrar shall record the mortgage in the register book, under sub-section (1) of 
section 26; 
Power to make 
rules. 

20 
Certificates to 
be held by 
seafarers. 
Certificate of 
competency 
and certificate 
of proficiency. 
(t) the documents required to be produced for the discharge of a
registered mortgage of a vessel under sub -section ( 4) of section 26; 
(u) the form of notice under sub -section ( 3) of section 27;
(v) the other liabilities of mortgagee under clause ( d) of section 28;
(w) the manner for transfer of mortgage and the form of instrument
effecting the transfer of mortgage, under sub -section ( 1) of section 30;  
(x) the procedure and conditions for transmission of interest in
mortgage under section 31; 
(y) the manner in which the name of an Indian vessel may be
changed under sub -section ( 3) of section 32;  
(z) the fee for inspection of register book and a certified copy of
any entry of the register bo ok under sub -section ( 1) of section 42;  
(za) the form and manner of application for closure of registration 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 43;  
(zb) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.  
PART IV 
MARITIME EDUCATION  AND TRAINING
45. (1) Every Indian vessel shall have seafarers with manning scales,
based on categories of vessel, areas and types of operations, as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The seafarer shall hold certificate of competency or certificate of
proficiency granted un der section 46 appropriate to his rank in the vessel, or 
of such higher grade, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that an Indian national, including Overseas Citizen of India 
with such certificate or foreign certificate of competency recognised by the 
Directo r-General, may serve on Indian vessels subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as may be prescribed.  
46. (1) An officer notified by the Central Government as the issuing
authority  shall, subject to the provisions of the Standards of Training, 
Certific ation and Watchkeeping for Seafarers Convention, grant a certificate 
of competency or certificate of proficiency for different grades of seafarers 
with such requirements and procedures as may be prescribed.  
(2) No certificate of competency or certificate o f proficiency shall be
granted under sub -section ( 1), unless the seafarer fulfils the requirements in 
respect of service, age limit, medical fitness, approved training courses 
including onboard training, qualifications and examination in accordance with 
the Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers 
Convention.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the
issuing authority notified under sub -section ( 1) may grant such other 
certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency with such requirements 
and procedures as may be prescribed.  
(4) The form, fee, period of validity and the manner of keeping record of
a certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency shall be such as may 
be prescribed.  

21 
47. (1) The Director -General shall administer, supervise and monitor all
activities relating to maritime education, training and assessment and approve the 
training institutes, training courses including onboard training, as applicable and 
method of con duct of such training course for the grant of certificate of 
competency or certificate of proficiency under this Part. 
(2) No certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be granted unless the training required for certification under 
the Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers 
Convention is imparted in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(3) The Director -General may, for the purposes of this Part, authorise a
surveyor or any person or body of persons to inspect any maritime training 
institute and the person so authorised in this behalf shall submit the report to the 
Director-General.  
(4) The Director-General may, after receipt of the inspection report under
sub-section ( 3), if he is satisfied that the maritime training institute has 
contravened any provisions of this Part, suspend or withdraw the approval 
granted to such maritime training in stitute after giving the institute an 
opportunity of being heard.  
(5) The Central Government, on receipt of any information pertaining to any
training institute operating without obtaining approval of the Director-General under 
sub-section (1), may undertake action against such institute in accordance with such 
procedure as may be prescribed. 
(6) Every pilot or person performing the duties of a pilot at any port shall,
from time to time, undergo such training and possess such certificates as the 
Director-General may by order, specify.  
48. (1) The Central Government shall appoint such persons having the
qualifications in accordance with the Standards of Training, Certification and 
Watchkeeping for Seafarers Convention as examiners for the purposes of 
assessing and examining the competence of persons desirous of obtaining 
certificates of competency or proficiency under this Part.  
(2) The nautical advisor shall be the Chief Examiner for the master and
deck department personnel and the chief surveyor shall be the Chief examiner for 
engine department personnel: 
Provided that in the absence of the nautical advisor and the chief surveyor, 
the Central Government may authorise any surveyor to act as the chief examiner. 
(3) The manner of conducting examination for certificate of competency or
certificate of proficiency, the fees to be charged and the payment to be made to 
the examiners appointed under sub -section ( 1), shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) The issuing authority referred to in sub -section (1) of section 46 shall
grant the certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency to every applicant 
duly reported by the examiners to have passed the examination and achieved the 
desired level of competence for that grade of certificate with satisfactor y 
evidence of his sobriety, experience, ability and general good conduct onboard 
vessel.  
(5) If the issuing authority is not satisfied with the report of the examiner,
he may require re -examination of the applicant including inquiry into the 
applicant’s testimonials and character.  
Training for 
grant of 
certificate of 
competency and 
certificate of 
proficiency. 
Examination for 
grant of 
certificates. 

22 
Production of 
certificate of 
competency. 
Recognition of 
certificates of 
competency 
granted in 
other States. 
Foreign vessel 
not to sail 
without 
seafarers 
having 
certificate. 
(6) If it appears to the issuing authority that a person  holding a certificate
of competency or certificate  of  proficiency  has  obtained  it  based  on  false  or 
erroneous information, or is guilty of indiscipline or misconduct, incompetency, 
or any  act  of  omission  or commission  or  compromise  to  safety, security  or  
prevention of  po llution  which may  pose  a threat  to  life  or  property or  
environment, he  may,  after  due  investigation, by  order,  withdraw,  sus pend or 
cancel such certificate:  
Provided that no order  shall  be  passed  under  this  sub-section  without 
giving the person holding the certificate  a  reasonable  opportunity  of  being 
heard.  
(7) The person whose certificate is withdrawn, suspended or cancelled by
the issuing authority under  sub-section ( 6) may  appeal  against  such  order,  in 
accordance with such procedure  as  may be  prescribed,  before  such  officer  as 
the Central Government may, by notification specify, as the appellate authority . 
(8) Whenever a person holding a certificate granted under this Part proves
to the satisfaction of the issuing authority that he has lost or is deprived of such 
certificate, the  issuing  authority  shall,  on payment  of such  fee as  may  be 
prescribed, grant a copy  of  the  certificate and  such copy  shall  have  all  the 
effects of the original certificate. 
49. (1) The master of every vessel shall on demand, produce to the proper
of
ficer the certificates of competency of the seafarers of the vessel along with a 
list containing the particulars of grades of certificates of the seafarers including 
the master.  
(2) A surveyor may at any reasonable time, go onboard a vessel to which
any of the  provisions o f this  Part  applies,  for the  purpose  of ensuring  that the 
seafarers holding certificates granted  in  accordance with the  Standards of 
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers Convention ar e actually 
appointed and are present, and satisfy himself about the adequacy of such 
seafarers for the watchkeeping duties in ports and at sea. 
50. (1) Where  in a State other than India,  certificate  of  competency  is
granted  under  any  law  for t he  time being  in  force  in that State which  is 
similar  to those referred  to in  this  Act,  then  if  the  Central  Government  is 
satisfied that, —  
(a) the conditions unde r which any certificate of competency is
granted in that State are not lower than the standards required for the grant 
under this Act for corresponding certificates; and  
(b) the certificate granted under this Act is accepted in that State  in
lieu of the corresponding certificate granted under the laws of that State,  
the Central Government may, by notification, declare that any certificate of 
competency granted under the law in force in that State shall be recognised as 
equivalent to the correspond ing certificate of competency granted under this 
Act. 
(2) The certificate recognised under this section as equivalent may be
issued with a certificate of endorsement as may be prescribed and a person 
holding such certificate of endorsement shall be conside red as duly certificated 
under this Act. 
51. (1) Every master of a foreign vessel shall, before proceeding to sea
from any port or place in India, ensure that the vessel has the requisite number 
of seafarers of appropriate grades in compliance with the Saf ety Convention 
and Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers 
Convention.  

23 
(2) A surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government may, at any reasonable time, go onboard a vessel for the purpose of 
ensuring that the seafarers holding certificates granted in accordance with the Safety 
Convention and Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers 
Convention are actually appointed and are present, and satisfy himself about the 
adequacy of such seafarers for the watchkeeping duties in ports and at sea. 
(3) If a surveyor or any person authorised under sub-section (2) reports any
deficiency in a foreign vessel in relation to the requirements of the Safety 
Convention and Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeepin g for 
Seafarers Convention and the Central Government is satisfied that it is unsafe for 
such vessel to proceed to sea, that vessel may be detained by the proper officer 
till such requirements are fulfilled.  
52. Every Indian citizen holding a certificate of competency or certificate of
proficiency or certificate recognised under section 50, shall, at any time during 
which the security of India is threatened or during a proclamation of emergency 
issued under clause ( 1) of article 352 of the Constitution, be liable to serve on 
Indian vessel for such period and on such terms and conditions as the Central 
Government may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf. 
53. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Part. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the manning scales of the seafarers based on different categories of
vessel, areas and types of operations under sub-section (1) of section 45; 
(b) the grade of a certificate and the conditions and restrictions subject
to which seafarers may serve on Indian vessels under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 45; 
(c) the requirements and procedure for grant of cer tificate of
competency or certificate of proficiency to the different grades of seafarer 
under sub-section (1) of section 46;  
(d) the requirement and procedure for grant of other certificates of
competency or certificates of proficiency under sub-section (3) of section 46; 
(e) the form of certificate, fees and the validity of such certificate and
the manner in which the records of certificates are to be kept under  
sub-section (4) of section 46; 
(f) the procedure in accordance with which the Centra l Government
may undertake action against training institutes operating without approval 
of the Director-General under sub-section (5) of section 47; 
(g) the manner of conducting examination for certificate of competency
or certificate of proficiency, fee to be charged and payment to be made to the 
examiners under sub-section (3) of section 48; 
(h) the procedure in accordance with which a person may appeal
before the appellate authority against the order passed by the issuing 
authority under sub-section (7) of section 48; 
(i) the fee for grant of certificate if lost or deprived, under sub-section (8) of
section 48; 
(j) the certificate of endorsement under sub-section (2) of section 50;
(k) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
Obligations of 
certain 
certificate 
holders to serve 
on Indian 
vessels. 
Power to make 
rules. 

24 
Application of  
this Part. 
Definitions.  
Classification 
of seafarers. 
Application of 
maritime 
labour 
standards to 
seafarers and 
vessels. 
PART V 
SEAFARERS  
54. Save as otherwise provided, this Part shall apply to, —
(a) every seafarer;
(b) recruitment and placement service; and
(c) ship owners.
55. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance ” means a
declaration issued by the Central Government or by any officer, 
authority or organisation authorised by the Central Government  in this 
behalf, in  respect of a vessel that it meets with the requirements and 
standards set out in the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention;  
(b) “recruitment and placement service ” means any person,
company, institution, agency or other organisation, in public or p rivate 
sector which is engaged in recruiting seafarers on behalf of employers or 
placing seafarers with the employers ;  
(c) “ship  owner” means the owner of the ship or any organisation
or person, such as the manager, agent or bareboat charterer, who has 
assumed the responsibility for the operation of the ship from the owner 
and who, on assuming such responsibility, has agreed to take over the 
duties and responsibilities imposed on ship  owners in accordance with 
the Maritime Labour Convention, even if any ot her organisation or 
persons fulfil certain of the duties or responsibilities on behalf of the 
ship owner.  
56. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the provisions of this Act shall apply to any person employe d 
or engaged as a seafarer.  
(2) The Central Government shall make rules for the classification of
seafarers into different categories, the minimum manning scale of seafarers of 
such categories, and the different scales for different classes of vessels.  
(3) Seafarers shall be deemed to be key workers, for the purposes of
facilitation of safe and unhindered movement for embarking or disembarking a  
vessel, shore leave, and when necessary, for shore-based medical treatment . 
57. (1) The provisions relating to maritime labour standards as contained
in the Maritime Labour Convention, shall apply to all seafarers and vessels 
registered under this Act, but shall not apply to, — 
(a) vessels which navigate exclusively in inland waters or w aters
within, or closely adjacent to, sheltered waters or areas where any law 
for the time being in force relating to ports apply;  
(b) vessels engaged in fishing activities;
(c) traditionally built vessels such as dhows and junks;
(d) vessels of war or na val auxiliaries.

25 
(2) Every vessel registered under this Act and every vessel other than an
Indian vessel while within the jurisdiction of India shall, subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed, be in possession of a certificate granted in 
accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention.  
(3) No vessel shall proceed to sea unless it is in possession of the certificate
referred to in sub-section (2). 
(4) The ship owner and the recruitment and placement service provider
shall jointly and severally be liab le to discharge the responsibilities of the ship 
owner and such service provider shall be deemed to be the ship owner for the 
purposes of offences and penalties under sections 281 and 282.  
58. (1) It shall be the duty of the shipping master to—
(a) monitor and facilitate the engagement and discharge of seafarers
in the manner provided under this Act; 
(b) provide means for securing the presence onboard at the proper
times of seafarers who are so engaged; 
(c) grant such continuous discharge certifi cate and seafarer’s identity
documents in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 
(d) hear and decide disputes between a master, ship owner or his agent
and any of the seafarers; 
(e) transmit the complaint of any dispute  arising in the territorial
waters of India , of a foreign seafarer with the master, ship owner or his 
agent in respect  of a vessel registered in a State other than India, to the 
competent authority of the country of registration and a copy of such 
complaint shall be forwarded to the Director-General, International Labour 
Organisation Office. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the director to—
(a) grant licence subject to such conditions as may be prescribe d,
regulate and control the recruitment and placement service and,— 
(i) ensure that no fees or other charges for recruitment or
placement of seafarers are borne directly or indirectly or in whole or 
in part, by the seafarers other than the cost of the seafarer obtaining a 
national statutory medical certificate, the national seafarer’s book a nd 
a passport or other similar personal travel documents, not including, 
however, the cost of visas, which shall be borne by the ship owner;  
(ii) ensure that adequate machinery and procedures exist for the
investigation, if necessary, of complaints concer ning the activities of 
recruitment and placement services; and  
(iii) to maintain registers of seafarers in respect of the categories
of seafarers; 
(b) inspect and verify the books of account and financial documents of
the recruitment and placement service provider and maritime training institute 
approved under this Act as and when directed by the Director-General; 
(c) perform such duties of the shipping master as the Director-General
may by order direct. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the seafarer’s welfare officer—
(a) in the case of any officer appointed at any port in India, to perform
such functions in relation to welfare of seafarers as may be assigned to him 
by the Central Government; 
Duties of 
shipping master, 
director and 
seafarer’s 
welfare officer. 

26 
Minimum age 
for seafarers. 
Medical 
certificate. 
Training and 
qualifications. 
Recruitment 
and placement 
of seafarers. 
(b) in the case of any officer appointed at any port outside India,  to
perform such functions in relation to welfare of seafarers and such functions 
of an Indian ambassador as may be assigned to him by the Central 
Government and such functions shall have the same effect as if they had 
been performed by an Indian ambassador for the purposes of this Part. 
(4) The shipping master or the director or the seafarer’s welfare officer shall
also perform such other duties as the Central Government may, by general or 
special order, specify in this behalf. 
59. No person under the age of sixteen years shall be engaged, employed or
work onboard any vessel. 
60. No person shall engage or carry to sea any seafarer to work in any
capacity in any vessel, unless the seafarer is in possession of a certificate to the 
effect that he is medically fit to be employed in that capacity granted in such form 
and by such authority as may be prescribed. 
61. (1) The Central Government may, by order, direct that the seafarers
generally or any category of seafarers in particular shall not be engaged or carried 
to sea to work in any capacity in any vessel or in any class of vessels specified  in 
the said order , unless each one of them possesses such qualifications as may be 
specified by the Director-General, in accordance with the Safety Convention and 
Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers Convention. 
(2) The ship owner shall ensure that the seafarers shall not work on the
vessel unless they are trained or certified as competent or otherwise qualified to 
perform their duties and have successfully completed training for personal safety 
onboard vessel. 
(3) The training and certification under sub -section ( 2), shall be in
accordance with the mandatory instruments adopted by the International 
Maritime Organisation. 
62. (1) The seafarer shall be engaged only by,—
(a) the recruitment and placement service agency possessing the
licence granted under this Part; or 
(b) the owners in the case of Indian vessel for the vessel owned by
them. 
(2) No person,—
(a) other than an owner of Indian vessel in respect of the vessel owned
by him, shall carry on the business of recruitment and placement service, 
unless he is in possession of a valid licence granted under this Part; 
(b) shall engage any seafarer under this Act in any vessel unless the
seafarer is in possession of a continuous discharge certificate and seafarer’s 
identity documents issued under this Part except as otherwise exempted; 
(c) shall demand or receive, either directly or indirectly from any
seafarer or person seeking onboard train ing or employment as seafarer or 
any person on his behalf, any remuneration or fees or other charges for 
seafarer recruitment or placement or for providing onboard training or 
employment to seafarer or person seeking onboard training or employment 
as seafarer: 
Provided that the cost of obtaining a medical certificate, the 
continuous discharge certificate or identity document and a passport or 
other similar personal travel documents by the seafarer may be borne by the 
seafarer or any person on his behalf but  not including the cost of visas, 
which shall be borne by the ship owner; 

27 
(d) shall discriminate between seafarers as regards their recruitment
and engagement onboard any vessel,— 
(i) on the ground of their membership or lack of membership in
any particular union purporting to represent the interests of seafarers; 
(ii) on the basis of training institute from where they obtained
the training or  the place of grant of their continuous discharge 
certificates. 
(3) The Central Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, if
satisfied that in the national interest or in the interest of seafarer, it is necessary so 
to do, may, by order in writing, prohibit the master or ship owner or his agent 
other than of an Indian vessel specified in the order, from engaging any person to 
serve as a seafarer on such vessel.  
(4) The services of the seafarer engaged in contravention of sub -section (1)
shall not be recognised for the purposes of certification under Part IV. 
(5) The Director-General may suspend or withdraw the continuous discharge
certificate or certificate of competency or the certificate of proficiency of a 
seafarer who seeks or obtains employment as a seafarer in violation of sub-section (1) 
and clause (a) of sub-section (2), with his own knowledge: 
Provided that no order for suspension or withdrawal of any certificate shall be 
passed unless the seafarer has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(6) Every recruitment and placement service agency possessing the licence
granted under this Part shall,— 
(a) ensure that the shi p owner has the financial ability to repatriate
abandoned seafarers; 
(b) ensure that the ship  owner repatriates abandoned seafarers along
with their maintenance and required medical assistance before such 
repatriation; 
(c) in case of death, transport the m ortal remains of a deceased
seafarer; 
(d) ensure that the labour conditions on the vessel where the seafarer
is placed are in conformity with the seafarer’s employment agreement; 
(e) ensure that any incident onboard the vessel causing injury,
disappearance or death, is reported within twenty -four hours of receipt of 
such information to such authority, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(f) ensure that reports in relation to seafarers recruited or placed
through the recruitment and placement servi ce agency, including any 
change in the terms and conditions of the recruitment and placement, are 
submitted to such authority, in such form and manner within such time as 
may be prescribed; 
(g) undertake such other responsibilities as may be prescribed.
63. (1) The master or owner of every Indian vessel or recruitment and
placement service agency for Indian vessel or foreign vessel shall enter into seafarers’ 
employment agreement in such form and manner as may be prescribed with every 
seafarer whom he engages and shall submit a copy thereof to the shipping master. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act,
the master of an Indian vessel registered at a port outside India, or owner of such 
vessel or his agent who has an a greement with the seafarer made in due form 
according to the law of that port or of the port in which her seafarer is engaged, 
may engage in any port in India—  
Agreement with 
seafarers. 

28 
Wages. 
Hours of rest. 
Entitlement to 
leave. 
Repatriation. 
Compensation 
for vessel’s 
loss or 
foundering. 
(a) a seafarer who is not a citizen of India and who holds a continuous
discharge certificate or any other similar document of identity issued by the 
competent authority of the State in which the vessel is registered or, of the 
State in which the said agreement was made; or 
(b) a seafarer who is a citizen of India a nd who holds a continuous
discharge certificate granted under this Act, 
and any seafarer so engaged under clause ( a) or clause ( b) may sign the 
agreement aforesaid.  
(3) A seafarer shall, before signing a seafarers’ employment agreement, be
given an opportunity to examine and seek advice on the agreement to ensure that 
he has freely entered into an agreement with sufficient understanding of his rights 
and responsibilities. 
64. (1) Every ship owner of an Indian vessel shall ensure that full payments
due to seafarers are made to them at not later than monthly intervals and are 
given a monthly account of payments due and amounts paid, including wages and 
additional payments.  
(2) If any amount in respect of wages payable to a seafarer under a seafarer
employment agreement is not paid within the monthly interval, the seafarer shall 
be entitled to wages at the rate last payable under the seafarers’ employment 
agreement for every day on which it remains unpaid until the full amount is paid, 
along with interest at such rate as may be prescribed but no interest shall be 
payable if the failure to make such monthly payment was due to— 
(a) a reasonable mistake; or
(b) a reasonable dispute as to liability; or
(c) the act or default of the seafarer; or
(d) any other cause not being the wrongful act or default of the persons
liable to make the payment or of their servants or agents. 
65. Every ship owner shall ensure that every seafarer in his employment is
given such hours of rest as may be prescribed. 
66. Every ship owner of an Indian vessel shall ensure that seafarers are
allowed paid annual leave subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
67. (1) Seafarers shall have the right to be repatriated at no cost to themselves in
such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every ship owner of an Indian vessel shall provide such financial security to
ensure that seafarers are duly repatriated in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) When the service of a seafarer is terminated without the consent of the
seafarer at a port outside India before the expiration of the period for which the 
seafarer was engaged, the master, ship owner or his agent shall, in addition to any 
other related obligation imposed on either of them by this Act, make adequate 
provision for the maintenance of the seafarer according to his rank or rating, and 
for the return of that seafarer to a proper return port. 
(4) If the master, ship owner or his agent fails to repatriate seafarers, the
expenses of maintenance and of the journey to the proper return port shall, if 
defrayed by the seafarer, be recoverable as wages due to him, and if defrayed by 
an Indian a mbassador, shall constitute a debt due to the Central Government in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 91. 
68. In case of loss or foundering of any vessel, the ship owner shall pay to
each seafarer onboard such indemnity against unemployment resulting from such 
loss or foundering, as may be prescribed. 

29 
69. Every vessel shall employ such number of seafarers, as may be
prescribed, onboard to ensure that vessels are operated safely and efficiently with 
due regard to security under all conditions, taking into account concerns about 
seafarer’s fatigue and the particular nature and conditions of the voyage. 
70. Every ship owner shall provide and maintain such accommodations and
recreational facilities for seafarers working or living onboard, or both, consistent 
with promoting the seafarer’s health and well-being, as may be prescribed.  
71. (1) Every ship owner shall provide for food and drinking water having
quality, nutritional value and quantity that adequately covers the requirements of 
the seafarers and takes into account the differing cultural and religious background. 
(2) Seafarers onboard a vessel shall be provided with food and water free of
charge during the period of engagement. 
(3) The ship owner shall ensure that the seafarers who are engaged as cooks
of the vessel are trained, qualified and found competent as specified by the 
Director-General. 
72. It shall be the duty of the ship owner to take such measures for
providing protection of health and medical care, at no cost to seafarers employed 
onboard the vessel, as may be prescribed. 
73. (1) The ship owner shall ensure that seafarers employed on the vessels are
provided with a right to material assistance and support with respect to the financial 
consequences of sickness, injury or death occurring while serving under a seafarers’ 
employment agreement or arising from their employment under such agreement. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect any other legal remedy
available to a seafarer under any other law for the time being in force. 
74. Every ship owner shall ensure that seafarers working onboard the vessel
are provided with occupational health protection and they live, work and train 
onboard vessel in a safe and hygienic environment, in accordance with such 
guidelines as the Director-General may by order, specify. 
75. All seafarers shall have access to such branches of social security
protection as may be prescribed.  
76. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of giving effect to
the provisions of Part A of the Code of the M aritime Labour Convention relating 
to flag State responsibilities, make rules for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) establishing an effective system for inspection and certification of
maritime labour conditions; 
(b) authorise public insti tutions or other organisations competent to
carry out inspections or grant certificates; 
(c) effective and coordinated system of regular inspections, monitoring
and other control measures; 
(d) onboard complaint procedure for the fair, effective and expeditious
hearing of seafarer ’s complaint alleging breach of the Maritime Labour 
Convention; and  
(e) compliance and enforcement.
(2) The Central Government shall, by order, specifiy such Indian vessels
which shall carry and maintain Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance. 
Manning levels. 
Accommodation 
and recreational 
facilities. 
Food and 
catering. 
Medical care. 
Ship owners’ 
liability. 
Health and 
safety protection 
and accident 
prevention. 
Social security. 
Flag State 
responsibilities. 

30 
Port State 
responsibilities. 
Rules for 
enforcement of 
Maritime 
Labour 
Convention. 
Payment of 
wages. 
77. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of giving effect to
the provisions of Part A of the Code of the Maritime Labour Convention relating 
to port State responsibilities, make rules for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) establishing an on shore complaint redressal procedure;
(b) establishing a procedure for inspections in port;
(c) compliance and enforcement.
(2) The Director-General shall notify a system for inspection of vessels and
the procedure for port State inspections, including— 
(a) the requirement to develop, maintain and update an electronic
inspection database, containing all information required for implementation 
of an effective and coordinated system of regular inspections; and  
(b) specifying risk profile of all vessels calli ng at Indian ports in the
inspection database. 
78. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of giving effect to
the provisions of Part A of the Code of the Maritime Labour Convention, make 
rules for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) minimum age;
(b) medical certificate;
(c) training and qualifications;
(d) recruitment and placement;
(e) seafarers’ employment agreements;
(f) payment of wages;
(g) hours of work and hours of rest;
(h) entitlement to leave;
(i) repatriation;
(j) compensation in case of loss of vessel or foundering;
(k) manning levels;
(l) service conditions including skill development opportunities;
(m) accommodation, recreational facilities, food and catering;
(n) ship owners’ liability;
(o) health protection, medical facilities, welfare and social security
protection; 
(p) any other matter which is to be or may be required for compliance
and enforcement of the Maritime Labour Convention. 
(2) The Central Government may, for the purposes of giving effect to,
Part B of the Code of the Maritime Labour Convention and any other provision of 
the Maritime Labour Convention which has not been given effect to in this Act, 
make rules for all or any of the matters specified in sub-section (1). 
79. (1) Where the service of any seafarer engaged under this Act is
terminated before the date specified in the agreement by reason of the wreck, loss 
or abandonment of the vessel or by reason of his being left on shore at any place 
outside India under a certificate granted under this Act of his unfitness or 
inability to proceed on the voyage, the seafarer shall be entitled to receive wages 
on such terms and conditions, including the periods during which suc h seafarer 
shall not be entitled to wages, as may be prescribed. 

31 
(2) Subject to such exceptions as may be prescribed, a seafarer shall not be
disentitled to claim wages for any period during which he has not performed his duty, 
if he proves that he was incapable of doing so by reason of illness, hurt or injury. 
(3) If a seafarer having signed an agreement is discharged otherwise than in
accordance with the terms thereof, without fault on his part justifying the discharge 
and without his consent, he shall be entitled to receive from the master or ship owner 
or his agent, in addition to any wages which he may have earned, as due 
compensation for the damage caused to him by the discharge, such sum as the 
shipping master may fix having regard to the circumstances relating to the discharge, 
which may be recovered as wages. 
(4) The compensation so payable under sub-section (3) shall not exceed—
(a) in the case of a seafarer who has been discharged before the
commencement of a voyage, one month’s wages; and 
(b) in the case of a seafarer who has been discharged a fter the
commencement of a voyage, three month ’s wages.  
80. (1) A seafarer serving in an Indian vessel shall, on termination of his
engagement, be discharged in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) If an Indian vessel is transferred or disposed of while s he is at sea or
on a voyage to any port outside India, every seafarer belonging to that vessel 
shall be discharged at that port, unless he consents in writing to complete the 
voyage in the vessel, if continued.  
(3) If a seafarer is discharged from an India n vessel without his consent
and before the expiration of the period for which the seafarer was engaged, he 
shall be duly repatriated in accordance with the provisions of section 6 7. 
(4) Every seafarer discharged in terms of sub-section (2) shall, if the voyage for
which he was engaged is not continued, be entitled to the wages to which he would 
have been entitled had his service been wrongfully terminated by the ship owner 
before the expiration of the period for which the seafarer was engaged. 
(5) The master of an Indian vessel shall not, —
(a) discharge a seafarer before the expiration of the period for
which he was engaged, unless the seafarer consents to his discharge; or 
(b) except in circumstances beyond his control, leave a seafarer behind,
without the authority of the officer specified in this behalf by the Central 
Government and such officer shall certify on the agreement with seafarer that 
he has granted such authority, and also the reason for the seafarer being 
discharged or the seafarer being left behind: 
Provided that such officer shall, before discharging or leaving behind such 
seafarer, investigate the grounds on which the seafarer is to be discharged or left 
behind and may in his discretion grant or refuse to grant such authority:  
Provided further that he shall not refuse to grant his authority if he is 
satisfied that the seafarer, without reasonable cause, — 
(a) has failed or refused to join his vessel or to proceed to sea therein; or
(b) has been absent from his vessel without leav e, either at the
commencement or during the progress of a voyage for a period of more than 
forty-eight hours. 
(6) The officer referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) shall keep a
record of all seafarers discharged or left behind with his authority and  whenever 
any charge is made against a seafarer under section 98, the fact that no such 
authority is so recorded shall be prima facie evidence that it was not granted. 
Discharge of 
seafarers.  

32 
Wages and 
property of 
deceased 
seafarers and 
seafarers left 
behind. 
Certain 
undisbursed 
amounts to be 
utilised for 
welfare of 
seafarers. 
Shipping 
master to 
adjudicate 
disputes 
involving 
seafarer. 
Power of 
shipping 
master to 
require 
production of 
documents. 
Wages not 
recoverable 
outside India 
in certain 
cases. 
Summary 
proceedings 
for wages. 
Restrictions on 
suits for 
wages. 
81. If any seafarer is left behind or lost overboard or is deceased, the master
shall enter in the official logbook a statement of the amount due to the seafarer in 
respect of wages at the time when he was left behind or lost overboard or is deceased, 
and of all property left onboard by him, and shall take such property into his charge 
and discharge the property in such manner as may be prescribed.  
82. Any amount deposited with or recovered by the shipping master as wages
or for making payment in accordance with the allotment note made by a seafarer or 
for being paid to a seafarer or his nominee may, if such amount remains unclaimed 
with the shipping master for a period of not less than six years, be utilised for the 
welfare of seafarer in such manner and subject to such restrictions and conditions as 
may be prescribed.  
83. (1) Where under the agreement with the seafarer any dispute arises
between the master, ship owner or his agent and any of the seafarer of the vessel, 
it shall be submitted to the shipping master. 
(2) Any dispute of an Indian seafarer, on a vessel registered in a State other
than India, in the territorial waters of India, with the master or ship owner or his 
agent, may be submitted to the shipping master. 
(3) The shipping master shall hear an d after giving the parties an
opportunity to be heard, decide the dispute submitted under sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section (2), pass an award in writing containing reasons, within a period of 
thirty days which shall be conclusive as to the rights of parties and any document 
relating to such dispute or award itself shall be prima facie evidence thereof: 
Provided that if the shipping master does not pass an award within thirty 
days from the date of receipt of the dispute for sufficient cause, the shipping 
master may pass an award within a further period of thirty days. 
(4) The award passed by the shipping master shall be enfo rceable in
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the same  
manner as if it were a decree of court. 
(5) Nothing in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply to any
matter submitted to a shipping master for decision under this section. 
84. In any proceedings under this Act before a shipping master relating to the
wages, claims or discharge of a seafarer, the shipping master may require the ship 
owner or his agent, master or seafarer to produce any logbooks, papers, or other 
documents in his possession or in his power relating to any matter in question in the 
proceedings, and may require the attendance of and examine any of those persons. 
85. Where a seafarer is engaged for a voyage which is to terminate in India, he
shall not be entitled to sue in any court outside India for wages unless he is discharged 
with such sanction as is required by this Act and with the written consent of the master, 
or proves such ill-usage on the part, or by the authority, of the master, as to warrant a 
reasonable apprehension of danger to his life if he were to remain onboard. 
86. (1) A seafarer or a person duly authorised by him, as soon as any wages due
to him become payable but not paid, may apply to any Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class exercising jurisdiction in or near the place at which his service has terminated or 
at which he has been discharged, or at which any person upon whom the claim is 
made is or resides, and such Magistrate shall try the case summarily and the order 
made by such Magistrate in the matter shall be final. 
(2) An application under sub -section (1) may also be made by any officer
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf by general or special order. 
87. A proceeding for the recovery of wages due to a seafarer shall not be
instituted by or on behalf of any seafarer in any civil court except where,— 
(a) the ship owner has been declared insolvent;
(b) the vessel is under arrest or sold by the authority of any court; or
(c) a Judicial Magistrate of the first class refers a claim to the court.
5 of 1908. 
22 of 1996. 

33 
5 of 1908. 
47 of 2023. 
5 of 1908. 
45 of 2023. 
88. (1) The master of a vessel shall, so far as the case permits, have the same
rights, liens and remedies for the recovery of his wages as a seafarer has under 
this Act or by any law or custom. 
(2) Every master shall have the same rights, liens and remedies for the
recovery of disbursements or liabilities properly made or incurred by him on 
account of the vessel as such master has for the recovery of his wages.  
(3) Every person lawfully acting as master of a vessel by reason of the
disease or incapacity from illness, of the master of such vessel shall, so far as the 
case permits, have the same ri ghts, liens and remedies for the recovery of 
disbursements or liabilities properly made or incurred by him on account of the 
vessel as a master has for the recovery of his wages. 
89. (1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that any dispute
between seafarer or any class of seafarers or of any union of seafarers and the ship 
owners in which such seafarers are employed or are likely to be employed exists 
or is apprehended and suc h dispute relates to any matter connected with or 
incidental to the employment of the seafarers, the Central Government may, by 
notification, constitute a Tribunal consisting of one or more persons, having  such 
qualifications and experience as may be pres cribed including having knowledge 
of maritime matter, and refer the dispute to the Tribunal for adjudication. 
(2) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice. 
(3) The Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence contained
in the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. 
(4) The Tribunal shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions under
this Act, have power to regulate its own procedure and shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying 
a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath; 
(b) compelling the production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;
(e) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
(5) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of section 229 and section 267 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.  
(6) No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal
practitioner in any proceeding before the Tribunal except with the consent of the 
other party or parties to the proceeding and with the leave of the Tribunal.  
(7) The Tribunal shall dispose of the reference and submit its award to the
Central Government within such period as may be prescribed. 
(8) On receipt of the award, the Central Government shall cause it to be
published and the award shall become enforceable on the expiry of thirty days 
from the date of such publication:  
Provided that where the Central Government is of the opinion that it shall 
be inexpedient on the grounds of public interest to give effect to the award or any 
part of it, it may, before the expiry of the said period of thirty days by order in the 
Official Gazette, either reject the award or modify it, and where the Central 
Government does so, the award shall not become enforceable or shall become 
enforceable subject to such modifications.  
Remedies of 
master for 
wages, 
disbursements, 
etc. 
Power to refer 
disputes 
between 
seafarers and 
employers to 
Tribunal. 

34 
Recovery of 
wages, etc., of 
seafarers lost 
with vessel.  
Relief and 
maintenance of 
abandoned 
seafarers.  
(9) An award which has become enforceable under this section shall be
binding on— 
(a) all parties to the dispute;
(b) where any party to the dispute is the ship owner, his heirs,
successors, or assignees. 
(10) Save as otherwise provided in the award, an aw ard shall remain in
operation for a period of one year from the date on which it becomes enforceable 
and shall thereafter continue to remain in operation until a period of two months 
has 
elapsed from the date on which notice is given by any party bound by the 
award to the other party or parties intimating its intention to terminate the award. 
(11) Unless otherwise directed by the  Central Government, the Tribunal
shall cease to exist on the expiry of a period of thirty days after publication of the 
award.  
(12
) Any money due to a seafar er from the ship owner under an award may
be recovered as wages. 
(13) Nothing contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 shall apply to
any dispute between seafarers or any class of seafarers or any union of seafarers 
and the ship owners in respect of the ship in which such seafarers are employed 
or are likely to be employed.
(14) During the pendency of proceedings under this section,—
(a) no seafarer or class of seafarers or union of seafarers shall go or
remain on strike or otherwise act in a manner prejudicial to the normal 
operation of the vessels in which the seafarer is employed or is likely to be 
employed; and 
(b) no ship owner shall,—
(i) alter to the prejudice of the seafarers concerned in the dispute,
the conditions of service applicable to them immediately before the 
commencement of such proceedings; or  
(ii) discharge or punish any seafarer in respect of any matter
connected with the dispute. 
90. Where a seafarer is missing or lost with the vessel to which he belongs,
the Central Government or such officer as the Central Government may appoint 
in this behalf may recover the wages and the compensation due to hi m from the 
master or ship owner or his agent in the same court and in the same manner in 
which the seafarer’s wages are recoverable, and shall deal with those wages in the 
same manner as with the wages and compensation due to other deceased seafarers 
under this Act. 
91. (1) The Indian ambassador at or near the place where a seafarer is
abandoned shall, on an application being made to him by the abandoned seafarer, 
provide in accordance with the rules made under this Act for the return of that 
seafarer to a proper return port and also for his necessary clothing and 
maintenance until his arrival at such port.  
(2) An abandoned seafarer shall not have any right to be maintained or sent
to a proper return port except to the extent and subject to such conditions as may 
be prescribed. 
(3) All repatriation expenses, other than excepted expenses, incurred by or
on behalf of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
shall constitute a debt due to the Central Government for which the ship owner or 
his agent or the vessel to which the seafarer in respect of whom they were incurred 
belonged at the time of his discharge or other event which resulted in his becoming 
an abandoned seafarer shall be liable, and the ship owner or his agent shall not be 
14 of 1947. 

35 
entitled to recover from the seafarer any amount paid by him to the Central 
Government in settlement or part settlement of such debt. 
(4) All excepted expenses incurred by or on behalf of the Central
Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall constitute a debt 
due to the Central Government for which the seafarer in respect of whom they 
were incurred and the ship owner or his agent or the vessel to which that seafarer 
belonged at the time of his discharge or other event which resulted in his becoming 
an abandoned seafarer shall be jointly and severally liable, and the ship owner or 
his agent shall be entitled to recover from the seafarer any amount paid by him to 
the Central Government in settlement or part settlement of such debt, and may 
apply to the satisfaction of his claim so much as may be necessary of any wages 
due to the seafarer. 
(5) All excepted expenses incurred in accordance with the provisions of this
Act in respect of any abandoned  seafarer by the ship owner or his agent or the 
vessel to which he belonged at the time of his discharge or other event which 
resulted in his becoming an abandoned seafarer shall constitute a debt due to the 
ship owner or his agent for which the seafarer shall be liable, and the ship owner 
or his agent may apply to the satisfaction of his claim so much as may be necessary 
of any wages due to the seafarer but he shall not be entitled to recover from the 
seafarer any repatriation expenses other than excepted expenses.  
(6) In any proceedings for th e recovery of any expenses which in terms of
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) are a debt due to the Central Government, the 
production of an account of the expenses and proof of payment thereof by or on 
behalf of or under the direction of the Central Gov ernment shall be prima facie 
evidence that the expenses were incurred in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act by or on behalf of the Central Government. 
(7) Any debt which may be due to the Central Government under this section
may be recovered by any officer authorised by it in writing in this behalf from the 
person concerned in the same manner as the wages are recoverable under 
section 86.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “excepted expenses” means repatriation expenses incurred in cases
where the cause of the seafarer being left behind is desertion or absence 
without leave or imprisonment for misconduct or discharge from his vessel 
on the grounds of misconduct;  
(b) “repatriation expenses” means expenses incurred in returnin g an
abandoned seafarer to a proper return port and in providing him with 
necessary clothing and maintenance until his arrival at such port, and 
includes in the case of a shipwrecked seafarer, the repayment of expenses 
incurred in conveying him to a port a fter shipwreck and maintaining him 
while being so conveyed;  
(c) “shipping master” means a shipping master,—
(i) for the port at which the seafarer entered into, or is believed
to have entered into, an agreement; or 
(ii) where the seafarer did not enter into an agreement in India,
for the port to which the seafarer has returned, or is expected to 
return, on the completion of his latest voyage.

36 
Replacement 
crew onboard 
abandoned 
vessels. 
Inspection by 
shipping master, 
etc. 
92. (1) If the ship owner of any abandoned Indian vessel or any foreign
vessel abandoned on or near the coast of India or within its coastal waters fails to 
make arrangement for or to meet the cost of arranging for replacement crew to be 
sent onboard the vessel whose seafarers are required to be repatriated, the Central 
Government shall arrange for replacement crew to be sent onboard such vessel. 
(2) The cost incurred by or on behalf of the Central Government under
sub-section (1) shall constitute a debt due to the Central Government liable to be 
paid by the ship owner or his agent for the seafarer in respect of whom they were 
incurred and the ship owner or his agent shall not be entitled to recover from the 
seafarer any amount paid by him to the Central Government in settlement or part 
settlement of such debt. 
(3) In any proceedings for the recovery of any expenses which in terms of
sub-section (2) are a debt due to the Central Government, the production of an 
account of the expenses and proof of payment thereof by or on behalf of or under 
the direction of the Central Government shall be prima facie evidence that the 
expenses were incurred in accordance with the provisions of this Act by or on 
behalf of the Central Government.  
(4) Any debt which may be due to the Central Government under this section
may be recovered by any officer authorised by it in writing in this behalf from the 
person concerned in the same manner as the wages are recoverable under 
section 86. 
(5) In any proceedin g under this Part, a certificate of the Central
Government or of such officer as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf, to the effect that any seafarer named therein is abandoned , shall be 
conclusive evidence that such seafarer is an abandoned seafarer within the 
meaning of this Act. 
93. (1) A shipping master, surveyor, seafarer ’s welfare officer, Indian
ambassador or any other officer at any port duly authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government shall, at any time,— 
(a) in the case of any vessel upon which the seafarer has been shipped
at that port; and 
(b) in the case of any Indian vessel, and if the master or three or more
of the seafarers so request,  
enter onboard the vessel and inspect,— 
(i) the provisions and water;
(ii) the weights and measures;
(iii) the accommodation for seafarers,
with which the vessel is required to be provided by or under this Act and also the 
space and equipment used for the storage and handling of food, water and the 
galley and other equipment used for the preparation and service of meals; 
(iv) the Maritime Labour Certificate and Declaration of Maritime
Labour Compliance. 
(2) All Indian vessels engaged in international voyage or operating from a
port, or between ports, in another State , shall possess a Maritime Labour 
Certificate and a Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance.  

37 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “international voyage” 
means a voyage from or to a port or place in India to or from a port or place outside 
India or between any ports outside India. 
(3) The vessels not covered under sub-section (2) shall, unless exempted by
the Central Government, possess such certificate in such manner and form as may 
be prescribed.  
(4) For the purpose of preventing seafarer from being taken onboard any
vessel at any port in India contrary to the provisions of this Act, a shipping master 
or deputy shipping master or assistant shipping master or a director,  or deputy 
director or assistant director of the seafarer’s employment office may enter at any 
time, onboard any such vessel upon which he has reasons to believe that seafarers 
have been shipped, and may muster and examine the seafarers employed therein. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,  “Maritime Labour 
Certificate” means a certificate granted by the Central Government or by any 
officer, authority or organisation authorised by it in this behalf, in accordance with 
the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention. 
94. (1) A seafarer shall for the purposes of this Part, be deemed to be a
serving seafarer during any period commencing on the date of the agreement with 
seafarers and ending thirty days after the date on which the seafarer is finally 
discharged from such agreement.  
(2) Every seafarer who is a party to a litigation shall be protected to the
extent, subject to such terms and conditions and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed. 
95. If a seafarer states to the master that he desires to make a complaint to a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or other proper officer against the master or 
any of the seafarers, the master shall,—  
(a) if the vessel is then at a place where there is a Judicial Magistrate
of the first class or other proper officer, as soon after such statement as the 
service of the vessel shall permit; and  
(b) if the vessel is not then at such place, as soon after her first arrival
at such place as the service of the vessel shall permit, 
allow the complainant to go ashore or send him ashore under proper protection to 
enable him to make the complaint. 
96. Where a vessel has arrived at a port or place in India at the end of a
voyage and any person, not being in the service of the Government or not being 
duly authorised by law for the purpose, goes onboard the vessel without the 
permission of the master, the master may take such person into custody and 
deliver him up forthwith to a police officer to be taken before a Judicial Magistrate 
of the first class and dealt with according to the provisions of this Act. 
97. No seafarer belonging to an Indian vessel wherever it may be, or to any
other vessel while in India, shall knowingly,— 
(a) do anything tendi ng to the immediate loss or destruction of, or
serious damage to, the vessel, or tending immediately to endanger the life 
of, or to cause injury to any person belonging to or onboard the vessel; or  
(b) refuse or omit to do any lawful act proper and requisite to be done
by him for preserving the vessel from immediate loss, destruction or serious 
damage, or for preserving any person belonging to or onboard the vessel 
from danger to life or from injury. 
Special 
provisions for 
protection of 
seafarers in 
respect of 
litigation. 
Facilities for 
making 
complaint.  
Vessel not to be 
boarded without 
permission.  
Misconduct 
endangering life 
or vessel. 

38 
Desertion and 
absence without 
leave. 
98. (1) No seafarer lawfully engaged shall,—
(a) desert his vessel; or
(b) neglect or refuse, without reasonable cause, to join the vessel or
proceed to sea in his vessel or be absent without leave at any time within 
twenty-four hours of the vessel ’s sailing from a port either at the 
commencement or during the progress of a voyage, or be absent at any time 
without leave and without sufficient reason from his vessel or from his duty. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the fact that the vessel on which the
seafarer is engaged or to which he belongs is unseaworthy, shall be deemed to be 
a reasonable cause for desertion or absence without leave:  
Provided that the seafarer has, before failing or refusing to join his vessel or 
to proceed to sea in his vessel or before absenting himself or being absent from 
the vessel complained to the master or a shipping master, surveyor, seafarer ’s 
welfare officer, port health officer, Indian ambassador or any other officer at any 
port duly authorised in this behalf by the Central Government, that the vessel is 
unseaworthy.  
(3) If it is shown to the satisfaction of a shipping master that a seafarer has
deserted his vessel or has absented himself without leave and without sufficient 
reason from his vessel or from his duty, the shipping master shall forthwith make 
a report to that effect to the Director -General who may thereupon direct that the 
seafarer’s continuous discharge certificate and seafarer identity document shall be 
withheld for such period as may be specified in that direction, or may suspend or 
withdraw the certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency of the 
deserting seafarer, if it is establi shed that such desertion was without leave or 
sufficient reason: 
 Provided that no order of withholding, suspension or cancellation shall be 
passed unless the seafarer has been given an opportunity of being heard. 
(4) If a seafarer deserts his vessel or is  absent without leave and without
sufficient reason from his vessel or from his duty, the master, any seafarer, the 
ship owner or his agent may, without prejudice to any other action that may be 
taken against the seafarer under this Act, convey him onboard his vessel and may 
for that purpose cause to be used such force as may be reasonable in the 
circumstances of the case.  
(5) If, either at the commencement or during the progress of any voy age, a
seafarer engaged in an Indian vessel commits outside India, the offence of 
desertion or absence without leave or any offence against discipline, the master 
or the ship owner or his agent may, if and so far as the laws in force in the place 
permit, arrest him without procuring a warrant.  
(6) No person shall convey onboard or arrest a seafarer on improper or
insufficient grounds. 
(7) Where a seafarer is brought before a court on the ground of desertion or
of absence without leave or of any offence against discipline, and the master or 
the ship owner or his agent so requires, the court may, in lieu of committing and 
sentencing him for the offence, cause him to be conveyed onboard his vessel for 
the purpose of proceeding on the voyage, or deliver him to the master or the ship 
owner or his agent to be by them so conveyed , and may in such case order any 
costs and expenses properly incurred by or on behalf of the master or ship owner 
by reason of the conveyance to be paid by the offender and, if necessary, to be 
deducted from any wages which he has then earned or by virtue of his then 
existing engagements may afterwards be earned. 

39 
99. (1) Any seafarer lawfully engaged shall be liable to penalty or be guilty
of an offence under this Act, if he commits any of the following acts, namely:— 
(a) if he quits the vessel without leave after her arrival at her port of
delivery and before she is placed in security; 
(b) if he has received an advance payment on the basis of his
agreement and wilfully or through misconduct fails to attend his vessel or 
desert therefrom before the payment becomes due to him; 
(c) if he wilfully disobeys any lawful command or neglects the duty;
(d) if he continues to wilfully disobey any lawful commands or if he
combines with any of the seafarers to wilfully disobey any lawful 
commands, or continues with wilful neglect of duty or if he combines with 
any of the seafarer to neglect duty or to impede the navigation of the vessel 
or retard the progress of the voyage;  
(e) if he assaults the master or any other seafarer belonging to the
vessel; 
(f) if he wilfully damages his vessel or commits criminal
misappropriation or breach of trust in respect of, or wilfully damages any 
of, her stores or cargo.  
(2) The prosecution a gainst any seafarer for any offence specified under
clauses (d), (e) and (f) of sub-section (1) may be instituted by the Director-General 
or an officer authorised by him. 
(3) The Director-General may, by order, suspend or cancel any certificate
granted under this Act to any seafarer for any specified period, for any offence 
specified in sub-section (1) during the course of the hearing or legal proceeding: 
Provided that no order of suspension or cancellation shall be passed unless 
the person concerned has been given an opportunity of being heard. 
100. (1) If a seafarer engaged is convicted of an offence of smuggling any
goods, whereby loss or damage is occasioned to the master or ship owner, he shall 
be liable to pay to that master or ship owner, a sum sufficient to reimburse the loss 
or damage and the whole or a part of his wages may be retained in satisfaction on 
account of that liability without prejudice to any other remedy.  
(2) If a seafarer is convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1), the
Director-General may direct that the seafarer ’s continuous discharge certificate  
and seafarer’s identity document shall be cancelled or suspended for such period 
as may be specified in the direction.  
101. If any offence of desertion or absence without leave under section 98
or offence against discipline under section 9 9 is committed, or if any act of 
misconduct is committed for which the offender’s agreement imposes a fine and 
it is intended to enforce the fine,— 
(a) an entry of the offence or act shall be made in the official logbook
and signed by the master and the officer on watch; 
(b) the offender, if still in the vessel, shall, before the sub sequent
arrival of the vessel at any port, or, if she is at the time in port, before her 
departure therefrom, be furnished with a copy of the entry and have the same 
read over distinctly and audibly to him and may thereupon make such reply 
thereto as he thinks fit; 
(c) a statement of a copy of the entry having been so furnished and the
entry having been so read over and the reply, if any, made by the offender 
shall likewise be entered and signed in the manner aforesaid; and  
General liability 
against 
discipline. 
Smuggling of 
goods by 
seafarer. 
Entry of 
offences in 
official logbook. 

40 
Report of 
desertions and 
absences 
without leave. 
Entries and 
certificates of 
desertion 
abroad. 
Facilities for 
proving desertion 
in proceedings 
for forfeiture of 
wages. 
Application of 
forfeitures. 
Decision of 
questions of 
forfeiture and 
deduction in 
suits for wages. 
Payment of 
fines imposed 
under agreement 
to shipping 
master. 
(d) in any subsequent legal proceedings, the entries required by this
section shall, if practicable, be produced or proved, and, in default of such 
production or proof, the court hearing the case may in its discretion, refuse 
to receive evidence of the offence or act of misconduct. 
102. Whenever any seafarer engaged outside India on an Indian vessel
deserts or otherwise absents himself in India without leave, the master of the 
vessel shall, within forty -eight hours of discovering such desertion or absence, 
report the same to the shipp ing master or to such other officer as the Central 
Government specifies in this behalf, unless in the meantime, the deserter or 
absentee returns. 
103. (1) In every case of desertion from an Indian vessel whilst such vessel
is at any place out of India, the master shall produce the entry of desertion in the 
official logbook to the Indian ambassador at the place, who shall thereupon make 
and certify a copy of the entry which shall be admissible in evidence in any legal 
proceeding relating to such desertion. 
(2) The master shall forthwith transmit such copy of entry certified under
sub-section ( 1) to the shipping master at the port at which the seafarer was 
shipped, and the shipping master shall, if required, cause the same to be produced 
in any legal proceeding.  
104. (1) Whenever a question arises whether the wages of any seafarer are
forfeited for desertion from a vessel, it shall be sufficient for the person insisting 
on the forfeiture to show that the seafarer was duly engaged in or belonged to the 
vessel, and either that he left the vessel  before the completion of the voyage or 
engagement or, if the voyage was to terminate in India and the vessel has not 
returned, that he is absent from her and that an entry of his desertion has been duly 
made in the official logbook.  
(2) The desertion shall thereupon, so far as relate to any forfeiture of wages
under this Part, be deemed to be proved, unless the seafarer produces a proper 
certificate of discharge or otherwise show to the satisfaction of the court that he 
had sufficient reasons for leaving his vessel.  
105. Where any wages or other property are under this Act forfeited for
desertion from a vessel, they shall be applied towards reimbursing the expenses 
caused by such desertion to the master or the ship owner or his agent, which may 
be recovered by the master, or the ship owner or his agent in the same manner as 
the deserter could have recovered them if not forfeited, and subject to that 
reimbursement, shall be paid to the Central Government.  
106. Any question concerning the forfeiture of or deductions from the wages
of a seafarer may be determined in any proceeding lawfully instituted with respect 
to those wages, notwithstanding that the offence in respect of which the question 
arises, though by this Act made punishable by imprisonment as well as forfeiture 
has not been made the subject of any criminal proceeding.  
107. (1) Every fine imposed on a seafarer for any act of misconduct under
his agreement shall be deducted and paid as follows, namely:— 
(a) if the offender is  discharged at any port or place in India and the
offence and such entries in respect thereof are proved to the satisfaction of 
the shipping master, the master or ship owner or his agent shall deduct such 
fine from the wages of the offender and pay the sam e to such shipping 
master; and  
(b) if the seafarer is discharged at any port or place outside India and
the offence and such entries are proved to the satisfaction of the Indian  

41 
ambassador by whose sanction he is so discharged, the fine shall thereupon 
be deducted, and an entry of such deduction shall then be made in the official 
logbook, if any, and signed by such officer and on the return of the vessel to 
India, the master or ship owner shall pay such fine to the shipping master. 
(2) An act of misconduct for which any such fine was imposed and paid
shall not be otherwise punishable under this Act. 
(3) The proceeds of all fines received by a shipping master under this section
shall be utilised for the welfare of seafarers in such man ner as the Central 
Government may direct. 
108. No person shall,—
(a) by any means whatever persuade or attempt to persuade a seafarer
to neglect or refuse to join or proceed to sea in or desert from his vessel, or 
otherwise to absent himself from his duty; 
(b) harbour or secrete a seafarer who has wilfully neglected or refused
to join or has deserted from his vessel, knowing or having reason to believe 
the seafarer to have so done: 
Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not extend to the case in 
which the harbour or secreting is by the spouse of the seafarer.  
109. No person shall secrete himself and go to sea in a vessel without the
consent of either the master or the shi p owner or his agent or of the person in 
charge of the vessel or of any other person entitled to give that consent. 
110. (1) If, during the progress of a voyage the master of any Indian vessel
is removed or superseded or for any other reason quits the vessel and is succeeded 
in the command by some other person, he shall deliver to his successor documents 
relating to navigation  of the vessel and the seafarers thereof which are in his 
custody.  
(2) On receipt of documents under sub-section (1), the successor shall make
an entry in the official logbook to that effect which shall also be endorsed by the 
predecessor.  
(3) The Direct or-General may suspend or withdraw the certificate of
competency of a master, if it is established that the documents were not lawfully 
handed over in accordance with sub -section ( 1), without leave or sufficient 
reason:  
Provided that no order for suspension or withdrawal of any certificate shall 
be passed unless the master has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. 
111. (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that due facilities are
or shall be given by the Government of any State outside India for recovering and 
apprehending seafarers who desert from Indian vessels in that State, the Central 
Government may, by notification, stating that such facilities are or shall be given, 
declare that this section shall apply to seafarers belonging to vessels of such State, 
subject to such limitations or conditions as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where this section applies to seafarers belonging to vessels of any State
other than India and a seafarer deserts from any such vessel, when wi thin India, 
any court that would have taken cognizance of the matter if the seafarer had 
deserted from an Indian vessel shall, on an application of the ambassador of that 
State, aid in apprehending the deserter and for that purpose may, on information 
given on oath, issue a warrant for his apprehension and on proof of the desertion, 
order him to be conveyed onboard his vessel or delivered to the master or the ship 
Seafarer not to 
be enticed to 
desert. 
Stowaways and 
seafarers carried 
under 
compulsion. 
On change of 
master, 
documents to be 
handed over to 
successor.  
Deserters from 
foreign vessels. 

42 
Official 
logbook.  
Power to make 
rules. 
owner or his agent to be so conveyed and any such warrant or order may be 
executed accordingly. 
112. (1) Every vessel of two hundred tons gross or more shall maintain an
official logbook in such form and such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The master, ship owner or his agent shall deliver the official logbook
referred to in sub-section (1), to the shipping master as and when required by the 
shipping master. 
(3) No person shall make or procure to be made or assist in making any entry
in off icial logbook in respect of any occurrence happening previously to the 
arrival of the vessel at her final port of discharge more than twenty -four hours 
after such arrival. 
113. (1) In addition to the power of the Central Government to make rules
for enforcement of Maritime Labour Convention, the Central Government shall 
make rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Part, including rules in 
respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) discharge of seafarers;
(b) payment of wages;
(c) advance and allotment of wages;
(d) rights of seafarers in respect of wages;
(e) mode of recovering wages;
(f) disputes between seafarers and employers;
(g) property of deceased seafarers;
(h) repatriation of seafarers and abandoned seafarers;
(i) provisions, health and accommodation;
(j) special provisions for the protection of seafare rs in respect of
litigation; 
(k) provisions for the protection of seafarers in respect of other matters;
(l) provisions as to discipline;
(m) official logbooks.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—  
(a) the categories and minimum manning scales of seafarers and the
scales for different classes of vessels under sub-section (2) of section 56; 
(b) the conditions subject to which vessel shall be in possession of a
certificate under sub-section (2) of section 57; 
(c) the form and manner of the grant of  continuous discharge
certificate and seafarer’s id entity documents under clause ( c) of          
sub-section (1) of section 58; 
(d) the conditions subject to which licence may be granted under
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 58; 
(e) the form of certificate to be possessed by seafarer and the authority
who grants that certificate to the effect that the seafarer is medically fit under 
section 60;  

43 
(f) the authority to whom and the form and manner in which the incident
is to be reported under clause (e) of sub-section (6) of section 62; 
(g) the authority to whom and the form, manner and the time within which
the reports is to be submitted under clause (f) of sub-section (6) of section 62; 
(h) other responsibilities of the recruitment and placement agency
under clause (g) of sub-section (6) of section 62; 
(i) the form and manner of seafarer’s employment agreement under
sub-section (1) of section 63; 
(j) the rate of interest on the wages payable to a seafarer
under sub-section (2) of section 64; 
(k) the hours of rest provided to every seafarer under section 65;
(l) the conditions subject to which seafarers are given annual paid
leave under section 66; 
(m) the circumstances and conditions for repatriation of seafarers
under sub-section (1) of section 67; 
(n) the financial security and manner of repatriation of seafarers
under sub-section (2) of section 67; 
(o) the indemnity amount to be paid to the seafarer under section 68;
(p) the number of seafarers to be employed onboard the vessel
under section 69; 
(q) the accommodations and recreational facilities for seafarers
under section 70; 
(r) the measures for providing protection of health and medical care to
seafarers under section 72; 
(s) the branches of social security protection to seafarers under section 75;
(t) the terms and conditions and the period during which a seafarer
shall not be entitled to wages under sub-section (1) of section 79; 
(u) the exceptions where a seafarer shall not be disentitled to claim
wages under sub-section (2) of section 79; 
(v) the manner of discharge from service of seafarer under
sub-section (1) of section 80; 
(w) the manner of discharge of property under section 81;
(x) the manner and the restrictions and conditions for utilisation of any
unclaimed amount deposited with or recovered by shipping master for the 
welfare of seafarers under section 82; 
(y) the qualifications and experience of persons appointed to the
Tribunal under sub -section (1) and any other matter under clause ( e) of 
sub-section (4) of section 89; 
(z) the period within which the Tribunal shall submit its award to the
Central Government under sub-section (7) of section 89; 
(za) the extent and the conditions subject to which a seafarer shall be 
maintained or sent to a proper return port, under sub-section (2) of section 91; 
(zb) the manner of possession of certificate and the form of such 
certificate under sub-section (3) of section 93; 
(zc) the terms, conditions and manner of protecting a seafarer who is 
a party to litigation under sub-section (2) of section 94; 
(zd) the form and manner of keeping logbook under sub-section (1) of 
section 112; 
(ze) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.  

44 
Application of 
this Part. 
Definitions.  
Safety and 
security 
requirements. 
PART VI 
SAFETY AND SECURITY 
114. This Part, unless otherwise exempted, shall apply in relation to matters
on safety and security, to— 
(a) Indian vessel and other vessels registered in India under this Act,
except vessels covered under Part XIII; 
(b) vessel other than Indian vessel when such vessel is within India,
including coastal waters; 
(c) port facility; and
(d) company.
115. In this part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “company” means the owner of the ves sel or any other
organisation or person such as the manager, or the bareboat charterer, who 
has assumed the responsibility for operation of the vessel from the owner of 
the vessel and who on assuming such responsibility has agreed to take over 
all the duti es and responsibilities imposed by the International Safety 
Management Code under the Safety Convention; 
(b) the words and expressions used in this Part but not defined, shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the international 
conventions or agreements or treaties, including their protocols, referred to 
in section 116. 
116. (1) Every vessel shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed,
comply with the provisions of the following international conventions, treaties or 
agreements, as applicable, namely:— 
(a) the Safety Convention;
(b) the Load Lines Convention, 1966;
(c) the Special Trade Passenger Ships Agreement, 1971;
(d) the Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing
Collisions at Sea, 1972; 
(e) the International Convention on Maritime Search and
Rescue, 1979; 
(f) the Tonnage Measurement Convention, 1969;
(g) the International Convention for Safe Containers, 1972;
(h) such other convention or agreement or treaty relating to safety or
security to which India is a party, as may be notified by the Central 
Government: 
Provided that  vessels to which  the  provisions  of the  above conventions, 
treaties or  agreements  are  not  applicable,  shall comply  with  such safety  and 
securi
ty requirements as may be prescribed: 
Provided further that it shall be a defense for the master or ship owner to 
prove that a contravention was solely due to deviation or delay caused by stress 
of weather or other circumstances which neither the master nor the ship owner 
nor the charterer, if any, could have prevented or forestalled.   
(2) The safety and security requirements for different classes of vessels and
certificates to be held by such vessels shall be such as may be prescribed. 

45 
117. (1) When an incident relating to the safety and security takes place on
a vessel, the master of the vessel shall report the particulars of the incident to such 
authority and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) When an incident takes place relating to the loss or likely loss overboard
of dangerous goods in packaged form into the sea, or dangerous goods in solid 
form in bulk into the sea, or any incident impeding safe navigation, the master of 
every vessel shall report the particulars of the incident to su ch authority in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) If the vessel referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) is
abandoned, or a report from such vessel is incomplete, the Central Government 
shall fix the responsibility on the master of the vessel. 
118. ( 1) The master of an Indian vessel, on receiving at sea a signal of
distress or information from any source that a vessel or aircraft is in distress shall 
proceed with all speed to the assistance of the persons in distress informing them, 
if possible, that he is doing so unless he is unable or in the special circumstances 
of the case considers it unreasonable or unnecessary to do so or unless he is 
released from such obligation under the provisions of sub-section (3). 
(2) Where the master of any vessel in distress has requisitioned any Indian
vessel that has answered his call, it shall be the duty of the master of the 
requisitioned vessel to comply with the requisition by continuing to proceed with 
all speed to the assistance of the persons in distress unless he is released from the 
obligation under sub-section (4). 
(3) The master shall be released from the obligation imposed by
sub-section (1) as soon as he is informed of the requisition of one or more vessels 
other than his own and that the requisition is being complied with by the vessel or 
vessels requisitioned. 
(4) The master whose ship has been requisitioned under sub-section (2) shall
be released from the obligation imposed by that sub -section, on being informed 
by the pe rsons in distress or by the master of any vessel which has reached the 
person in distress, that assistance is no longer required. 
(5) If the master of an Indian vessel, on receiving at sea a signal of distress
referred to in sub-section (1), is unable or in the special circumstances of the case 
considers it unreasonable or unnecessary to go to the assistance of the persons in 
distress, he shall forthwith cause a statement to be entered in the official logbook 
or if there is no official logbook, cause other record to be kept of his reasons for 
not going to the assistance of those persons. 
(6) The master of every Indian vessel for which an official logbook is
required, shall enter or cause to be entered in the official logbook every signal of 
distress or message that a vessel, aircraft or person is in distress at sea. 
(7) The master of every Indian vessel shall render assistance to every person
found at sea in danger of being lost, unless he is unable to or, in the special 
circumstance of the case, considers th at such assistance cannot be rendered 
without serious danger to his vessel, or the persons thereon. 
(8) If the master of an Indian vessel is unable or consider it unreasonable to
go to the assistance of a person found at sea in danger of being lost, the ma ster 
shall forthwith cause a statement to be entered in the official logbook or, if there 
is no official logbook, cause other record to be kept of his reasons for not going 
to the assistance of that person. 
(9) The master of the vessel shall take all reasonable measures to report the
particulars of any incident relating to safety and security which takes place in the 
vicinity of the vessel to such authority in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Reporting of 
incidents. 
Obligations to 
render 
assistance on 
receiving signal 
of distress and 
to persons in 
danger. 

46 
Search and 
rescue services. 
Radio 
communication 
requirements. 
Information 
about vessel’s 
stability. 
Submersion of 
load lines. 
No vessel to 
carry passenger 
without 
certificate. 
119. The Central Government shall, whenever necessary, make arrangements
for search and rescue services for dealing with distress situation at sea, including 
coastal waters or such territory under the International Convention on Maritime 
Search and Rescue, 1979 and agreement related thereto or any other law for th e 
time being in force.   
120. Every Indian vessel shall be equipped and maintained with such
communication equipment, distress and safety equipment and shall be provided 
with such certified operators as may be prescribed. 
121. (1) Every Indian vessel shall carry onboard such information relating
to the stability of the vessel and the effects of any damage control and general 
precautions necessary to maintain watertight integrity of the vessels and 
provisions for damage control duly approved, in compliance with the provisions 
of the Safety Convention and the Load Line Convention or the safety and security 
requirements in accordance with the provisions of this Part. 
(2) The chief ship surveyor shall assign load line, in compliance wi th the
Load Line Convention and approve such information relating to stability of 
passenger ships as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Director -General may, by order, authorise any other 
surveyor to perform the duties of the chief ship surveyor under th is section on 
such terms and conditions as may be specified therein. 
122. (1) No vessel, other than a vessel exempted from the provisions of this
Part relating to load lines, shall be so loaded as to submerge when the vessel has 
no list of the appropriate load line on each side of the vessel, that is to say, the 
load line indicating or purporting to indicate the maximum depth to which the 
vessel is for the time being entitled under the load line rules, to be loaded. 
(2) Without prejudice to any other procee dings under this Act, any vessel
which is loaded in contravention of this section may be detained until such vessel 
ceases to be so loaded. 
123. (1) No vessel shall carry passengers between ports or places in India or
from any port or place in India to any port or place outside India, or from any port 
or place outside India to any port or place in India, unless such vessel has all valid 
certificates required under this part. 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, specify the
conditions relating to,— 
(a) passenger accommodation;
(b) scale of passenger and amenities to be provided to seafarers;
(c) space or disallowance of any space on a vessel;
(d) scale of provisions and water to be provided;
(e) hospital accommodation and medical facilities;
(f) the conditions for carriage of cargo and livestock; and
(g) any other matter, to carry out the purposes of this Part.
(3) Subject to the conditions specified in sub -section (2), the master of a
passenger vessel departing or proceeding on a voyag e shall make a statement 
about the passengers onboard the vessel in such form as may be specified by the 
Central Government in this behalf. 

47 
124. No vessel shall proceed to sea unless such vessel is in possession of
valid certificates referred to in sub-section (2) of section 116. 
125. (1) A person shall be liable to penalty under this Act if he commits any
of the following acts, namely:— 
(a) being drunk or disorderly attempts to enter a vessel; or
(b) onboard molest any person; or
(c) travels or attempts to travel without payment of fa re; or
(d) wilfully refuses or neglects to quit the vessel on arrival at
destination; or 
(e) fails to exhibit his ticket when requested by the master or other
officer; or 
(f) misconducts himself in such a manner as to cause annoyance or
injury to persons onboard; or 
(g) carries any substance that could jeopardise the safety or security of
the vessel, life onboard or the environment in general. 
(2) The master may refuse to receive onboard any person referred to in
sub-section (1) and if such person is onboard, may put him on shore, and the 
person so refused admittance or put on shore shall not be entitled to return of any 
fare he has paid. 
(3) The master or other officer of any such vessel and all persons called by
him or other officer to his assistance, may detain any person who commits any 
offence under sub -section ( 1) and convey the offender with all convenient 
dispatch before the nearest police station to be dealt with in accordance with the 
law. 
126. (1) No vessel shall carry or attempt to carry cargo without the required
certificate in contravention of this Part or shall have onboard or in any part thereof 
a cargo which is not in accordance with the certificate held by the vessel. 
(2) No vessel shall carry or attempt to carry passengers without the required
certificate under this Part or shall have onboard or in any part thereof a number of 
passengers which is greater than the number set forth in the certificate held by the 
vessel. 
(3) The master of any vessel which carries or attempts to c arry cargo or
passengers in contravention of this section shall be liable to have his certificate of 
competency cancelled or suspended for such a period as the Central Government 
may, by order, specify in this behalf. 
127. (1) Every person who sends or attempts to send a vessel to sea which
is unseaworthy, unless he proves that her going to sea in such unseaworthy state 
was under the circumstances reasonable and justifiable, shall be liable to penalty 
under this sub-section.  
(2) Every master of a vessel wh o knowingly takes or attempts to take a
vessel to sea which is unseaworthy, unless he proves that her going to sea in such 
unseaworthy state was under the circumstances, reasonable and justifiable, shall 
be liable to penalty under this sub-section. 
(3) For the purpose of giving proof under sub -sections (1) and ( 2), every
person charged under this section may give evidence in the same manner as any 
other witness. 
Vessel not to 
proceed to sea 
without valid 
safety and 
security 
certificates. 
Penalties for 
certain acts. 
Vessel not to 
carry cargo or 
passengers in 
contravention of 
Act. 
Unseaworthy 
vessel not to be 
sent to sea. 

48 
Obligation of 
ship owner, 
master or agent 
with respect to 
seaworthiness. 
Safety and 
security 
management. 
Power to make 
rules. 
128. (1) In every contract of service, express or implied,  between the owner
of a vessel and the master or any seafarer thereof, there shall be implied, 
irrespective of any agreement to the contrary, an obligation on the ship owner that 
such ship owner and the master and every agent charged with the loading of such 
vessel or the preparing thereof for sea or the sending thereof to sea, shall use all 
reasonable means to ensure the seaworthiness of such vessel for the voyage at the 
time when such voyage commences and to keep her in a seaworthy state during 
the voyage. 
(2) For the purpose of verifying compliance of the provisions of this section,
the Central Government may, either at the request of the ship owner or otherwise, 
arrange for a survey of the hull, equipment or machinery of any sea-going vessel 
by a surveyor or any person so authorised. 
129. (1) Every vessel, company or port facility shall comply with such safety
and security management requirements as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Central Government or a person authorised by it shall arrange for
the audit of the vessel, company or port facility for the purpose of sub-section (1). 
(3) The Central Government or a person authorised by it may set different
levels of security and provide such information thereof, to all the port facilities 
and all vessels entering into any port facility. 
130. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Part. 
(2) In particular, a nd without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the conditions subject to which the vessel shall comply with the
conventions, treaties or agreements to which India is a party and the safety 
and security requirements to be complied by the vessels to which the said 
conventions, treaties or agreements are not applicable, under sub-section (1) 
of section 116; 
(b) the safety and security requirements for different classes of vessels
and the certificates to be held by such vessels under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 116; 
(c) the manner of reporting the particulars of incidents and the
authority to whom such particulars shall be reported under sub -section (1) 
and sub-section (2) of section 117; 
(d) the manner of reporting the particulars of incidents and the
authority to whom such particulars shall be reported under sub -section (9) 
of section 118; 
(e) the communication equipment, distress and safety equipment and
the certified o perators to be provided to every Indian vessel under 
section 120; 
(f) the information relating to the stability of passenger ship to be
approved under sub-section (2) of section 121; 
(g) the safety and security management requirements to be compli ed
by the vessel, company or port facility under sub-section (1) of section 129; 
(h) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.

49 
80 of 1976. 
PART VII 
PREVENTION AND CONTAINMENT OF POLLUTION FROM VESSEL AND 
RESPONSE 
131. Save as otherwise provided, this Part shall apply to,—
(a) Indian vessel and every other vessel registered in India;
(b) vessel other than an Indian vessel;
(c) vessel not entitled to fly the flag of India but which operate under
the authority of India; 
(d) vessel that enters a port, shipyard or offshore terminal or place in
I
ndia or within the coastal waters; 
(e) any incident of marine casualty or any act relating to such casualty
occurring with grave and imminent danger to Indian coastline or coastal 
waters or related interests or posing a threat to the marine environment or to 
the coastline or related interest, from pollution or threat of pollution in the 
sea or air either by deliberate, negligent or accidental release of oil, ballast 
water, 
noxious liquid substance, garbage,  sewage, waste,  harmful         
anti-fouling substances, harmful emissions or any other harmful  substance 
including such incidents occurring on the high seas. 
Explanation.—
For the purposes of clauses (d) and (e), “coastal waters” 
shall mean and include any part of the territorial waters of India, along with any 
part of the adjoining maritime zones of India or any marine area adjacent 
thereto over which India has, or, may hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in 
regard to control of marine pollution under the Territorial Waters, Continental 
Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, or any 
other law for the time being in force; 
(f) port for the purpose of providing reception facilities:
Provided that this Part shall not apply to any warship, naval auxiliary or 
other vessel owned or operated by the Central Government or the State 
Governments and used for the time being only on Government non -commercial 
service unless otherwise specified by the Central Government by notification: 
Provided further that the Director -General may provide equivalence to, or 
grant exemption from, the provisions of this Part or the rules made thereunder, to 
any vessel or person, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
132. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “harmful substance” means any substance or form of energy,
which, if introduced into the sea or air, is liable to create hazards to human 
health, harm living resources and marine life, damage amenities or interfere 
with other legitimate uses of the sea or air and includes any substance 
subject to control by any of the conventions to which India is a party or such 
other substance as may be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(b) “dumping” means any—
(i) deliberate disposal of waste water or other matter from
vessels, ports, platform or other man-made structures at sea; or 
(ii) deliberate disposal of vessels, structures of ports, platform or
other man-made structures at sea, 
but does not include— 
(i) the disposal of wastes or other matter incidental to, or derived from
normal operations of vessels, platforms or other man-made structure at sea 
and their equipment, other than wastes or other matter transported by or to 
vessels, platforms or other man -made structures at sea, operating for the  
Application of 
this Part. 
Definitions.  

50 
Control of 
discharge or 
emission of 
harmful 
substances or 
dumping at sea. 
Prevention and 
containment of 
pollution and 
response. 
purpose of disposal of such matter or derived from the treatment of such 
wastes or other matter on such vessels, platform or structure; or 
(ii) the placement of matter for a purpose other than the mere disposal
thereof: 
Provided that such placement is not contrary to the aims of the London 
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes 
and Other Matter, 1972; 
(c) “port” s hall include port facility, shipyard, ship breaking yards,
ship repair unit, offshore facilities and terminals; 
(d) “vessel” means a vessel of any type, whatsoever, operating in the
marine or aquatic environment and includes hydrofoil boats, air -cushion 
vehicles, submersibles, floating craft, floating platforms, floating storage 
units and floating production storage and off -loading units but does not 
include fixed platforms or other fixed man -made structures at sea for the 
purposes of dumping. 
133. (1) Save as otherwise provided, all vessels shall be under an obligation
to prevent discharge or emission of harmful substances or mixtures containing 
harmful substances.  
(2) All Indian vessels shall be fitted with such equipment and comply with
such requirements and conditions relating to construction, survey of equipment 
and structure of vessel, as may be prescribed. 
(3) No certificate shall be granted under this Part unless the requirements
and conditions of this section are complied with. 
(4) The Centra l Government may designate such specific areas requiring
more stringent standards for pollution prevention as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Central Government may, either at the request of the ship owner or
otherwise, arrange for the survey of the hull, equ ipment or machinery of any 
vessel by a surveyor and, if found fit, shall grant certificates in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder in such form, for such 
duration and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
(6) The  Central Government may take measures, as it may consider
appropriate, to prevent the pollution of the sea by the dumping of waste and other 
matter that is liable to create hazards to human health, harm living resources and 
marine life, damage amenities or interfere with other legitimate use of the sea.  
(7) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the items
permitted for dumping in the coastal waters and may prescribe the manner in 
which permissions for the dumping of such items may be obtained. 
(8) Unless expressly permitted, no vessel, port, platform or other man-made
structures at sea shall engage in dumping in the coastal waters. 
134. (1) Every vessel shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed,
comply with the provisions of the f ollowing international conventions, as 
applicable, namely:— 
(a) the MARPOL Convention;
(b) the Anti-Fouling Systems Convention;
(c) the Ballast Water Management Convention;
(d) International Convention Relating to Intervention on the High Seas
in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, 1969; 
(e) any other pollution prevention convention or agreement or treaty
to which India is a party, as may be prescribed: 

51 
Provided that vessel to which the provisions of the above conventions are 
not applicable shall comply with such pollution prevention requirements as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) A vessel shall possess such different types of certificates and documents
depending on the type, size, nature and area of operation of the vessel as may be 
prescribed. 
135. (1) No vessel shall proceed to sea unless such vessel is in possession
of valid certificates required under the convention or agreement or treaty referred 
to in section 134. 
(2) A vessel shall carry a valid certificate onboard and shall be subject to
inspection while at a port in India by the surveyor or an authorised person in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as limiting the 
powers of any officer under any other law for the time being in force from 
boarding and inspecting the vessel or its equipment. 
(3) If the inspection under this section reveals that a vessel does not have a
valid certificate onboard or whose condition or equipment’s condition does not 
meet the particulars of the certificate onboard, the vessel may be detained by order 
by a proper officer until proceedings are concluded under this section or in the 
opinion of the Central Government, the vessel can proceed to sea without 
presenting an unreasonable threat or harm to safety of life at sea, marine 
environment or the public health and welfare. 
(4) Notwithstanding any proceedings initiated against the owner or master
of the vessel under this section, the Central Government may initiate further action 
against such persons, if it determines that the incident of pollution continues to 
cause harm or damage after the conclusion of the proceedings, or results in harm 
or damages not discovered at the time of the initiation of the proceedings. 
136. Every Indian vessel shall maintain such books of record in such form
and manner and the nature of entries to be made in the books of record, the custody 
and disposal thereof, and all other matters relating thereto, shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 
137. (1) Where the Central Government has reasonable grounds to suspect
that a vessel which proposes to enter a port in India does not comply with the 
requirements of this Part, it may direct the port to deny entry to such vessel. 
(2) Where the Central Government has reasonable grounds to suspect that a
vessel does not comply with the requirements of this Part and poses a threat of 
harm to the coast or coastal waters or has caused s uch harm, it may direct any 
proper officer to detain the vessel or have the vessel moved to such place and for 
such period as it may deem fit. 
(3) Where any vessel detained under this section proceeds to sea before
being released, the master of the vessel, ship owner or any person who sends the 
vessel to sea, shall be liable to penalty under this Act. 
138. (1) Where an incident in which the cargo or harmful substances escape
or is likely to escape from a vessel causes or threaten to cause pollution of air, 
marine environment or any part of coasts or coastal waters, the master of every 
vessel shall report the particulars of such incident to such authority in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Central Government shall, upon receiving information regarding any
incident of pollution under sub-section (1), immediately take notice of such incident 
and may direct the owner, agent, master, charterer, operator, lessee or licensee of 
the vessel by notice served on him, to take the following actions, namely:— 
Vessel not to 
proceed to sea 
without valid 
pollution 
prevention 
certificates. 
Record books. 
Power to deny 
entry, detain or 
move vessel. 
Power to take 
measures for 
containment of 
pollution and 
reporting of 
incidents. 

52 
(a) to prevent the escape of such harmful substances from the vessel,
as may be specified in such notice; 
(b) to remove the cargo or oil or noxious liquid substance or harmful
substance from the vessel in such manner and to such place, as may be 
specified in the notice;  
(c) to remove the vessel to a place, as may be specified in the notice;
(d) to remove the cargo or oil or noxious liquid substance or harmful
substance slicks on the surface of the sea in such manner as may be specified 
in the notice;  
(e) to prohibit the removal of the vessel including any cargo or stores
therein, from a place specified in the notice; and 
(f) any other action as may be considered necessary to prevent such
damage. 
(3) If a vessel referred to in sub -section (1) is abandoned or a report from
such vessel is incomplete, the Central Government shall fix the responsibility of 
the incident on the master or owner of that vessel.  
(4) Where the release of harmful substances has caused or is likely to present
a grave and imminent danger to the coast or coastal waters, the Central 
Government may proceed to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to 
prevent, mitigate or eliminate such threat or danger. 
(5) Where any person fails to comply with any notice served on him under
sub-section ( 2), the Central Government may, whether or not such person is 
convicted of an offence under this Part by reason of his having so failed to comply, 
cause such action to be taken as it may deem necessary for,— 
(a) carrying out the directives given in the notice issued under
sub-section (2); 
(b) containing the pollution caused or preventing the pol lution
threatened to be caused, to any part of the coast or coastal waters by any 
harmful substance having escaped or threatening to escape from the vessel. 
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Part, any expenditure or liability
incurred by the Central Government in, or by reason of, the exercise of powers 
under sub-section (5) in relation to any vessel in respect of which a notice had 
been issued under this section, shall be a debt due to the Central Government and 
may be recovered from the person or persons on whom the notice was served or 
from all or any of those persons, and shall be a charge upon all or any vessel 
owned by that person or persons which may be detained by the Central 
Government until the amount is paid: 
Provided that where the amount due to the Central Government is not paid 
within reasonable time, the Central Government may cause all or any vessel 
owned by such person or any part thereof to be sold, for the purpose of recovery 
of such an amount with applicable interest. 
(7) The Central Government shall have the power to take such measures as
may be deemed necessary to prevent, mitigate or eliminate grave and imminent 
danger to the coastline or related interests from pollution or threat of pollution 
following any incident on the high seas which may reasonably be expected to 
result in major harmful consequences to the coastline or coastal waters. 
(8) The Central Government may make national or regional arrangement
system for responding promptly and effectively to pollution incident s occurring 
within the coastal waters. 

53 
139. (1) For the purposes of taking any measures under section 138, the
Central Government or any other officer authorised by it in this behalf, may, by 
an order in writing, direct the owner of any Indian vessel or equipment to provide 
such services or assistance as may be specified in that order. 
(2) The owner of any vessel or equipment with respect to which an order is
made under sub-section (1), shall be entitled to tariff rates of freight and charter 
hire, at reasonable rates having regard to current market conditions: 
Provided that where tariff rates of freight are not fixed or where there is any 
dispute about reasonable rate of charter hire, the freight or charter hire, shall be 
paid at such rates as may be fixed by the Central Government by an order in 
writing, subject to determination of reasonability of such rates of freight or charter 
hire by examining such witnesses, documents and accounts as it may deem 
necessary. 
(3) The Director-General may,—
(a) requisition the services of any officer of the Central G overnment
or other officers or any police officer; 
(b) requisition the resources and pollution prevention equipment
available with any of the offices of the Central Government or other offices 
or organisations, 
for the purposes of this Part and it shall be the duty of every such officer or office 
or organisation to render assistance. 
140. The Central Government shall prescribe such measures as it may deem
appropriate and practical, for the monitoring, detection and control of pollution 
under this Part.  
141. The Central Government may appoint such persons as analysts for the
purposes of incidents of pollution under this Part and specify the scope of powers 
to be exercised by an analyst in this regard. 
142. (1) Every port shall provide such reception facilities and surveillance,
supervision and guidance thereof as may be prescribed, taking into account the 
pollution prevention conventions specified in section 134. 
(2) The Central Government may give directions to the ports to take
appropriate measures to ensure that wastes or residue generated during operation, 
repair and re-cycling of vessel are collected, handled, treated and disposed of in a 
safe and environmentally sound manner to protect human health and the 
environment. 
(3) A port authority providing reception facilities or a person providing such
facilities by arrangement with the port authority may impose charges for the use 
of the facilities at such rates and impose such conditions in respect of the use 
thereof as may be notified by the Central Government in respect of the port. 
(4) Where the Central Government is satisfied that there are no reception
facilities at any port or that the facilities available at such port or place are not 
adequate for enabling vessels calling at such port or place to compl y with the 
requirements of the pollution prevention conventions, the Central Government 
may direct, by order in writing, such authority to provide or arrange for the 
provision of such reception facilities, as may be specified in the order. 
(5) Any port tha t fails to comply with the directions under sub -section (4)
shall be liable to penalty under this Act. 
143. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Part. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
give directions. 
Measures for 
detection of 
pollution. 
Appointment of 
analysts. 
Reception 
facilities. 
Power to make 
rules. 

54 
Survey, audit 
and 
certification. 
(a) the manner of providing equivalence or granting exemption to any
vessel or person under the second proviso to section 131; 
(b) other substances which fall within the definition of “harmful
substances” in clause (a) of section 132; 
(c) the equipment and requirements and conditions relating to
construction, survey of equi pment and structure of vessel under        
sub-section (2) of section 133; 
(d) the pollution prevention standards and requirements for designated
areas under sub-section (4) of section 133; 
(e) the form, duration and conditions subject to which a certificate
may be granted under sub-section (5) of section 133; 
(f) the manner of obtaining permission for dumping in coastal waters
under sub-section (7) of section 133; 
(g) the conditions subject to which the vessel shall comply with the
convent ions, agreements or treaties specified in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13 4 including any other pollution prevention convention or 
agreement or treaty to which India is a party and the pollution prevention 
requirements to be complied with by the vessels on whom such 
conventions , agreements or treaties do  not apply;  
(h) the types of certificates and documents under sub -section (2) of
section 134; 
(i) the manner of inspection of certificates by a surveyor under
sub-section (2) of section 135; 
(j) the form and manner of maintenance of record book and the nature
of entries to be made in the books of record, the custody and disposal 
thereof, and other matters relating to maintenance of record book under 
section 136; 
(k) the particulars of the incident, t he authority and the manner of
reporting incident under sub-section (1) of section 138; 
(l) the measures to be taken by the Central Government for the
monitoring, detection and control of pollution under section 140; 
(m) the reception facilities, surveill ance, supervision and guidance
under sub-section (1) of section 142; 
(n) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
PART VIII 
SURVEY, AUDIT AND CERTIFICATION
144. ( 1) Every Indian vessel, company or port shall unless otherwise
exempted by the Central Government, be surveyed or audited or certified for 
verification of compliance with the conventions specified in section 147 and such 
requirements for different classes of vessels, company or port, as may be 
prescribed. 
Explanation.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “company” 
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (a) of section 115. 
(2) A surveyor or any person authorised by the Director -General in this
behalf may, if satisfied that any vessel, co mpany or port has been surveyed or 
audited as per the requirements under this Act, grant certificate or documents to 
such vessel, company or port.  

55 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any survey or
audit of a vessel, company or port under this Part is completed, the owner, agent 
or master of such vessel, company or port shall not make or cause to be made any 
alteration in the structure, equipment, fittings, arrangements, material, systems or 
scantlings covered by the survey or audit without the prior permission of the 
Central Government.  
(4) If, after grant of certificates or documents under sub -section (2), the
Central Government or any person authorised by it, has reason to believe that 
changes have been made to the structure, equipment, fittings, arrangements, 
material, systems or scantlings, or they have sustained any damage or are 
otherwise found insufficient, then the Central Government or any person 
authorised by it in this behalf may require that the vessel, company or port be      
re-surveyed or audited to such extent, as it may deem fit, or it may modify or 
revoke or suspend or cancel or surrender the certificates and docum ents, after 
giving an opportunity of being heard, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) No vessel shall proceed to sea unless the owner or master of the vessel
holds onboard all the certificates or documents as required under this section. 
145. Every vessel, company or port shall, unless exempted under this Part,
be in possession of such certificates as may be prescribed. 
146. (1) Save as otherwise provided, a surveyor may at any reasonable time,
go onboard a vessel and may inspect or audit the vessel  or any part thereof, the 
structure, equipment, fittings, arrangements, materials, systems, scantlings, cargo, 
provisions, stores, her certificates and certificates of the seafarers onboard: 
 Provided that he shall not unreasonably hinder the operation of the vessel 
or detain or delay her from proceeding on any voyage. 
(2) The owner, agent, master or every officer of the vessel shall afford to the
surveyor all reasonable facilities for survey and provide all such information in 
respect of the vessel and her  structure, equipment, fittings, arrangements, 
materials, scantlings, systems, cargo, provisions, stores, her certificates and 
certificates of the seafarers, as the surveyor may require.  
147. Every vessel, company or port shall be surveyed, audited and certified
to confirm compliance with the following conventions as applicable, namely:— 
(a) the Safety Convention;
(b) the MARPOL Convention;
(c) the Anti-Fouling Systems Convention;
(d) the Ballast Water Management Convention;
(e) the Load Lines Conventions;
(f) the Tonnage Measurement Convention, 1969;
(g) the Special Trade Passenger Ships Agreement, 1971 and its
Protocol; 
(h) the Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing
Collisions at Sea, 1972; 
(i) the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979
(SAR 1979); 
(j) the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006; or
(k) any other convention relating to survey, audit or certification as
may be prescribed. 
Certificates.  
Power of 
surveyor.  
Compliance of 
provisions of 
convention.  

56 
Recognition of 
certificates 
granted outside 
India.  
Grant of 
certificate to 
foreign vessels 
in India and 
Indian vessels in 
foreign States. 
Power to call for 
information. 
Power to 
conduct 
inspections. 
148. A valid certificate granted under a convention in respect of a vessel
other than an Indian vessel by the Government of the State to which the vessel 
belongs, shall subject to such rules as the Central Government may make in this 
behalf, have the same effect in India as the corresponding certificates granted in 
respect of an Indian vessel.  
149. (1) The Central Government may, at the request of the Government of
a State to which a convention applies, cause an appropriate convention certificate 
to be granted in respect of a vessel registered or to be registered in that State, if it 
is satisfied in like manner as in the case of an Indian vessel that such certificate 
may be granted and where a certificate is granted at such a request, it shall contain 
a statement to that effect. 
(2) The Central Government may request the Government of a State to
which a convention applies to grant an appropriate convention certificate in 
respect of a vessel registered or to be registered in India and a certificate granted 
in pursuance of such a request shall have effect for the purposes of this Act, as if 
it had been granted by the Central Government.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “convention certificate” 
means a certificate granted under the provisions of any convention. 
150. (1) The Central Government, surveyor, or any other person authorised
in this behalf, shall have the power to require the master of a vessel to which this 
Part applies, to give such information as may be required to ensure compliance 
with the provisions of this Part. 
(2) The surveyor or any other person empowered under sub-section (1), shall
have the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
(3) Any person who refuses or fails to give the information referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be liable for a penalty under this Act. 
151. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint such persons
to conduct inspections of any vessel to which this Part applies, in order to— 
(a) verify whether the vessel has violated any provisions of this Act or
rules made thereunder; 
(b) comply with the request of a contracting party to any convention,
agreement or treaty referred to in section 147, for an investigation as to 
violation of any provisions of such convention, agreement or treaty, by a n 
Indian vessel; 
(c) comply with such other matter as may be prescribed.
(2) The violation noticed in the inspection conducted under sub-section (1)
shall be reported to the Central Government in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The Central  Government may, upon receipt of the report under
sub-section (2), take any action or direct the master of the vessel to take such 
action as may be required. 
5 of 1908.

57 
152. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Part. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the requirements for different classes of vessels, company or ports
for survey, audit and certification under sub-section (1) of section 144; 
(b) the manner of re-survey, audit and certification of vessel, company
or port and modification, revocation, suspension, cancellation or surrender 
of the certificates and documents under sub-section (4) of section 144; 
(c) the certificates to be possessed by a vessel, company or port under
section 145; 
(d) any other convention relating to survey, audit or certification under
clause (k) of section 147; 
(e) any other power of the surveyor or other person under cla use (d)
of sub-section (2) of section 150; 
(f) any other matter for compliance of which inspections may be
conducted under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 151; 
(g) the form and manner of report  to be made to the Central
Government under sub-section (2) of section 151; 
(h) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
PART IX 
MARITIME LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
CHAPTER I 
COLLISION, ACCIDENT AT SEA AND LIABILITY
153. (1) This Chapter shall apply to,—
(a) Indian vessels; and
(b) any vessel other than an Indian vessel while it is at a port or place
in India including the coastal waters. 
(2) All claims arising out of pollution damage under Chapter III or
Chapter IV of this Part shall be adjudicated in accordance with the provisions 
of those Chapters.  
154. (1) Each vessel shall bear its own damage if the collision is accidental
or the cause of the collision is not determined. 
(2) If the collision is caused by the fault of one of the vessels, the liability to
make good the damages or loss caused to one or more of those vessels or to their 
cargo or to any property of the seafarers, passengers or other persons onboard or 
the liability for loss of life or personal injury, shall be of the vessel which has 
committed the fault.  
(3) If the collision is caused by the fault of two or more vessels, the liability
of each vessel, to make good the damages or loss caused to one or more of those 
vessels or to their cargo or to any property of the seafarers, passengers or other 
persons onboard or the liability for loss of life or personal injury, shall be in 
proportion to the degree of faults respectively committed by each such vessel: 
Power to make 
rules. 
Application of 
this Chapter.  
Apportionment 
of liability. 

58 
Damage or loss 
of vessel, cargo 
or property. 
Joint and several 
liability for loss 
of life or 
personal injury. 
Right of 
contribution.  
Provided that if, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, it is not 
possible to establish different degrees of fault, the liability shall be apportioned 
equally. 
(4) For the purposes of this Chapter, for any maritime claim arising out of
collision between vessels, the High Court may, in the course of proceedings under 
this Act, assign all or any of the following duties to any assessors, appoint ed by 
the Central Government under the Admiralty (Jurisdiction and Settlement of 
Maritime Claims) Act, 2017, namely:— 
(a) determination of fault, including the degree of fault attributable to
each vessel; 
(b) attend the proceedings and present their written findings before the
High Court; and 
(c) any other duties as may be assigned by the High Court.
155. (1) Whenever, by fault of two or more vessels, damage or loss is caused
to one or more of them or to the cargo of one or more of them or to any property 
of the seafarers, passengers or other persons onboard one or more of them, the 
liability, including liability to third parties, to make good the damage or loss shall 
be in proportion to the degree in which each vessel was at fault.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to render any vessel liable for
any loss or damage to which her fault has not contributed. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the liability of any person under any
contract, or shall be construed as imposing any liability upon any person from 
which he is exempted by any contract or by any provision of law, or as affecting 
the right of any person to limit his liability in the manner provided by law.  
(4) For the purposes of this Chapter, references to damage or loss caused by
the fault of a vessel shall be construed as including references to any salvage or 
other expenses consequent upon that fault, recoverable under any law for the time 
being in force by way of damages. 
156. (1) Whenever loss of life or personal injuries are suffered by any person
onboard a vessel owing to the fault of that vessel and any other vessel, the liability 
to third parties, of the owners of the vessels concerned shall be joint and several.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as depriving any person of any
right of defence on which he might have relied in an action brought against him 
by the person injured, or any person entitled to sue in respect of such loss of life, 
or shall affect the right of any person to limit his liability in cases to which this 
section relates.  
157. (1) Whenever loss of life or personal injuries are suffered by a person
onboard a vessel owing to the fault of that vessel and of any other vessel and a 
proportion of the damages is recovered from the owner of one of the vessels which 
exceeds the proportion in which she was in fault, the said owner may recover by 
way of contribution the amount of the excess from the owners of the other vessels 
to the extent to which those vessels were respectively in fault:  
Provided that no amount shall be so recovered which shall not, by reason of 
any statutory or contractual limitation of, or exemption from, liability or which 
shall not for any other reason, have been recovered in the first instance as damages 
by the persons entitled to sue therefor.  
22 of 2017. 

59 
(2) In addition to any other remedy provided by law for the time being in
force, the person entitled to any contribution under sub -section (1) shall, for the 
purpose of recovering the contribution, have subject to the provisions of this Act, 
the same rights and powers as the persons entitled to sue for damages in the first 
instance.  
158. (1) In every case of collision between two vessels, it shall be the duty
of the master or person in -charge of each vessel in and so far as he can do so 
without danger to his own vessel, seafarers and passengers, if any,— 
(a) to render to the other vessel, her master, seafarers and passengers,
if any, such assis tance as may be practicable and necessary to save them 
from any danger caused by the collision and to stay by the other vessel until 
he has ascertained that she has no need of further assistance; and  
(b) to give to the masters or persons in-charge of the other vessels, the
name of his own vessel and of the port to which she belongs and also from 
which she comes and to which she is bound. 
(2) The failure of the master of a vessel to comply with the provisions of
this section shall not raise any presumption of liability under this Chapter. 
159. In every case of collision in which it is practicable so to do, the master
of every vessel shall immediately after the occurrence, cause a statement thereof 
and of the circumstances under which the same occurred, to be entered in the 
official logbook, if any, and the entry shall be signed by the master and also by 
the officer on watch or one of the seafarers. 
160. When an Indian vessel or other vessels to which this Chapter applies,
has sustained or caused any accident occasioning loss of life or any serious injury 
to any person or has received any material damage affecting her seaworthiness or 
her efficiency either in her hull or is so altered in any part of her machinery as not 
to correspond with the particulars cont ained in any of the certificates granted 
under this Act in respect of the vessel, the master or ship owner or his agent shall, 
within such time as may be prescribed, after the happening of the accident or 
damage or as soon thereafter as possible, transmit to the Director-General or the 
nearest principal officer a report of the accident or damage and of the probable 
cause thereof stating the name of the vessel, her official number, if any, her port 
of registry and the place where she is. 
161. If the owner or  agent of any Indian vessel has reason, owing to the
non-appearance of the vessel or to any other circumstance, to apprehend that the 
vessel is wholly lost, he shall as soon as may be, send notice in writing to the 
Director-General relating to the loss and the cause of such loss stating the name 
of the vessel, her official number, if any, and her port of registry. 
CHAPTER II 
LIMITATION OF LIABILITY FOR MARITIME CLAIMS
162. (1) The ship owner or salvor or any person for whose act, neglect or
default, the ship owner or salvor, or any such person is responsible, and the insurer 
of liability for such claims, may limit his liability for claims in respect of— 
(a) loss of life or personal injury or loss of or damage to property
including damage to harbour works, basins and waterways and aids to 
navigation, occurring onboard or in direct connection with the operation of 
the vessels or with salvage operations and co nsequential loss resulting 
therefrom;  
Duty of master 
of vessel to 
assist in case of 
collision. 
Collision to be 
entered in 
official logbook. 
Report to Director-
General of 
accidents to 
vessels.  
Notice of loss of 
Indian vessel to be 
given to Director-
General. 
Limitation of 
liability for 
damages in 
respect of 
certain claims. 

60 
(b) loss resulting from delay in the carriage by sea of cargo, passengers
or their luggage; 
(c) other loss resulting from infringement of rights other than contractual
rights, occurring in direct connection with the operation of the vessel or salvage 
operations;  
(d) the raising, removal, destruction or the rendering harmless of a
vessel which is sunk, wrecked, stranded or abandoned, including anything 
that is or has been onboard such vessel;  
(e) the removal, destruction or the rendering harmless of the cargo of
the vessel; 
(f) a person other than the person liable in respect of measures taken
in order to avert or minimise loss for which the person liable may limit his 
liability in accordance with the Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims 
Convention and further loss caused by such measures. 
(2) The claims set out under sub-section (1) shall be subject to limitation of
liability, even if brought by way of recourse or for indemnity under a contract or 
otherwise: 
Provided that claims set out under clauses (d), (e) and (f) of sub-section (1) 
shall not be subject to limitation of liability to the extent they relate to 
remuneration under a contract with the person liable.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to,—
(a) claims for salvage, including any claim for spe cial compensation
under Article 14 of the Salvage Convention, or contribution in
general average;  
(b) claims for oil pollution damage under Chapter III of this Part
relating to civil liability for oil pollution damage; 
(c) claims subject to any convention or any law for the time being in
force in  India governing or  prohibiting limitation of  liability for  nuclear 
damage;  
(d) claims against t he ship owner of a nuclear vessel for nuclear
damage; 
(e) claims by servant of the  ship owner or salvor whose duties are
connected with the vessel or the salvage operations, including claims of their 
heirs, dependants or other persons entitled to make such claims, if under the 
law governing the contract of service between the ship owner or salvor and 
such servants, the ship owner or salvor is not entitled to limit his liability in 
respect 
of such claims, or if he is by such  law only permitted to limit his 
liability to  an amount  greater than  that  provided  in  the  Limitation  of 
Liability for Maritime Claims  Convention  or the rules  made  under 
sections 165 and 166.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, the act of invoking limitation 
of liability shall not be an admission of liability. 
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this Chapter,— 
(a) the liability of a ship owner shall include the liability in an action
brought against the vessel herself; 

61 
(b) “ship owner” means the owner, charterer, manager or operator of
a sea-going vessel. 
163. A person shall not be entitled to limit his liability under section 162, if
it is proved that the loss resulted from his personal act or omission, committed 
with the intent to cause such loss, or committed recklessly and with knowled ge 
that such loss is likely to result.  
164. Where a person entitled to limitation of liability under this Chapter has
a claim against the claimant arising out of the same occurrence, their respective 
claims shall be set off against each other and the provisions of this Chapter shall 
apply only to the balance, if any.  
165. (1) The limits of liability for claims other than passenger claims under
section 166 arising on any distinct occasion, shall be calculated in accordance 
with the provisions of the Limita tion of Liability for Maritime Claims 
Convention:  
Provided that in cases where the provisions of the Limitation of Liability for 
Maritime Claims Convention are not applicable, the limit of liability shall be such 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where the amoun t calculated in respect of claims for loss of life or
personal injury is insufficient to pay such claims in full, the amount calculated in 
respect of other claims shall be available for payment of the unpaid balance of 
claims in respect of claims for loss of life or personal injury and such unpaid 
balance shall rank rateably with claims in respect of other claims.  
(3) Without prejudice to the right of claims for loss of life or personal injury
under sub-section (2), the claims in respect of damage to harbo ur works, basins, 
waterways and aids to navigation shall have priority over other claims.  
(4) The limits of liability for any salvor not operating from any vessel or for
any salvor operating solely on the vessel to, or in respect of which he is rendering 
salvage services, shall be calculated according to gross tonnage as provided in the 
Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims. 
166. In respect of claims arising on any distinct occasion for loss of life or
personal injury to passengers of a vessel, the limit of liability of the owner thereof 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “claims arising on any 
distinct occasion for loss of life or personal injury to passengers of a vessel” shall 
mean any claim brought by or on behalf of any person carried in that vessel,—  
(a) under a contract of passenger carriage; or
(b) who, with the consent of the carrier, is accompanying a vehicle or
live animals which are covered by a contract for the carriage of goods. 
167. (1) The limits of liability determined under section 165 shall apply to
the aggregate of all claims which arise on any distinct occasion,— 
(a) against the person or any person for whose act, neglect or default,
he is responsible; or 
(b) against a ship owner rendering salvage services from that vessel
and a salvor operating from such vessel and any person for whose act, 
neglect or default he is responsible; or  
(c) against the salvor who is not operating from a vessel or who is
operating solely on the vessel in respect of which the salvage services are 
rendered and any person for whose act, neglect or default, such salvor is 
responsible.  
Conduct 
barring 
limitation.  
Counter claims.  
Limits of 
liability.  
Limit for 
passenger 
claims. 
Aggregation of 
claims. 

62 
Constitution of 
limitation fund. 
Limitation of 
liability without 
constitution of a 
limitation fund. 
Distribution of 
fund. 
(2) The limits of liability determined under section 16 5 shall apply to the
aggregate of all claims subject thereto which may arise on any distinct occasion 
against the ship owner in respect of the vessel referred to in that section and any 
person for whose act, neglect or default he is responsible. 
168. ( 1) Any person alleged to be liable may constitute a fund with the
Central Government or the High Court in which legal proceedings are instituted 
or expected to be instituted in respect of claims which can be limited under t his 
Chapter.  
(2) The fund shall be constituted in the sum of the amounts calculated in
accordance with the provisions of section 165 or section 166, read with   
section 167, as are applicable to claims for which limitation of liability is invoked 
and which arise from the same distinct occasion, together with interest at such rate 
as may be notified by the Central Government thereon from the date of occurrence 
giving rise to the liability until the date of the constitution of the fund.  
(3) The limi tation fund of the value calculated in accordance with
sub-section (2) or stipulated by the High Court or the Central Government, shall 
be constituted by— 
(a) depositing the amount; or
(b) producing a guarantee acceptable under any law for the time being
in force and considered to be adequate by the High Court or the Central 
Government.  
(4) The fund so constituted shall be available only for the payment of claims
in respect of which limitation of liability may be invoked. 
(5) The fund const ituted by one of the persons or ship owner or salvors
referred to in section 167, or his insurer, shall be deemed to be constituted by all 
such persons or ship owners or salvors or their insurers. 
169. ( 1) Limitation of liability may be invoked notwithstan ding that a
limitation fund has not been constituted under section 168. 
(2) In case the right to limitation of liability is invoked without the
constitution of a limitation fund under section 168,— 
(a) the High Court shall adjudicate each claim for its ful l proven
amount and declare the right of the person liable to limit his liability and for 
the purpose of enforcement, the amount of limitation shall be applicable to 
the respective claims; and  
(b) the claimant shall not be barred from taking other action in respect
of such claims. 
(3) Section 171 shall not be applicable unless a limitation fund is constituted
under section 168. 
170. (1) Subject to the limits of liability under sections 165 and 166, the
fund shall be distributed among the claimants in propo rtion to their established 
claims. 
(2) No lien or other right in respect of any vessel or property shall affect the
proportions in which the fund is distributed among several claimants under this 
section.  
(3) If before the fund is distributed, the person liable or his insurer has
settled a claim against the fund, such person shall, up to the amount he has paid, 
acquire by subrogation the rights which the person so compensated would have 
enjoyed under this Cha pter.  

63 
(4) The right of subrogation under sub-section (3) may also be exercised by
any person other than the person liable or his insurers in respect of any amount of 
compensation which such person may have paid.  
(5) Where the person liable or any other person establishes that he may be
compelled to pay at a later date, in whole or in part any such amount of 
compensation with regard to which such person would have enjoyed a right of 
subrogation under this section had the compensation been paid before the fund 
was distributed, the High Court or the Central Gove rnment where the fund is 
constituted may order that a sufficient sum be provisionally set aside to enable 
such person to enforce his claim against the fund at such later date. 
171. (1) Where a fund is constituted under section 168, any person having
made a claim against the fund shall be barred from exercising any right in respect 
of such claim against any other vessel or property of a person by or on behalf of 
whom the fund was constituted. 
(2) After a fund is constituted under section 168, if any vessel o r other
property, belonging to a person on behalf of whom the fund was constituted, is 
arrested or attached for a claim which may be raised against the fund, or any 
security given, may be released by an order of the High Court and such release 
shall always be ordered by the High Court whether or not the fund was constituted 
with the same or any other High Court or with the Central Government.  
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply only if the claimant
makes a claim against the fund before the High Court or the Central Government 
administering that fund and the fund is actually available and freely transferable 
in respect of that claim.  
172. (1) Every registered owner of an Indian vessel and of any vessel other
than an Indian vessel ente ring or departing a port in India or operating in the 
coastal waters shall maintain compulsory insurance or such other financial 
security from an insurer or organisation as may be prescribed, in respect of such 
vessel. 
(2) The insurance shall cover maritime claims subject to limitation specified
under section 162. 
(3) The amount of insurance for each and every vessel per incident shall be
at least equal to the relevant maximum amount for the limitation of liability 
provided under section 165 and for passenger claims the relevant maximum 
amount for the limitation of liability under section 166.  
(4) Any vessel departing a port in India in contravention of this section shall
be liable to be detained by such authority as may be prescribed. 
173. (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any person referred to
in section 162 who seeks to limit his liability before the High Court or seeks to 
procure the release of a vessel or other property or the discharge of any security 
given within India but shall not apply to any person who does not have—  
(a) habitual residence in India; or
(b) principal place of business in India; or
(c) any vessel in relation to which the right of limitation is invoked or
whose release is sought and which does not fly the flag of a State which is 
a party to the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims,  
at the time of invocation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
Bar to other 
actions.  
Compulsory 
insurance or 
other financial 
security for 
maritime claims 
subject to 
limitation. 
Scope of 
application of 
this Chapter.  

64 
Power to make 
rules for matters 
under Chapters I 
and II of this 
Part. 
Application of 
this Chapter. 
Definitions. 
(2) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to air-cushion vehicles or
floating platforms constructed for the purpose of exploring or exploiting the 
natural resources of the sea-bed or the sub-soil thereof. 
174. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of Chapter I and this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the time within which the master or ship owner or his agent shall
report the accident to the Director-General or the nearest principal officer 
under section 160; 
(b) the limits of liability in cases where the provisions of the
Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims Convention are not applicable 
under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 165; 
(c) the limit of liability of the ship owner for loss of life or personal
injury to passengers of a vessel under section 166; 
(d) insurer or other organisation  and other financial security whose
insurance is acceptable under sub-section (1) of section 172; 
(e) the authority competent to detain any vessel under sub-section (4)
of section 172; 
(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III 
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
175. This Chapter shall apply to,—
(a) pollution damage caused by,—
(i) Indian vessel within the jurisdiction of any contracting party
to the Civil Liability Convention; and 
(ii) Indian vessel and any ship while it is at a port or place in
India including the coastal waters, extending not more than two 
hundred nautical miles from the baseline; 
(b) preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or minimise such
pollution damage. 
176. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “incident” means any occurrence, or series of occurrences having
the same origin, which causes pollution damage or creates a grave and 
imminent threat of causing such damage;  
(b) “oil” means any persistent hydrocarbon mineral oil such as crude
oil, fuel oil, heavy diesel oil and lubricating oil whether carried onboard a 
ship as cargo or in the bunkers of such ship;  
(c) “person” means any individual or partnership or any public or
private body, whether corporate or not,  including a State or any of its 
constituent sub-divisions; 
(d) “pollution damage” means,—
(i) loss or damage caused outside the ship by contamination
resulting from the escape or discharge of oil from the ship, wherever 
such escape or discharge occurs:  

65 
Provided that compensation for impairment of the environment 
other than loss of profit from such impairment shall be limited to costs 
of reasonable measures of reinstatement actually undertaken or to be 
undertaken; and  
(ii) the costs of preventive measures and further loss or damage
caused by preventive measures; 
(e) “preventive measures” means any reasonable measures taken by
any person after an incident has occurred to prevent or minimise pollution 
damage;  
(f) “ship” means any sea-going vessel and seaborne craft of any type
whatsoever constructed or adapted for the carriage of oil in bulk as cargo: 
Provided that a ship capable of carrying oil and other cargoes shall be 
regarded as a ship only when it is actually carrying oil in bulk as cargo and 
during any voyage following such carriage unless it is proved that it has no 
residues of such carriage of oil in bulk aboard; 
(g) “ship owner” means,—
(i) the person registered as the owner of the ship; or
(ii) in the absence of registration, the person owning the ship; or
(iii) in the case of a ship owned by any State, the persons
registered in that State as the operator of such ship. 
177. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -sections (2) and ( 3), the ship
owner shall be liable for any pollution damage caused by the ship as a result of 
the incident and where the incident consists of a series of occurrences, from the 
time of the first of such occurrences.  
(2) No liability for pollution damage shall be attached to the ship owner, if
he proves that the pollution damage,— 
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a
natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or 
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission done with intent to cause
damage by a third party; or 
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful act of any
Government or other authority responsible for the maintenance of lights or 
other navigational aids in the exercise of that function. 
(3) Where the ship owner proves that the pol lution damage resulted either
wholly or partially from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage by 
the person who suffered the damage or from the negligence of that person, the 
ship owner may be exonerated wholly or partially from his liability to such person. 
(4) No claim for compensation for pollution damage may be made against
the ship owner otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(5) Subject to sub -section ( 6), no claim for compensation for pollution
damage under this Chapter or otherwise may be made against,— 
(a) the servants or agents of the ship owner or the seafarers;
(b) the pilot or any other person who, not being a seafarer, performs
services for the ship; 
(c) any charterer (howsoever described including a bareboat
charterer), manager or operator of the ship; 
Liability of ship 
owner. 

66 
Joint and several 
liability for 
ships.  
Jurisdiction of 
High Court. 
Jurisdiction 
where pollution 
damage occurs 
in two or more 
States. 
Limitation of 
liability. 
Constitution of 
limitation fund. 
(d) any person performing salvage operations with the consent of the
ship owner or on the instructions of a competent public authority; 
(e) any person taking preventive measures;
(f) any servant or agent of persons mentioned in clauses ( c), ( d)
and (e), 
unless the damage resulted from their personal act or omission, committed with 
the intent to cause such damage, or committed recklessly and with knowledge that 
such damage is likely to result.  
(6) Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any right of recourse of the ship
owner against third parties. 
178. When an incident involving two or more ships occur and pollution
damage results therefrom, all the ship owners concerned, unless exonerated under 
sub-section (3) of section 177, shall be joint ly and severally liable for all such 
damage which is not reasonably separable.  
179. (1) The admiralty jurisdiction of the respective High Courts under the
Admiralty (Jurisdiction and Settlement of Maritime Claims) Act, 2017, shall be 
deemed to extend to a ny claim for liability arising under this Chapter and shall 
also extend to any case arising out of such claim, including the constitution of a 
limitation fund (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as fund) by the ship owner.  
(2) All claims arising out of  an incident of oil pollution, including the
constitution of a fund, shall be made in the High Court having jurisdiction over 
the pollution damage and if the pollution damage occurs in the Exclusive 
Economic Zone, or more than one High Court has jurisdiction over such pollution 
damage, the claim may be made in the High Court which has jurisdiction over the 
port or place where the ship responsible for such pollution damage is detained. 
180. Where pollution damage occurs in the territory of one or more other
contracting parties to the Civil Liability Convention, or preventive measures have 
been taken to prevent or minimise pollution damage in the territory of such 
contracting parties, claims for compensation may be brought in the courts of any 
such contracting party: 
Provided that once a fund is established in India in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter, only the High Court or the Central Government shall 
have jurisdiction to determine matters relating to apportionment and distribution 
of the fund.  
181. (1) The ship owner may limit his liability under this Chapter in respect
of any incident, to an aggregate amount in accordance with Article V of the Civil 
Liability Convention. 
(2) The ship owner shall not be entitled to limit his liability under thi s
Chapter if it is proved that the pollution damage resulted from his personal act or 
omission, committed or made with the intent to cause such damage, or recklessly 
and with knowledge that such damage is likely to result. 
182. (1) Any ship owner, desiring to avail of the benefit of limitation of his
liability under this Chapter, shall apply to the High Court having jurisdiction or 
the Central Government for constitution of a fund for the total sum representing 
his limits of liability, within such time and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 
(2) Such fund may be constituted either by depositing the sum or by
furnishing bank guarantee or such other security with the High Court or the 
Central Government.  
22 of 2017.

67 
5 of 1908.
(3) The insurer or any other person providing financial security to the ship
owner may apply to the High Court or the Central Government for constitution of 
the fund under sub -section (1) and the fund so constituted shall have the same 
effect as if it were constituted by the ship owner.  
(4) An application for constitution of the fund may be made by the insurer
under this section even in cases where the ship owner is not entitled to limit his 
liability under sub-section (2) of section 181 and in any such event, constitution 
of the fund shall not prejudice the rights of any claimant against the ship owner 
for full compensation exceeding the amount deposited or secured in the fund. 
(5) The amount in Special Drawing Rights to be deposited or secured in the
fund under this section shall be converted in rupees on the basis of official value 
in rupees of the Special Drawing Rights as determined b y the Reserve Bank of 
India on the date of constitution of the fund. 
(6) Where a fund is established by the ship owner in relation to an incident
of oil pollution before a High Court, all claims for compensation under this 
Chapter shall only be instituted in the High Court where the fund was constituted: 
Provided that where claims arising out of the incident of oil pollution is 
made in High Courts other than the one where the fund was established, the ship 
owner may approach the Supreme Court in accordance with the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 to transfer the claims to the High Court where such fund was 
established. 
183. ( 1) Upon constitution of the fund, the High Court or the Central
Government shall issue a notice inviting claims against the fund arising from the 
particular incident of oil pollution, within such time and containing such other 
particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) Any person who has suffered pollution damage shall be entitled to claim
compensation and may make an application for participation in the proceedings: 
Provided that where such fund has not been established, the claimant may 
approach the High Court having jurisdiction or the Central Government under 
section 180. 
(3) The Central Government shall issue a notice of proceedings to the
International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund which is entitled to participate in 
the proceedings in accordance with Chapter V of this Part. 
(4) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure to be followed for
establishment of the fund and adjudication  of claims arising from an incident of 
oil pollution. 
184. (1) Where, before the fund is distributed, the ship owner or any of his
servants or agents or any person providing him insurance or other financial 
security has as a result of an incident paid compensation for pollution damage, 
such person shall upto the amount he has paid, acquire by subrogation the rights 
which the person so compensated may have enjoyed under this Chapter. 
(2) Where the ship owner or any other person establishes that he may be
compelled to pay at a later date in whole or in part any such am ount of 
compensation with regard to which such person shall have enjoyed a right of 
subrogation under sub-section (1) had the compensation been paid before the fund 
was distributed, the High Court where the fund was constituted may order that a 
sufficient sum be provisionally set aside to enable such person to enforce his claim 
against the fund at such later date. 
185. (1) The High Court or the Central Government shall consolidate all
claims against the fund including those arising out of subrogation under 
section 184.  
Claims for 
compensation 
where fund is 
established. 
Acquisition of 
right for 
compensation 
by subrogation. 
Consolidation of 
claims and 
distribution of 
fund.  

68 
Arrest and sale 
of ship if ship 
owner, etc., 
unable to satisfy 
claims for 
compensation. 
Restriction on 
enforcement of 
claims after 
establishment of 
fund. 
Compulsory 
insurance or 
other financial 
security. 
(2) Any claim in respect of expenses reasonably incurred or sacrifices
reasonably made by the ship owner voluntarily to prevent or minimise pollution 
damage shall rank equally with other claims against the fund. 
(3) Subject to the right of subrogation under section 184, the High Court or
the Central Government shall distribute the amount in the fund among all 
claimants in proportion to their established claims. 
(4) If the ship owner, insurer or other financial security holder has failed to
establish a fund un der this Chapter, the High Court shall make an order for 
compensation against such party to be payable within such period as may be 
specified in the order. 
186. (1) Where the High Court makes an order for compensation which the
ship owner has not complied with and such owner has not established a fund, an 
application may be made by a person entitled to compensation to that court to 
arrest the ship responsible for the incident or any ship owned by such person. 
(2) The High Court may direct the amount remaini ng unpaid after
determination of liability of the International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund, 
in accordance with Chapter V of this Part, to be levied by distress and sale of the 
ship and her equipment in accordance with this Act. 
(3) The High Court or t he Central Government shall have the power to
detain any ship involved in an incident of oil pollution, until the ship owner has 
established a fund in accordance with section 182, or has duly complied with the 
order for compensation under sub-section (4) of section 185, whichever is earlier. 
187. Where the ship owner after an incident has constituted a fund in
accordance with this Chapter and is entitled to limit his liability,— 
(a) no person having a claim for pollution damage arising out of that
incident shall be entitled to exercise any right against any other ship and 
property of the ship owner in respect of such claim;  
(b) the High Court or the Central Government shall order the release
of any ship or other property belonging to the ship owner which has been 
detained in respect of a claim for pollution damage arising out of that 
incident and shall similarly release any bail or other security furnished to 
avoid any arrest: 
Provided that this section shall apply only if the sum paid into the High 
Court or to the Central Government, or such part thereof as corresponds to the 
claim, is actually available to the claimant. 
188. (1) The owner of every ship carrying more than two thousand tons of 
oil in bulk as cargo shall in respect of such ship maintain an insurance or  other 
financial security to cover his liability for pollution damage under this Chapter for 
the amount specified under the provisions of the Civil Liability Convention: 
Provided that  the  Central Government  may  require  the  owner  of  a  ship 
carrying such tons of oil in bulk, to maintain insurance or other financial security 
to cover his liability for pollution damage upto such limits, as may be prescribed. 
(2) In respect of every Indian vessel which maintains insurance or other 
f
inancial security under  sub-section  (1), there  shall  be  granted  by  the  Central 
G
overnment a certificate  in such  form and giving  such  particulars,  subject  to 
payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.  
(3) The  Central Government may, on an application by the owner or agent 
of any foreign ship, grant a certificate  under sub-section (2) in respect of such 
f
oreign ship on production  of satisfactory evidence relating to maintenance of 
i
nsurance or other financial security in accordance with the provisions of the Civil 
Liability Convention. 

69 
189. Any certificate granted by a competent authority in a State outside India 
to a ship registered in that State or any certificate granted by a competent authority 
of a State which is a contracting  party to the Civil Liability Convention to any 
ship wherever it is registered, shall be accepted at any port or place in India, as if 
it were granted under this Act.  
190. (1) No Indian vessel which has onboard more than two thousand tons 
of oil in bulk as cargo shall enter or leave or attempt to enter or leave any port or 
place in India unless it carries onboard a certificate granted under sub-section (2) 
of section 188 or a certificate accepted under section 189. 
(2) No ship other than an Indian vessel carrying more than two thousand 
tons of oil in bulk as cargo, wherever registered, shall enter or leave or attempt 
to enter or leave any port or place in India unless it carries onboard a certificate 
granted under sub-section ( 2) of section 188 or  a certificate  accepted under 
section 189. 
(3) No proper officer shall grant inward entry or outward clearance to any 
ship to which sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) applies, unless its master produces 
a certificate required in respect of such ship. 
191. (1) The insurer or other person providing financial security for the 
ship owner’s liability for pollution damage may be directly liable for any 
claim for compensation for such damage which may be brought directly 
against such insurer or other person. 
(2) The insurer or other person providing financial security against whom a 
claim is made directly may, even if the owner is not entitled to limit his liability 
under section 181, avail himself such limits of liability as specified in the said 
section. 
(3) The insurer or other person providing financial security may further avail 
himself of the defences (other than the bankruptcy or winding up of the company) 
which the ship owner himself would have been entitled to invoke and such insurer 
or other person  may avail  himself of  the defence that  the pollution damage 
resulted from the wilful misconduct of the ship owner himself but such insurer or 
other person shall not avail himself of any other defence which he might have 
been entitled to invoke in the proceedings brought by the ship owner against him. 
(4) The insurer or other person providing financial security shall in any case 
have the right to require the ship owner to be joined in the proceedings. 
(5) Any sum provided by insurance or by other financial security maintained 
in accordance with section 188 shall be available exclusively for the satisfaction 
of claims under this Chapter.  
192. (1) Any judgment passed by a competent court of contracting party 
under the Civil Liability Convention shall be recognised in India, except where,— 
(a) the judgment was obtained by fraud; or
(b) the ship owner or the insurer or the person providing financial
security who is a party to the proceedings was not given reasonable notice 
and a fair opportunity to present his case. 
(2) Any judgment recognised under sub-section (1) shall be enforceable in
India in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed: 
Provided that such procedure shall not permit t he merits of t he case to be 
re-opened. 
193. (1) The rights of compensation under this Chapter shall be extinguished 
unless action is brought within a period of— 
Acceptance of 
certificate 
granted outside 
India.  
Ban on entering 
or leaving an 
Indian port 
without 
certificate.  
Direct action 
against insurer 
or other person 
providing 
financial 
security.  
Recognition of 
judgment of 
court of 
contracting 
parties to Civil 
Liability 
Convention. 
Limitation 
period. 

70 
Government 
ships.  
Power to make 
rules. 
Application of 
this Chapter. 
Definitions.  
(a) three years from the date of occurrence of pollution damage; and
(b) six years from the date of the incident which caused pollution
damage. 
(2) If the incident consists of a series of occurrences, the period of six years
shall commence from the date of the first occurrence. 
194. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any warship or any ship for the 
time being  used by the  Government of any State for purposes other  than 
commercial purposes. 
195. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions 
of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudi ce to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the time and manner of constitution of the limitation fund under
sub-section (1) of section 182; 
(b) the time and other particulars of the  notice under sub-section (1)
of section 183; 
(c) the procedure for establishment of fund and adjudication of claims
arising from incidents of oil pollution under sub-section (4) of section 183; 
(d) the threshold limit of tonnage of oil to be carried in bu lk and the
limit of liability for pollution damage under the proviso to sub -section (1) 
of section 188; 
(e) the form, particulars and fee to be paid for the grant of a certificate
under sub-section (2) of section 188; 
(f) the procedure for enforcement of judgement under sub-section (2)
of section 192; 
(g) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV 
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR BUNKER OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
196. This Chapter shall apply to,—
(a) pollution damage caused due to escape or discharge of bunker oil
from every Indian vessel and from every ship other than an Indian vessel 
while it is,— 
(i) within the territory of India including territorial waters; or
(ii) at a port or a place in India or within the coastal waters, not
extending more than two hundred nautical miles from the baseline; 
(b) preventive measures for preventing or minimising the pollution
damage, 
but shall not apply to— 
(a) warships, naval auxiliary or other vessels owned or operated by the
Government and used for the time being, only for non -commercial 
purposes; 
(b) pollution damage specified in Chapter III of this Part.
197. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Bunker Convention” means the International Convention on Civil
Liability for Bunker Oil Pollution Damage, 2001; 

71 
(b) “bunker oil” means any hydrocarbon mineral oil, including
lubricating oil, used or intended to be used for the operation or propulsion 
of the ship, and any residues of such oil; 
(c) “incident”, “person”, “pollution damage” and “preventive measures”
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (a), (c), (d) 
and (e), of section 176; 
(d) “registered owner” means the person or persons registered as the
owner of the ship or, in the absence of registration, the person or persons 
owning the ship, and in the case of a ship owned by a State and operated by 
a company which in that State is registered as the ship’s operator, “registered 
owner” shall mean such company; 
(e) “ship” means any sea-going vessel and sea borne craft of any type
whatsoever; 
(f) “ship  owner” means the owner, including the registered owner,
bareboat charterer, manager and operator of the ship. 
198. (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 200,—
(a) where pollution damage is caused due to discharge or escape of
bunker oil onboard or originating from the ship, the ship owner shall be 
liable for,— 
(i) any pollution damage;
(ii) the cost of any reasonable measures taken for preventing or
minimising any pollution damage so caused or likely to be caused; and 
(iii) any damage caused by any such preventive measure so taken:
Provided that where an incident consists of a series of occurrences 
having the same origin, the ship owner shall be liable from the first of such 
occurrences and where more than one person is liable, their liability shall be 
joint and several; 
(b) where there is a grave and imminent threat of damage being caused
outside a ship, the ship owner shall be liable for the cost of any measures 
reasonably taken to prevent or minimise any such damage. 
(2) Where any incident involving two or more ships occurs resulti ng in
pollution damage, the ship owners of all ships involved in such incident shall, unless 
the damage is reasonably separable, be jointly and severally liable for such damage. 
199. ( 1) No liability for pollution damage shall be incurred by the ship
owner under this Chapter, if he proves that such damage,— 
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a
natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or 
(b) was wholly caused by any act or omission don e with an intent to
cause such damage by any person other than an employee or agent of the 
ship owner; or 
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful act of any
Government or other authority responsible for the maintenance of lights or 
other navigational aids in the exercise of that function. 
(2) If the ship owner proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly or
partially either from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage by the 
person who suffered the damage or from the neglig ence of that person, then, he 
shall be wholly or partially exonerated from his liability to such person. 
Liability for 
bunker oil 
pollution. 
Exemption from 
liability. 

72 
Right of ship 
owner to 
limitation of 
liability. 
Determination 
of limitation of 
liability. 
Consolidation of 
claims and 
distribution of 
amount. 
Extinguishment 
of right to claim. 
Maintenance of 
compulsory 
insurance or 
other financial 
security. 
Direct action 
against insurer 
or other person 
providing 
financial 
security. 
Grant of 
certificate. 
200. ( 1) The ship owner and the person providing insurance or other
financial security shall be entitled to limit his liability under this Chapter in respect 
of any one or more incidents in accordance with the provisions of Chapter II of 
this Part. 
(2) The ship owner shall not be entitled to limit his liability, if it is proved
that the incident causing pollution damage occurred as a result of his personal act 
or omission, committed or made with intent to cause such damage, or committed 
recklessly and with knowledge that such damage is likely to result. 
201. A ship owner who is alleged to have incurred a liability for bunker oil
pollution under section 1 98 or his insurer may make an application to the High 
Court or the Central Government for determination of limitation of his liability in 
accordance with the provisions of Chapter II of this Part. 
202. The High Court or the Central Government may consolidate all
claims against the ship owner or his insurer who has deposited the amount under 
section 201 and may distribute the amount amongst the claimants in accordance 
with the provisions of section 170.   
203. ( 1) The right to claim compensation unde r this Chapter shall be
extinguished, if such claim is not made within a period of— 
(a) three years from the date of occurrence of damage; and
(b) six years from the date of incident which caused such damage.
(2) Where the incident consists of a series of occurrences, the period of six
years shall commence from the date of the first of such occurrence. 
204. Every registered owner of a ship having gross tonnage of more than
one thousand tons shall, for the purpose of his liability for pollution damage under 
this Chapter, maintain compulsory insurance coverage or such other financial 
security, subject to such limits as may be specified under the Limitation of 
Liability for Maritime Claims Convention. 
205. (1) The insurer or other person providing financial security for the ship
owner’s liability for pollution damage may also be liable along with the ship 
owner for any claim for compensation for such damage. 
(2) The insurer or other person providing financial security may, if the ship
owner is not enti tled to limit his liability in accordance with the provisions of 
section 200, avail himself such limits of liability as may be prescribed. 
(3) Any claim for compensation for pollution damage may be brought
directly against the insurer or other person provi ding financial security for the 
registered ship owner’s liability for pollution damage and in such case, the insurer 
or such person may invoke defences (other than bankruptcy or winding up of the 
company) which the ship owner would have been entitled to in voke, including 
limitation of liability under section 200: 
Provided that the insurer or such person may invoke the defence that the 
pollution damage resulted from the wilful misconduct of the ship owner but shall 
not invoke any other defence which such ins urer or person might have been 
entitled to invoke in proceedings brought by the ship owner against such insurer 
or person: 
Provided further that the insurer or such person may make the ship owner a 
party to such proceedings. 
206. (1) The Central Government shall grant a certificate in respect of every
ship which maintains insurance or other financial security, in such form, 
containing such particulars, subject to such conditions and on payment of such 
fee, as may be prescribed. 

73 
(2) Every certificate granted under sub -section ( 1) shall on expiry, be
renewed in such manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed. 
207. (1) No ship shall enter or leave or attempt to enter or leave any port or
place to which this Chapter applies unless it carries onboard a certificate granted 
under section 206. 
(2) Any certificate granted by a competent authority in any State outside
India to a ship registered in th at State or any certificate granted by a competent 
authority of any State which is a contracting party to the Bunker Convention to 
any ship wherever registered, shall be accepted at any port or place in India as if 
it were granted under this Act. 
(3) No proper officer shall permit inward entry or outward clearance to any
ship to which sub -section (1) or sub-section (2) applies unless the master of the 
ship produces the certificate required in respect of such ship. 
208. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall prejudice the right of recourse
that the ship owner may have against any other person in respect of his liability. 
209. (1) Any judgment passed by a competent court of a contracting party
under the Bunker Convention shall be recognised in India except where,— 
(a) the judgment was obtained by fraud; or
(b) the ship owner or the insurer or the person providing financial
security who is a party to the proceedings was not given reasonable notice 
and a fair opportunity to present his case. 
(2) Any judgment recognised under sub-section (1) shall be enforceable in
India in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed: 
Provided that such procedure shall not permit the merits of the case to be 
re-opened. 
210. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the limits of liability of the insurer or other person p roviding
financial security under sub-section (2) of section 205; 
(b) the form of certificate, particulars, conditions and fee for issuance
of certificate under sub-section (1) of section 206; 
(c) the manner of renewal of certificate and fees under sub-section (2)
of section 206; 
(d) the procedure for enforcement of a judgment under sub-section (2)
of section 209; 
(e) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V 
INTERNATIONAL OIL POLLUTION COMPENSATION FUND 
211. This Chapter shall apply to pollution damage caused in the territory of
India, including the coastal waters, not extending more than two hundred nautical 
miles from the baseline and to preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or 
minimise such pollution damage.  
212. (1) In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “associated person” includes any subsidiary or commonly
controlled entity or such person as may be prescribed; 
(b) “contributing oil” means crude oil and fuel oil.
Ban on entering 
or leaving port 
without 
clearance.  
Right of 
recourse. 
Recognition of 
judgment of  
court of 
contracting 
parties to 
Bunker 
Convention. 
Power to make 
rules. 
Application of 
this Chapter.  
Definitions. 

74 
Contribution to 
Fund.  
Contribution 
payable by 
persons to 
Fund. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,— 
(i) “crude oil” means any liquid hydrocarbon mixture occurring
naturally in the earth whether or not treated to render it suitable for 
transportation and includes crude oils from which certain distillate 
fractions are removed (sometimes referred to as topped crudes) or to 
which certain distillate fractions are added (sometimes referred to as 
spiked or reconstituted crudes); 
(ii) “fuel oil” means heavy distillates or residues from crude oil
or blends of such materials intended for use as a fuel for the production 
of heat or power of a quality equivalent to the “American Society for 
Testing and Materials’ Specification for Number Four Fuel Oil 
(Designation D 396-69)”, or heavier; 
(c) “Fund” means the International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund,
1992 established under Article 2 of the Fund Convention; 
(d) “Fund Convention” means the International Convention on the
establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution 
Damage, 1992, including protocols, if any, to which India is a party;  
(e) “guarantor” means any person providing insur ance or other
financial security to cover the owner’s liability; 
(f) “ton”, in relation to oil, means a metric ton.
(2) The words or expressions used in this Chapter but not defined shall have
the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Civil Liability Convention. 
213. (1) All contributions to the Fund in respect of contributing oil carried
by sea to ports or terminal installations in India shall be payable in accordance 
with Articles 10 and 12 of the Fund Convention. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply—
(a) whether or not the contributing oil is imported; and
(b) notwithstanding that contributions are payable to the Fund in
respect of carriage of the same contributing oil on a previous voyage. 
(3) The person liable to pay contributions to the Fund shall be—
(a) in case of contributing oil which is being imported into India, the
importer; and 
(b) in any other case, the person by whom the oil is received in India.
(4) A person shall not be liable to pay contributions to the Fund in resp ect
of the contributing oil imported or received by him in any year, if the aggregate 
quantity of contributing oil so imported or received in a year by him and any 
associated person does not exceed one lakh fifty thousand tons, or as may be 
specified from time to time in the Fund Convention.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “terminal installation” 
means any site for the storage of oil in bulk which is capable of receiving oil from 
waterborne transportation, including any facility situated off shore and linked to 
such site.  
214. (1) The contributions payable to the Fund by a person for any year shall
be,— 
(a) such amount as may be determined under Article 12 of the Fund
Convention; 

75 
(b) in such instalments, becoming due at such dates,
as may be notified under the Fund Convention and any amount due shall be payable 
along with interest at a rate determined under Article 13 of the Fund Convention.  
(2) The Central Government may require persons who are or may be liable
to pay contributions to the Fund under this Chapter to give financial security for 
payment of contributions to the Central Government or the Fund.  
215. (1) Where any person suffering pollution damage is unable to obtain
full and adequate compensation for the damage under the  Civil Liability 
Convention, the Fund shall be liable to pay compensation to such person, if,— 
(a) no liability for the damage arises under the provisions of the Civil
Liability Convention; or 
(b) the ship owner liable for the damage under the provisions of the
Civil Liability Convention is financially incapable of meeting his 
obligations in full and any financial security that may be provided under that 
Convention does not cover or is insufficient to satisfy the claims for 
compensation for the damage and the person suffering damage has taken all 
reasonable steps to pursue the legal remedies available to him; or 
(c) the damage exceeds the ship owner’s liability under the Civil
Liability Convention.  
(2) The expenses incurred or sacrifices made by the ship owner voluntarily
to prevent or minimise pollution damage shall be treated as pollution damage for 
the purposes of this section.  
(3) The Fund shall incur no obligation under sub-section (1) if,—
(a) it is proved that the pollution damage resulted from an act of war,
hostilities, civil war or insurrection or was caused by oil which has escaped or 
been discharged from a warship or other ship owned or operated by a State and 
used at the time of the incident, only on Government non-commercial service; or 
(b) the claimant fails to prove that the damage resulted from an
incident involving one or more ship. 
(4) If the Fund proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly or partly either
from an act or omission done with the intent to cause damage by the person who 
suffered the damage or from the negligence of that person, the Fund may be 
exonerated wholly or partly from its obligation to pay compensation to such person.  
(5) The Fund shall in any event (except in respect of preventive measures),
be exonerated to the extent the ship owner may have been exonerated under the 
Civil Liability Convention. 
216. (1) The liability of the Fund under section 215 shall be subject to the
limits specified in Article 4 of the Fund Convention. 
(2) Upon institution of a claim for compensation under this Chapter, the
High Court shall issue notice to the Fund and such Fund shall be entitle d to 
participate in the proceedings. 
(3) No order shall be passed against the Fund by the High Court until the
Fund notifies the High Court that the amount of the claim may,— 
(a) not be reduced; or
(b) be reduced to a specified amount and the liability of the Fund shall
be enforceable only for the reduced amount. 
(4) The amount for which the Fund is liable under this Chapter shall be paid
in rupees and the mode and manner of converting such amount from Special 
Drawing Rights into rupees shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Liability of 
Fund.  
Limitation of 
liability of 
Fund. 

76 
Power to call for 
information. 
Claims against 
Fund and 
jurisdiction of 
courts. 
Extinguishment 
of claims.  
217. (1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of transmitting
to the Fund, the names and addresses of the persons who under this Chapter 
are liable to make contributions to the Fund every year and the quantity of 
contributing oil in respect of which they a re so liable, by notice, require any 
such person to furnish such information, in such manner and within such 
time, as may be specified therein.  
(2) In proceedings by the Fund against any person for the recovery of
any contribution due to the Fund under se ction 214, the particulars contained 
in any list transmitted by the Central Government to the Fund shall, so far 
as those particulars are based on information obtained under this section, be 
admissible as evidence of the facts stated therein, and so far as  particulars 
which are so admissible are based on information given by the person against 
whom the proceedings are brought, shall be presumed to be accurate until 
the contrary is proved.  
(3) No person shall disclose any information which was furnished to or
obtained by him under this section unless the disclosure is made, — 
(a) with the consent of the person from whom the information was
obtained; 
(b) in connection with the compliance of this section;
(c) for the purpose of any legal proceedings arising out of this
section or of any report of such proceedings. 
(4) A person who, —
(a) refuses or wilfully neglects to comply with a notice under this
section; or 
(b) makes, while furnishing any information in  compliance with
a notice under this section, any statement which he knows to be false 
in a material particular, or recklessly makes any statement which is 
false in a material particular,  
shall be liable to penalty under this Act. 
218. (1) Any claim aga inst the Fund for compensation under this
Chapter shall be brought before the High Court. 
(2) The Fund shall have the right to intervene as a party to any legal
proceedings instituted in the High Court against the ship owner or his 
guarantor.  
(3) Where a  notice of proceedings is given to the Fund by the High
Court, any judgment given in the proceedings shall, after it has become final 
and enforceable, become binding upon the Fund to the effect that the facts 
and evidence in that judgment may not be disput ed by the Fund on the 
ground that it has not intervened in the proceedings.  
219. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, no action to enforce a claim against the Fund under this 
Chapter shall be entertained by a Hig h Court, unless — 
(a) the action to enforce is commenced; or
(b) notice of action to enforce a claim against the ship owner or
his guarantor in respect of the pollution damage is given to the Fund,  
within three years from the date when the damage occurred a nd six years 
from the date of the incident that caused such damage.  

77 
220. In respect of any sum paid by a public authority in India or by the Fund
as compensation for pollution damage, that authority or the Fund shall acquire by 
subrogation any rights which the person so compensated would have enjoyed 
under the Fund Convention.  
221. The Central Government may establish a fund for the pollution damage
exceeding the amount payable under this Part and the source of fund and manner 
of disbursement of compensation from such fund shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
222. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) subsidiary or commonly controlled entity or person under clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 212; 
(b) the mode and manner of conversion of Special Drawing Rights to
rupees under sub-section (4) of section 216; 
(c) the source of fund and manner of disbursement of compensation
from fund established under section 221; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
PART X 
MARINE INCIDENT AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
223. This Part shall apply to marine incidents occurring directly or in
connection with the operations of,— 
(a) Indian vessels; and
(b) vessels other than Indian vessels which enter a port or offshore
terminal or place in India or within her coastal waters. 
224. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “marine incident” means an event, or sequence of events,
occurring directly in connection with the operation of a vessel that 
endangers, or if not corrected, would endanger the safety of the vessel, its 
occupants or any other person or the environment and includes marine 
violation, marine casualty, marine disaster, cyclon es, storms or other 
adverse weather events, very serious marine casualty and such other event 
or sequence of events as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(b) “maritime emergency response” means a speedy action
undertaken in response to a marine incident to ensure minimum damage to 
the vessel, passengers, seafarers, cargo and the marine environment by 
mitigating, containing, restoring and providing relief against such marine 
incident. 
225. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint one or more
nodal authorities who shall administer and supervise the marine incidents and the 
corresponding maritime emergency response. 
(2) The nodal authority shall discharge its duties under the supervision and
control of the Central Government. 
Subrogation and 
right of 
recourse. 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
establish fund 
for excess 
claim. 
Power to make 
rules. 
Application of 
this Part. 
Definitions. 
Appointment of 
nodal authority 
for marine 
incidents. 

78 
Primary 
response party. 
Plans and 
procedures for 
response 
mechanisms. 
Powers of nodal 
authority. 
Maintenance of 
compulsory 
insurance or 
other financial 
security. 
Power to make 
rules. 
Marine 
casualties and 
report thereof. 
226. (1) The ship owner or master, seafarers of the concerned vessel and
such other persons as may be notified by the Central Government shall be the 
primary response party responsible for engaging in maritime emergency response. 
(2) The primary response party shall comply with all directions, advisories
or instructions issued by the concerned nodal authority for the respective class of 
marine incidents. 
227. The Central Government shall notify plans fo r prevention of marine
incidents and procedures for maritime emergency responses. 
228. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, it shall be lawful for the nodal authority to issue directions in 
writing, consistent with the objectives of this Part, to the administrative bodies 
under the Central Government and the State Governments.  
(2) The nodal authority may requisition the services of any officer of the
Central Government or the State Government or any police officer or any other 
authority or body to assist for the purposes of this Part and it shall be the duty of 
every such officer or authority or body to comply with such requisition. 
(3) The nodal authority may requisition the resources and pollution
prevention equipment available with any of the offices of the Central Government 
or the State Government or other offices or organisations to assist for the purposes 
of this Part and it shall be the duty of such offices or organisations to comply with 
such requisition. 
(4) The circumstances under which the nodal authority shall carry out
maritime emergency response to a marine incident shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
229. Every registered owner of an Indian vessel or any other vessels which
enter a port, shipyard or offshore terminal or place in India or within coastal 
waters shall, for the purpose of covering his liability under this Part, maintain 
adequate insurance coverage or such other financial security as may be prescribed, 
and carry onboard a certificate or document showing compliance with such 
requirement.  
230. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Part. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudi ce to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the circumstances under which the nodal authority shall carry out
maritime emergency response to a marine incident under sub-section (4) of 
section 228; 
(b) adequate insurance coverage or other financial security under
section 229; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
PART XI 
INVESTIGATION AND INQUIRIES ON MARINE CASUALTIES 
231. (1) For the purposes of investigation and inquiries under this Part, a
marine casualty shall be deemed to be an event or sequences of events that has 
resulted in any of the following and has occurred directly or in connection with 
the operations of Indian vessels and any other vessels, when— 
(a) on or near the coast of India, any vessel is lost, abandoned, stranded
or materially damaged; 

79 
(b) on or near the coast of India, any vessel causes loss or material
damage to any other vessel or to external infrastructure; 
(c) any loss of life or presumed loss of life ensues by reason of any
casualty happening or otherwise, onboard any vessel, on or near the coast 
of India or its coastal waters; 
(d) in any place, any such loss, abandonment, stranding, material
damage or casualty occurs to or onboard any Indian vessel and any 
competent witness thereof is found in India; 
(e) any Indian vessel is lost or is supposed to have been lost, and an y
evidence is obtainable in India as to the circumstances under which such 
vessel proceeded to sea or was last heard of; 
(f) in any place within the coastal waters, pollution, or the potential
threat of such pollution to the environment, or severe damage t o the 
environment, or the potential to severe damage to the environment is caused 
by a vessel; 
(g) a fire or explosion takes pl ace on any Indian vessel anywhere in
the world, or a fire or explosion takes place on a vessel other than an Indian 
vessel, while  such vessel is on or near the coas t of India or its coastal 
waters.  
(2) In the cases mentioned in sub -section ( 1), the ship owner, manager,
operator, company, pilot, harbour master, master, or other person in charge of the 
vessel or where two vessels are concerned, in charge of each vessel at the time of 
the marine casualty shall, within twenty-four hours of the occurrence, give notice 
of the marine casualty to the officer app ointed in this behalf by the Central 
Government.  
(3) Wherever any such officer receives notice of the marine casualty under
sub-section (2), he shall forthwith inform in writing to the Central Government 
and proceed to make preliminary inquiry into the marine casualty.  
(4) The officer referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall, on completion of
preliminary inquiry, furnish the report to the Central Government or other 
authority as may be appointed by it in this behalf. 
(5) The Central Government may, for the pu rposes of the investigation,
appoint a body to conduct marine safety investigation in accordance with the 
Safety Convention. 
(6) The body appointed under sub -section ( 5) shall make preliminary
assessment of the marine casualty and conduct a marine safety i nvestigation for 
ascertaining the causes and circumstances of such marine casualty and submit its 
report to the Central Government. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Part, “company” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause (a) of section 115. 
232. On receipt of the marine safety investigation report under sub-section (6)
of section 231, or if the Central Government is of the opinion that prima facie, 
there exists incompetency, misconduct or violation of any law for the time being 
in force on the part of any person, it may— 
(a) initiate administrative action; and
(b) direct such officer or other authority having jurisdiction over the
area to initiate proceedings against such person as may be required in 
accordance with such law. 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
initiate 
proceedings. 

80 
Application of 
this Chapter. 
Definitions. 
PART XII 
WRECK AND SALVAGE 
CHAPTER I 
WRECK 
233. This Chapter shall apply to the wrecks located within the territory of
India including the coastal waters but shall not apply to,— 
(a) any measures taken under the International Convention relating to
the Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, 1969; 
(b) any warship or other vessel owned or operated by the Government
for non-commercial service. 
234. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “authority” means the Central Government or any person
authorised by it; 
(b) “Convention” means the Nairobi Convention on the Removal of
Wrecks, 2007; 
(c) “hazard” means any condition or threat, that—
(i) poses a danger or impediment to navigation; or
(ii) may reasonably be expected to result in major harmful
consequences to the marine environment or damage to the coastline or 
related interests of India or any other State.  
Explanation.—For the purpose s of this clause, “related interest” 
means—  
(i) maritime coastal, port and estuarine activities including
fisheries activities, constituting essential means of livelihood of the 
persons concerned;  
(ii) tourist attractions and other economic interests of the areas
concerned; 
(iii) the health of the coastal population and the well-being of the
area concerned, including conservation of marine living resources and 
of wildlife; and 
(iv) offshore and underwater infrastructure;
(d) “maritime casualty” means a collision of ships, stranding or other
incident of navigation or other occurrence onboard a ship or external to it, 
resulting in material damage or imminent threat of material damage to a ship 
or its cargo;  
(e) “operator of ship” means the ship owner or any other organisation
or person such as the manage r or the bareboat charterer, who has assumed 
the responsibility for operation of the ship from the ship owner and has 
agreed to take over the duties and responsibilities enshrined under the 
International Safety Management Code;  
(f) “receiver of wreck ” means a person appointed as such under
sub-section (1) of section 235; 
(g) “registered owner” means,—
(i) the person registered as the owner of the ship or in the absence
of registration, the person owning the ship at the time of the maritime 
casualty; 

81 
(ii) in the case of a ship owned by a State and operated by a
company which in that State is registered as the operator of the ship; 
(h) “removal” means any form of prevention, mitigation or
elimination of the hazard created by a wreck and the expressions “remove”, 
“removed” or “removing”, shall be construed accordingly;  
(i) “ship” means a sea -going vessel of any type whatsoever and
includes hydrofoil boats, air -cushion vehicles, submersibles, floating craft 
and floating platforms, except when such platforms are on location engaged 
in the exploration, exploitation or production of seabed mineral resources. 
235. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint any person
to be a receiver  of wreck who shall receive and take possession of wreck and 
perfor
m his duties under this Chapter, within such local limits as may be specified 
in that notification.  
(2) The duties of a receiver of wreck shall include disposal or sale of the
wreck, giving of notices, enforcing perf ormance of obligations by ship  owner, 
operator or insurer of the ship, and to take such action as required to remove the 
wreck by the  most practical and expeditious means available, consi stent with 
considerations of safety and protection of maritime environment. 
236. (1) When any Indian vessel or any ship other than an Indian vessel, is
invol
ved in a maritime  casualty resulting in a wreck  in any area to which this 
Chapter applies, the master or ship owner or the operator of the ship shall, without 
any delay report such incident to the Director-General and the Maritime Rescue 
Coordination Centre or the Maritime Rescue Sub-Centre of Indian Coast Guard.
(2
) When any Indian vessel is involved in a maritime casualty resulting in a
w
reck in a convention area of any State, the master and the operator of that ship 
shall, without any delay, report such incident to the affected State in such manner 
as may  be  required  by  that  State and shall  also  report such  incident  to  the 
Director-General and the Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre or the Maritime 
Rescue Sub-Centre of Indian Coast Guard.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,— 
(i) “affected State” means the country in whose convention area the
wreck is located; 
(ii) “convention area” means the Exclusive Economic Zone of a State
party established in accordance with international law or, if a State party has 
not established such a zone, an area beyon d and adjacent to the territorial 
sea of that State determined by that State in accordance with international 
law and extending not more than two hundred nautical miles from the 
baseline from which the breadth of its territorial sea is measured. 
237. The Central Government shall determine whether a wreck constitute a
hazard or not, based on the following criteria, namely:— 
(a) the type, size and construction of the wreck;
(b) the depth of water in the area;
(c) the tidal range and currents in the area;
(d) the proximity to protected areas including coral reefs and other
areas as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(e) the sensitive sea areas identified as appropriate and designated in
accordance with g uidelines adopted by the International Maritime 
Organisation, or a clearly defined area of the Exclusive Economic Zone 
where special mandatory measures are adopted in accordance with 
requirements of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982; 
Receiver of 
wreck.  
Duty to report 
wrecks.  
Determination 
of hazard. 

82 
Locating and 
marking of 
wrecks. 
Power to pass 
over adjoining 
lands. 
Prohibition of 
certain acts in 
respect of 
wreck. 
(f) the proximity of shipping routes or established traffic lanes;
(g) the traffic density and frequency;
(h) the type of traffic;
(i) the nature and quantity of the wreck’s cargo, the amount and types
of oil (such as bunker oil and lubricating oil) onboard the wreck and in 
particular, the damage likely to result if the cargo or oil is released into the 
marine environment;  
(j) the vulnerability of port and port facilities;
(k) the prevailing meteorological and hydrographical conditions;
(l) the submarine topography of the area;
(m) the height of the wreck above or below the surface of the water at
lowest astronomical tide; 
(n) the acoustic and magnetic profiles of the wreck;
(o) the proximity of offshore installations, pipelines, telecommunication
cables and similar structures; 
(p) the proximity of tourist spots and heritage locations; and
(q) any other criteria as may be prescribed.
238. (1) When a wreck is determined to be a hazard, it shall be the duty of
the ship owner or the operator of such a ship, to— 
(a) immediately mark the wreck at his or its own cost in such manner
as may be prescribed; and 
(b) maintain the marking until the wreck is removed.
(2) The cost for locating and marking the ship shall be borne by or recovered
from the ship owner or the operator of such a ship. 
239. (1) Whenever a ship is wrecked, stranded or in distress, all persons
may, for the purpose of rendering ass istance to the ship or of saving the lives of 
the shipwrecked persons, or of saving the cargo or equipment of the ship, unless 
there is some public road equally convenient, pass and repass, either with or 
without vehicles or animals, over any adjoining lan ds without being subject to 
interruption by the owner or occupier of the land, so that they do as little damage 
as possible and may also on the like condition, deposit on these lands any cargo 
or other article recovered from the ship.  
(2) Any damage sustained by an owner or occupier as a consequence of the
exercise of the rights under this section shall be a charge on the ship, cargo or 
articles in respect of or by which the damage is sustained and in case of dispute, 
the amount payable in respect of such damage shall be determined by a Magistrate 
on an application made to him in this behalf.  
240. No person shall,—
(a) without the leave of the master, board or attempt to board any ship
which is wrecked, stranded or in distress, unless the person acts by 
command of the Central Government; or 
(b) impede or hinder or attempt in any way to impede or hinder the
saving of any ship stranded or in danger of being stranded or otherwise in 
distress in any area to which this Chapter applies or of any part of the cargo 
or equipment of the ship, or of any wreck; or  
(c) release any wreck or deface or obliterate any marks thereon; or

83 
(d) wrongfully carry away or remove any part of a ship stranded or in
danger of being stranded or otherwise in distress or any part of the cargo or 
equipment of the ship or any wreck, in any area to which this Chapter 
applies. 
241. Where a receiver of wreck suspects or receives information that any
wreck is released or is in the posse ssion of some person who is not the owner 
thereof or that any wreck is otherwise improperly dealt with, he may apply to the 
nearest Judicial Magistrate of the first class for a search warrant and such 
Magistrate shall have power to grant the warrant and the receiver of wreck by 
virtue thereof may enter any house or other place wherever situate and also any 
ship and search for, seize and detain any such wreck found thereof.  
242. (1) When it is determined that the wreck constitutes a hazard, t he
receiver of wreck shall give the detailed information of the hazard to the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government, on receipt of information under sub-section (1)
shall,— 
(a) inform the Government of the State in which the ship is registered
as well as the registered ship owner; and 
(b) consult such State and any State affected by the wreck regarding
measures to be taken in relation to such wreck. 
(3) The registered ship owner or the operator of the ship shall remove such
wreck which is determined to constitute a hazard: 
Provided that where any dispute arises as to whether the wreck constitutes 
a hazard or not, the decision of the Central Government shall be final and binding 
on all parties.  
(4) When a wreck is determined to constitute a hazard, the registered ship
owner or any inter ested person shall provide to the Central Government or the 
receiver of wreck with the evidence of insurance or other financial security 
maintained by him in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(5) The receiver of wreck or ship owner or operator of the ship shall submit
a plan for removal of wreck to the Central Government. 
(6) The Central Government shall approve or disapprove or approve with
certain modifications, the plan submitted before it under sub -section ( 5) and 
having regard to the nature of the hazard, specify on a case to case basis, the time 
within which the ship owner or operator shall remove the wreck. 
(7) If the ship owner or operator do not remove the wreck within the time
specified under sub-section (6), the Central Government may, at the expense of 
such ship owner or operator, remove the wreck by the most practical and 
expeditious means available, consistent with considerations of safety and 
protection of the marine environment and the wreck or any sale proceeds derived 
from such wreck shall become the property of the Central Government. 
(8) Where immediate action is required and the receiver of wreck has
informed the ship owner or the operator accordingly, he may, at the expense of 
such ship owner or operator, remove  the wreck by the most practical and 
expeditious means available, consistent with considerations of safety and 
protection of the marine environment. 
(9) Where any measure taken under this section is construed to be salvage,
the provisions of Chapter II of this Part relating to salvage shall apply. 
Search warrants 
where wreck is 
involved. 
Measures to 
facilitate 
removal of 
wrecks. 

84 
Liability of ship 
owner. 
Maintenance of 
insurance or 
other financial 
security. 
243. (1) The registered ship owner shall be liable for the costs of locating,
marking and removing the wreck under this Chapter unless he proves that the 
maritime casualty which caused the wreck— 
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection, or a
natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or 
(b) was wholly caused by act or omission done with an intent to cause
damage by a third party; or 
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful act of any
Government or other authority responsible for the maintenance of lights or 
other navigational aids in the exercise of that function.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall—
(a) affect the right of the registered ship owner to limit his liability in
accordance with the provisions of section 162; or 
(b) prejudice any right of recourse available to the registered ship
owner against third parties. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the registered ship
owner shall not be liable for any cost, if, and to the extent that liability or such 
costs is in conflict with— 
(a) any other provisions of this Act;
(b) the provisions of the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010; or
(c) any other international legal instrument to which India is a party.
244. (1) Every registered owner of an Indian vessel of gross tonnage of
three hundred and above shall, for the purposes of covering his liability under this 
Chapter, be required to maintain compulsory insurance coverage or such other 
financial security, as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every ship owner or operator of a ship other than an Indian vessel of gross
tonnage of three hundred and above, while it is in the area to which this Chapter 
applies, shall maintain insurance coverage or other financial security to cover his 
liability under the Convention and shall carry onboard a certificate to that effect.  
(3) The certificate referred to in sub-section (2) shall, in case the ship is,—
(a) registered in India, be granted by the authority;
(b) registered in a Convention State other than India, be granted by or
under the authority of the Government of that State; and 
(c) registered in a State which is not a Convention State, be granted or
certified by the appropriate authority authorised by any Convention State. 
(4) Any ship which contravenes the provisions of sub -section (2), shall be
liable to be detained by the authority. 
(5) Any claim for costs arising under this Chapter may be brought directly
against the insurer or other person providing financial security for the registered 
ship owner’s liability and in such a case, t he insurer or such person may invoke 
defences (other than bankruptcy or winding up of the company) which the 
registered ship owner would have been entitled to invoke, including limitation of 
liability as provided under this Act: 
Provided that where the registered ship owner is not entitled to limitation of 
liability under this Act, the insurer or such person may limit liability to an amount 
equal to the amount of the insurance or other financial security required to be 
maintained under sub-section (1): 
38 of 2010.

85 
 Provided further that the insurer or such person may invoke the defence that 
the maritime casualty resulted from the wilful misconduct of the registered ship 
owner but shall not invoke any other defence which such insurer or person might 
have been entitled to invoke in proceedings brought by the registered ship owner 
against such insurer or person:  
Provided also that the insurer or such person shall have the right to require 
the registered ship owner to be joined in such proceedings.  
245. (1) The owner of any wreck in the possession of the receiver, upon
establishing his claim to the satisfaction of the receiver within one year from the 
time at which the wreck came into the possession of the receiver shall, upon 
paying the salvage and other charges, be entitled to have the wreck or the proceeds 
thereof delivered to him.  
(2) Where any articles belonging to or forming part of a ship other than an Indian
vessel which is wrecked or belonging to and forming part of the cargo of such ship, 
are found in any area to which this Chapter applies or are brought into any port in 
India, the ambassador  of the State in which the ship is registered or, in the case of 
cargo,  the State to which the owners of the cargo may have belonged shall, in the 
absence of the owner and of the master or other agent of the owner, be deemed to be 
the agent of the owner, with respect to the custody and disposal of the articles.  
(3) Where the owner of the wreck does not appear and claim the balance of
the proceeds of sale within one year from the date of sale, the said balance shall 
become the property of the Central Government.  
246. Any claim for recovery of costs for locating and marking of the ship under
this Chapter shall be made within a period of three years from the date of determination 
of the hazard and six years from the date the maritime casualty resulted in the wreck:  
Provided that where the maritime casualty consists of a series of occurrences, 
the six years period shall be reckoned from the date of the first occurrence. 
CHAPTER II 
SALVAGE 
247. (1) This Chapter shall apply to—
(a) salvage operations within the territory of India including the
coastal waters; and 
(b) judicial or arbitral proceedings relating to salvage operations in
respect of a vessel or any other property which are instituted in India. 
(2) This Chapter shall not apply to—
(i) the fixed or floating platforms or mobile offshore drilling units when
such platforms or units are on location engaged in the exploration, exploitation 
or production of seabed mineral resources;  
(ii) warships or other non-commercial vessels owned or operated by the
Government which are entitled, at the time of salvage operations, to sovereign 
immunity;  
(iii) such vessels as the Central Government may, by notification, specify.
(3) This Chapter shall apply, notwithstanding that the vessel undertaking the
salvage operations belong to the same owner of the vessel being salvaged. 
248. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “damage to the environment” means substantial physical damage
to human health or to marine life or resources in coastal or inland waters or 
areas adjacent thereto caused by pollution, contamination, fire, explosion or 
similar major incidents; 
Claims of ship 
owners to 
wreck.  
Extinguishment 
of right to claim 
recovery of 
costs.  
Application of 
this Chapter. 
Definitions. 

86 
Salvage payable 
for saving life, 
cargo or wreck. 
Salvage 
operations 
controlled by 
Government or 
port and public 
authorities.  
Salvage 
contracts. 
Duties of salvor, 
owner and 
master. 
(b) “payment” means any reward, remuneration or compensation due
under the Salvage Convention; 
(c) “property” means any property not permanently and intentionally
attached to the shoreline and includes freight at risk; 
(d) “vessel” means any ship or craft, or any structure capable of
navigation. 
249. (1) Where services are rendered by any master or salvor or any person
other than the authority notified by the Central Government,— 
(a) wholly or in part within the territorial waters of India in saving life
from any vessel, or elsewhere in saving life from a vessel registered in India; or 
(b) in assisting a vessel or saving the cargo or equipment of a vessel which
is wrecked, stranded or in distress at any place to which this Chapter applies; or 
(c) in saving any wreck,
there shall be payable to such master or salvor or person by the owner of the 
vessel, cargo, equipment or wreck, a reasonable sum for salvage having regard to 
all the circumstances of the case.  
(2) A master or person or salvor rendering salvage under clause ( a) of
sub-section (1) shall be entitled to a fair share of the payment for the salvage of 
the vessel or other property or preventing or minimising damage to the 
environment. 
(3) Salvage in respect of the preservation of life when payable by the owner
of the vessel shall be payable in priority to all other claims for salvage. 
250. Where salvage operations are rendered by or on behalf of the
Government or by a vessel of the Indian Navy or of the Coast Guard or the 
commander or crew of any such vessel or the port authorities or  any public 
authority, the Government or other authority acting on its behalf shall be entitled 
to salvage and payment for such services as provided under this Chapter and shall 
have the same rights and remedies in respect of those services as any other salvor. 
251. (1) The owner of a vessel or the master on behalf of the owner shall
conclude contracts with salvors to undertake necessary and adequate salvage 
operations in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.     
(2) The master or the owner of the vessel shall have the authority to conclude
such contracts on behalf of the owner of the property onboard the vessel. 
252. (1) The salvor shall have the following duties towards the owner of the
vessel or other property in danger, namely:— 
(a) to carry out the salvage operations with due care;
(b) to exercise due care to prevent or minimise damage to the environment
during salvage operations; 
(c) to seek assistance from other salvors including port authorities or
public authorities when circumstances so require; 
(d) to coordinate with the Director-General and act in compliance with
the instructions issued by him; and 
(e) to accept the intervention of other salvors when reasonably requested to
do so by the owner or master of the vessel or other property in danger: 
Provided that if it is found that such a request was unreasonable, it shall not 
prejudice the amount of reward of such salvor. 
(2) The owner or master of the vessel or the owner of other property which
is in danger shall have the following duties towards the salvor, namely:— 
(a) to cooperate with the salvor during the course of the salvage
operations; 

87 
(b) to exercise due care to prevent or minimise damage to the
environment during the salvage operations; 
(c) when the vessel or other property is brought to a place of safety, to
accept redelivery when reasonably requested by the salvor; and 
(d) to provide satisfactory security for the claim, including interest and
costs of the salvor for the salvage operations, at the request of the salvor. 
253. (1) A salvor shall have a right to payment for the services rendered by
him relating to salvage operations: 
Provided that no such payment shall be made where there is express and 
reasonable prohibition from rendering any such service by the owner or master of 
vessel or owner of any other property in danger which is not and has not been 
onboard the vessel.  
(2) The criteria for claiming rewards, manner of fixing rewards, payment of
special compensation under Article 14 of the Salvage Convention, apportionment 
of payment amongst salvors, salvage of persons, payment under the contract, 
payment for additional serv ices not covered under the contract and effect of 
misconduct of salvors on reward or payment under this Chapter shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) The salvor shall have right to enforce his maritime lien against the ship
owner or master of vessel or owner of any other property in danger when 
satisfactory security for his claim, including interest and costs, is not provided by 
such ship owner or master or owner.  
254. (1) The Central Government shall take such measures as may be
necessary to protect it s coastline or related interests from pollution or threat of 
pollution arising out of a maritime casualty or acts relating to such casualty which 
may result in major harmful consequences. 
(2) The Central Government may give such directions as it deems fit to the
ship owner or the master or the salvor or a port authority or a public authority or 
any other person in relation to salvage operations. 
(3) The Central Government may, for the purposes of efficient and effective
salvage operations, saving life or pr operty in danger and preventing damage to 
the environment, seek cooperation from the concerned ship owner or the master 
or the salvor or a port authority or a public authority or any other person, to give 
assistance to vessel in need, to admit to ports of vessel in distress or in need of 
assistance and to give facilities to salvors.  
(4) The circumstances under which the salvage operation shall be exercised
by the Central Government shall be such as may be prescribed. 
255. The Central Government may, for the purposes of this Chapter, notify
a list of salvors having such qualifications and experience and subject to such 
terms and conditions as may be prescribed.   
256. The ship owner and salvor may, for the redressal of grievances relating
to this Part, appro ach the Director -General who shall assist the parties in an 
independent and impartial manner to enable an amicable settlement in accordance 
with such procedure as may be prescribed. 
257. (1) Either party to the salvage contract shall prefer an arbitration for a
dispute that is not resolved by the Director-General under section 256: 
Provided that where the salvage contract does not provide for the resolution 
of disputes by arbitration, the disputes shall be adjudicated in accordance with the 
salvage contract. 
Rights of 
salvors. 
Powers and 
duties of Central 
Government in 
relation to 
salvage 
operations.  
Retention of 
salvors.  
Disputes 
between ship 
owner and 
salvor. 
Adjudication of 
disputes 
between ship 
owner and 
salvor. 

88 
Extinguishment 
of claims.  
Savings.  
Power to make 
rules. 
Application of 
this Part. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by the arbitral award may appeal to the concerned
High Court in accordance with the applicable law. 
(3) Any dispute involving more than one claimant to the salvage amount
shall be decided by the High Court. 
(4) The High Court may, by interim order, direct that the salvor shall be paid
such amount as may appear to it to be fair and just. 
258. Any action relating to payment under this Chapter shall extinguish if
no action for such claim is made within a period of two years from the da te of 
completion of salvage operations.  
259. Nothing in this Part shall,—
(a) affect any treaty or arrangement with any foreign State to which
India is a party with reference to the disposal of the proceeds of wrecks on 
their respective coasts; or  
(b) entitle any person to salvage under this Act in respect of any
property recovered by creeping or sweeping in contravention of the Indian 
Ports Act, 1908.   
260. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Part. 
(2) In par ticular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the other criteria to determine whether a wreck constitute a hazard
or not under clause (q) of section 237; 
(b) the manner of marking wreck under clause ( a) of sub-section (1)
of section 238; 
(c) the manner of giving detailed information of the hazard to the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 242; 
(d) the other financial security under sub-section (1) of section 244;
(e) the criteria for claiming rewards, manner of fixing rewards,
payment of special compensation, apportionment of payment and the effect 
of misconduct of salvors on reward or payment under sub -section (2) of 
section 253; 
(f) the circumstances in which salvage operation shall be exercised by
the Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 254; 
(g) the qualification, experience and the terms and conditions subject
to which salvors shall be notified under section 255; 
(h) the procedure in accordance with which the Director-General shall
settle the dispute under section 256; 
(i) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
PART XIII 
SAILING, FISHING AND OTHER VESSELS 
261. Save as otherwise provided, nothing contained in this Act, except the
provisions of this Part, Part I, Part II, Part III, Part XI and Part XIV, shall apply 
to vessels of the following description, namely:— 
(a) sailing vessel;
(b) fishing vessel;
15 of 1908.

89 
80 of 1976.
(c) vessel whose net tonnage is less than fifteen and is engaged solely
in the coasting trade of India: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, direct that any 
other provisions of this Act shall also apply to such vessels subject to such 
conditions, exceptions and modifications as may be specified in that notification. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “coasting trade of India” 
means,— 
(i) the carriage by sea of goods or passengers or both from any port or
place in India to any other port or place in India; or 
(ii) performing any service within  the waters in the  jurisdiction of
India, including any part of the adjoining maritime zones of India within the 
meaning of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic 
Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, or any other law for the time 
being in force or any port or place, including inland ports, as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 
262. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “C-188 Convention” means the C-188-Work in Fishing Convention
adopted by the International Labour Conference of the International Labour 
Organisation and signed in Geneva on the 14th day of June, 2007; 
(b) “Indian fishing vessel” means a fishing vessel registered as an
Indian vessel under section 15; 
(c) “skipper” means the  person having the command of a fishing
vessel; 
(d) “Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for
Fishing Vessel Personnel Convention” means International Convention on 
Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel 
Personnel, 1995, signed in London on the 7th day of July,1995. 
263. (1) If any question arises as to whether a vessel falls under this Part, it
shall be decided by the Director-General and his decision thereon shall be final. 
(2) Where the question under sub-section (1) relate to a fishing vessel, the
decision shall be made in such manner as may be prescribed. 
264. (1) Every vessel covered under this Part shall be manned and carry
onboard such fittings, material, appliances and apparatus, for safety, security and 
prevention of pollution, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that in case of fishing vessels, such rules shall take into consideration 
the provisions of such international conventions and standards or parts thereof, as 
may be deemed necessary by the Central Government, including the Cape Town 
Agreement and C-188 Convention. 
(2) Every owner of a vessel to which this Part applies, shall provide such
policy of insurance as may be prescribed, for all persons employed as members 
of the crew of such vess el, against death or personal injury caused by accident 
arising in the course of their employment, for an amount which shall not be less 
than the amount specified by the Central Government. 
(3) No vessel shall ply or proceed to sea unless it complies with the
provisions of this section. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “Cape Town Agreement” 
means the Cape Town Agreement of 2012 on the Implementation of the 
Provisions of the 1993 Protocol relating to the Torremolinos International 
Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977 signed in Cape Town on the 
11th day of October, 2012. 
Definitions. 
Decision of 
question 
whether a vessel 
falls under this 
Part.  
Requirements 
for safety, 
security, 
prevention of 
pollution and 
insurance. 

90 
Manning of 
fishing vessels. 
Central 
Government to 
grant certificate 
of proficiency. 
Training for 
grant of 
certificate of 
competency and 
certificate of 
proficiency. 
Examination for 
grant of 
certificate. 
265. (1) The Central Government may make rules to provide for the
following matters, taking into consideration the Standards of Training, 
Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel Convention as may 
be deemed necessary, namely:— 
(a) the manning scale of every Indian fishing vessel and different
manning scales for different categories of Indian fishing vessels, areas and 
types of fishing operations; 
(b) the grade of certification to be held by every fisher appropriate to
his station, serving onboard an Indian fishing vessel. 
(2) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, an
Indian national with certificate of competency granted under the law for the time 
being in force of another State or foreign national with certificate of competency 
granted under this Act or another State, may serve on an Indian fishing vessel. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of the Standards of Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel Convention, as applicable, every 
fishing vessel, whether at sea or in any port or plac e, shall be manned by such 
number of persons with such qualifications and such other requirements as may 
be prescribed. 
266. (1) The Central Government shall, subject to the provisions of the
Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishin g Vessel 
Personnel Convention, grant certificate of competency or certificate of 
proficiency for such different grades of fishers with such requirements and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) No certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency  shall be
granted under sub-section (1), unless the fisher fulfils the qualifications and other 
requirements referred to in sub-section (3) of section 265. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the
Central Government may grant such other certificate of competency or certificate 
of proficiency with such requirements and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) A certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency shall be granted
in such form, on payment of such fee and be valid for such period, as may be 
prescribed.   
267. (1) The Director -General shall administer, supervise and monitor all
activities relating to training and assessment for the grant of certificate of 
competency or certificate of proficiency under this Part. 
(2) The Director-General shall approve the training institute, training course
and method of conduct of such training for the grant of certificate of competency 
or certificate of proficiency in accordance with such criteria as may be prescribed. 
268. (1) The Director -General or a person duly authorised by the
Director-General in this behalf shall appoint such person or persons for the purpose 
of examining the persons desirous of obtaining certificate of competency or 
certificate of proficiency. 
(2) No certificate referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be granted to any
applicant, unless such applicant is duly repo rted by the examiner to have 
satisfactorily passed the examination.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of the Standards of Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel Convention, the form and manner of 
conduct of examination for the purposes of grant of certificate of competency or 
certificate of proficiency and the fee payable therefor, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 

91 
269. Where it appears to the Central Government that a person holding
certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency has obtained it on the basis 
of false or erroneous information, or is guilty of misconduct, or on receipt of any 
report of incompetency, or any act of omission or commission or compromise to 
safety, security or prevention of pollution by the person holding such certificate 
which may threaten or pose a threat to life or property or environment, it may, 
after due investigation, by order, withdraw, suspend or cancel such certificate: 
Provided that no order shall be passed under this section without giving to 
the holder of such certificate a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
270. The owner, master, tindal or skipper of every vessel shall, on demand,
produce to the proper officer the certificate of competency or certificate of 
proficiency or any other certificate specified under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder.  
271. Subject to the provisions of C -188 Convention,  as the Central
Government may deem necessary,— 
(a) the owner or his agent or skipper of an Indian fishing vessel shall
enter into an agreement in such form and manner as may be prescribed, with 
every fisher whom he engages to man the vessel and shall submit a copy 
thereof to the person or authority as may be notified by the Central 
Government; 
(b) a fisher ’s right to wages and provisions shall begin either at the
time he commences work or at the time specified in the agreement or 
presence onboard, whichever is earliest; 
(c) a fisher engaged under this section shall not,—
(i) by any agreement forfeit his lien on the fishing vessel; or
(ii) be deprived of any remedy for the recovery of his wages to
which, in the absence of the agreement, he shall be entitled; or 
(iii) by any agreement abandon his right to wages in case of the
loss of the fishing vessel; or 
(iv) abandon any right that he may have or obtain in the nature
of salvage,  
and every agreement inconsistent with the provisions of this Act shall be void. 
272. The Central Government may, by notification, require every Indian
fishing vessel or any specified class of Indian fishing vessels to furnish fishery 
data to the Registrar in such form and at such periodical intervals as may be 
specified in that notification. 
273. (1) No vessel shall ply or proceed to sea unless it is in possession of
such certificates granted under this Part in such manner and for such period as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Every certificate shall be granted in such manner and shall be in force
for such period as may be prescribed: 
Provided that where a vessel is not at a port at the time of expiry of the 
certificate, the owner, master, tindal or skipper of that vessel shall notify the 
Central Government of such expiry, and the certificate shall continue to be valid 
until her first arrival at the next port after the expiry of such period. 
274. Where it appears to the Central Government that any non-mechanically
propelled vessel does not have valid certificates required under th is Act, it may, 
after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the owner, master or 
charterer, take appropriate action including suspension or cancellation of 
registration of such vessel under this Act. 
Withdrawal, 
suspension or 
cancellation of 
certificate. 
Production of 
certificate. 
Agreements in 
respect of 
fishing vessel. 
Fishery data to 
be furnished by 
Indian fishing 
vessels. 
Vessel not to 
proceed without 
valid 
certificates. 
Power of Central 
Government to 
initiate action 
against  
non-mechanically 
propelled vessels. 

92 
Statement 
relating to crew 
of vessels to be 
maintained. 
Inquiry to 
jettisoning of 
cargo. 
Detention of 
vessel by proper 
officer. 
Detention of 
unseaworthy 
vessels. 
275. (1) Every owner, master or tindal or skipper of a vessel shall maintain
or cause to be maintained a statement of the crew of the vessel containing the 
following particulars with respect to each member thereof in such form as may be 
prescribed, namely:— 
(a) his name;
(b) the details of the agreement with him under section 271;
(c) the wages payable to him;
(d) the names and addresses of his next-of-kin;
(e) the date of commencement of his employment; and
(f) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(2) Every change in the crew of the vessel shall be entered in the statement
under sub-section (1). 
(3) A copy of such statement and of every change entered therein shall be
communicated as soon as possible to the shipping master. 
276. (1) If any owner, master or tindal or skipper of a vesse l in the course
of the voyage, has jettisoned or claims to have jettisoned the whole or any part of 
the cargo of the vessel on account of abnormal weather conditions or for any other 
reason, he shall immediately after arrival of the vessel at any port or place in India, 
give notice of such jettisoning to the proper officer and such notice shall contain 
full particulars of the cargo jettisoned and the circumstances under which such 
jettisoning took place. 
(2) Where the proper officer receives the notice unde r sub-section (1), he
shall forthwith report in writing to the Central Government and may proceed to 
make an inquiry into the matter. 
277. (1) Any vessel attempting to ply or proceed to sea without free board
markings or any vessel which is so loaded as to  submerge such markings or 
carrying persons in excess of the certified capacity may be detained by a proper 
officer until the vessel complies with the requirements of this Act. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided, for the purposes of this Part, a proper officer
may, at any reasonable time, go onboard a vessel and may inspect or audit the 
vessel and any part thereof, the structure, equipment, fittings, arrangements, 
materials, systems, scantlings, cargo, provisions, stores, her certificates and 
certificates of the crew onboard: 
Provided that the proper officer shall not unreasonably hinder the operation 
of the vessel or unreasonably detain or delay her from proceeding on any voyage. 
(3) The owner, agent, master or every officer of the vessel shall afford to the
proper officer all reasonable facilities for a survey or audit and provide all such 
information in respect of the vessel and her structure, equipment, fittings, 
arrangements, materials, scantlings, systems, cargo, provisions, stores, her 
certificates, and certificates of the crew, as the proper officer may reasonably 
require. 
278. (1) If any vessel under this Part arrives in or proceeds from a port or
place in India in an unseaworthy condition or which is likely to pose a threat to 
the security on Indian coasts or offshore installations, the vessel may be detained 
until the owner, master or tindal or skipper takes all reasonable measures to ensure 
the seaworthiness of the vessel. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect the liability of the person
in charge of the vessel in respect of such unseaworthiness or threat to the security on 
Indian coasts or offshore installations under any other provisions of this Act. 

93 
279. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the Central
Government may, by order in writing and upon such conditions, if any, as it 
may think fit to impose, exempt any vessel or tindal, skipper or member of 
crew of such vessel or any class thereof, from any specified requirement 
contained in or prescribed in pursuance of this Act or dispense with the 
observance of any such requirement in the case of any vessel or tindal, skipper 
or member of crew of such vessel or any class thereof,  if it is satisfi ed that 
the requirement is substantially complied with or that compliance with the 
requirement is or ought to be dispensed with in the circumstances of the case.  
(2) Where an exemption is granted under sub -section ( 1) subject to any
condition, a breach of any such condition shall, without prejudice to any other 
remedy, be liable to penalty under this Act.  
280. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the general ity of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the manner of deciding whether a vessel falls under Part XIII
under sub -section ( 2) of section 263; 
(b) the scale of manning and fittings, material, a ppliances and
apparatus to be carried onboard by vessel under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 264;  
(c) policy of insurance for all persons employed as members of the
crew under sub -section ( 2) of section 264; 
(d) the conditions and restrictions for serving on a n Indian fishing
vessel under sub -section ( 2) and number of persons for manning fishing 
vessels and their qualifications and other requirements, under 
sub-section ( 3), of section 265;  
(e) the different grades of fishers, requirements and man ner of
grant of certificate under sub -section ( 1) of section 266;  
(f) other certificates with requirements and the manner of its grant
under sub -section ( 3), and the form, fee and validity of such certificates 
under sub -section ( 4), of section 266;  
(g) the criteria for  approving training institute, training courses and
method of conduct of such training for the grant of certificate of competency 
or certificate of proficiency under sub-section (2) of section 267; 
(h) the form and manner and fee payable fo r conduct of
examination under sub -section ( 3) of section 268;  
(i) the form and manner of agreement with fisher under clause ( a)
of section 271;  
(j) the certificates required to ply or proceed to sea by a vessel
under sub -section ( 1) of section 273;  
(k) th e manner of grant of certificate and the period of such
certificate under sub -section ( 2) of section 273;  
(l) the form for maintaining a statement of the crew of the vessel
and other particulars under sub -section ( 1) of section 275;  
(m) any other matter wh ich is required to be or may be prescribed.
Power to 
exempt. 
Power to make 
rules. 

94 
Offences and 
penalties. 
PART XIV 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES 
281. (1) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule
or notification made or issued thereunder  or fails to comply with any provision 
thereof which it was his duty to comply with, shall be liable to penalty or be guilty 
of an offence under this Act and if in respect of any such contravention or offence 
no penalty or punishment is specially provided, he shall be liable to penalty which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 
(2) The contraventions mentioned in column (2) of the table below, shall be
liable to the extent of penalty mentioned in column (4) of the said table, with 
reference to such contraventions, respectively. 
Table 
Serial 
No. 
Contravention Section Penalties 
  (1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. If the Indian charterer fails to
comply with the conditions
prescribed under section 16.
16 Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
2. If the owner of an Indian vessel
fails to register a vessel under
sub-section (1) of section 20.
20(1) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
3. If a person fails to deliver the
certificate of registration to the
Registrar or person entitled as
required under sub-section (2) of
section 22.
22(2) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
4. If any person transfers a registered 
mortgage in contravention of  
sub-section (1) of section 30.
30(1) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
5. If an owner fails to make an
application for re-registration of a
vessel or for registering an
alteration of a vessel under
section 33.
33 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees and in addition, a 
penalty which may extend to two 
thousand rupees for every day during 
which the contravention continues.   
6. If any person fails to hoist the proper
national colours except those
declared under sub-section (2) of
section 37, onboard the Indian
vessel.
37(2) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
7. If any person conducts training
course in contravention of
sub-section (2) of section 47.
47(2) Penalty which may extend to 
twenty lakh rupees. 
8. If any person obstructs authorised
person to inspect any maritime
training institute under
sub-section (3) of section 47. 
47(3) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
9. If the master of any vessel fails to
produce the certificates under
sub-section (1) of section 49. 
49(1) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees and in addition, a 
penalty which may extend to five 
thousand rupees for every day during 
which the contravention continues. 

95 
10. If any person causes a vessel to
proceed to sea in contravention of 
sub-section (3) of section 57.
57(3) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
11. If any person engages or employs a 
person below the age of sixteen
years in contravention of section 59.
59 Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees for every seafarer 
engaged in the contravention. 
12. If any person engages or carries to
sea any seafarer in contravention of
section 60.
60 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees for every seafarer 
engaged in the contravention.  
13. If any person engages or carries to
sea a seafarer in contravention of 
sub-section (1) of section 61.
61(1) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees, for every seafarer 
engaged in the contravention. 
14. If any person engages a seafarer in
contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 62.
62(1) Penalty which may extend to three 
lakh rupees for every seafarer. 
15. If any person engages a seafarer in
contravention of clause ( b) of
sub-section (2) of section 62.
62(2)(b) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees, for every seafarer 
engaged in the contravention.  
16. If any person discriminates between 
seafarers in contravention of clause (d) 
of sub-section (2) of section 62.
62(2)(d) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees for every seafarer. 
17. If any ship owner, master or his
agent engages any person to serve
as seafarer in contravention of 
sub-section (3) of section 62.
62(3) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
18. If any recruitment and placement
service agency contravene
clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c)
or clause (d) of sub-section (6) of
section 62.
 
62(6)(a), 
(b), (c) 
and (d) 
Penalty which may extend to 
fifteen lakh rupees. 
19. If any recruitment and placement
service agency contravene
clause (e) or clause ( f) of
sub-section (6) of section 62.
62(6)(e) 
and (f)  
Penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees.  
20. If any master or ship owner or
recruitment and placement service
agency fails to enter into a seafarer
employment agreement in
contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 63.
63(1) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees for every seafarer. 
21. If a m aster or ship owner of an
Indian vessel fails to discharge a
seafarer in contravention of
sub-section (2) of section 80.
80(2) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
22. If any master discharges a seafarer
before the expiration of the period
for which he was engaged or leaves
a seafarer behind in contravention
of sub-section (5) of section 80.
80(5) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 

96 
23. If a master fails to make an entry
in the official logbook with
respect to a seafarer who is left
behind or lost overboard or is
deceased, or fails to take charge
of his property or fails to
discharge such property in
contravention of section 81.
81 Penalty which may extend to 
three times the va lue of the 
property not accounted for or if 
such value is not ascertained, to 
twenty thousand rupees. 
24. If any master or ship owner, or
his agent or seafarer fails to
produce any logbooks, papers or
other documents in any
proceedings before a shipping
master or fails to attend such
proceedings in contravention of
section 84.
84 Penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees. 
25. If any person commits a breach of
any term of an award which is
binding on him under sub-section (8)
of section 89. 
89(8) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
26. If any seafarer or class of 
seafarers or union of seafarers
goes or remain on strike in
contravention of clause ( a) of
sub-section (14) of section 89. 
89(14)(a) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
27. If any ship owner alters the 
conditions of service or
discharges or punishes a seafarer
in contravention of clause (b) of
sub-section (14) of section 89. 
89(14)(b) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
28. If any person obstructs the
shipping master or surveyor,
seafarer welfare officer or
Indian ambassador or any other
authorised officer from entering
or inspecting a vessel under
sub-section (1) of section 93. 
93(1) Penalty which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees unless he 
can prove that the obstruction 
was caused without his 
knowledge or connivance. 
29. If the master or owner of a vessel
fails to be in possession of  the
certificates specified in
sub-section (2) or sub-section (3)
of section 93.
93(2), 
(3) 
Penalty which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees unless he 
proves that the non-compliance 
was not caused by his 
inattention, neglect or wilful 
default. 
30. If a  master without reasonable
cause fails to facilitate a seafarer to
make a complaint under
section 95.
95 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
31. If a person goes onboard a vessel
in contravention of section 96. 
96 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees.  
32. If a seafarer deserts his vessel in
contravention of clause ( a) of
sub-section (1) of section 98.
98(1)(a) He shall be liable to forfeit all or 
any part of the property he leaves 
onboard and of the wages he has 
then earned and also if the 
desertion takes place at any place 

97 
outside India, to forfeit all or any 
part of the wages which he may 
earn in any other vessel in which he 
may be employed until his next 
return to India, and to satisfy any 
excess of wages paid by the master 
or owner of the vessel from which 
he deserts to any substitute 
engaged in his place at a higher rate 
of wages than the rate stipulated to 
be paid to him. 
33. If a seafarer neglects or refuses,
without reasonable cause, to join
the vessel or does not proceed to
sea in his vessel or is absent
without leave in contravention of
clause (b) of sub -section (1) of
section 98. 
98(1)(b) He shall, if the contravention does 
not amount to desertion, be liable 
to forfeit out of his wages a sum not 
exceeding two days’ pay and in 
addition for every twenty -four 
hours of absence either a sum not 
exceeding six days’ pay or any 
expenses properly incur red in 
hiring a substitute.  
34. If any seafarer quits the vessel
without leave under clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 99. 
99(1)(a) Forfeiture out of his wages of a 
sum not exceeding one month’s 
pay. 
35. If any seafarer fails to attend his
vessel under  clause ( b) of
sub-section (1) of section 99.
99(1)(b) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees but nothing herein shall 
take away or limit any other 
remedy which any person would 
otherwise have for breach of 
contract or refund of money 
advanced or otherwise. 
36. If any seafarer wilfully disobeys
any lawful command under
clause (c) of sub -section (1) of
section 99.
99(1)(c) Forfeiture out of his wages of a 
sum not exceeding two days’ pay. 
37. If any master fails to report
desertion and absence without
leave in contravention of
section 102.
102 Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
38. If any person persuades or attempts
to persuade a seafarer to neglect or
refuse to join or proceed to the
vessel or deserts his vessel, in
contravention of clause ( a) of
section 108. 
108(a) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
39. If any person harbours or secretes a 
seafarer who has wilfully neglected
or refused to join or has deserted his
vessel, in contravention of clause (b) 
of section 108.
108(b) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
40. If any person secretes himself and
goes to sea in contravention of
section 109.
109 Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees.   

98 
41. If a master fails to deliver
documents relating to the
navigation of the vessel to his
successor in contravention  of
sub-section (1) of section 110.
110(1) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
42. If the owner or master of a vessel
fails to comply with provisions of
the international conventions,
treaties or agreements in
contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 116.  
116(1) Penalty which may extend to fifteen 
lakh rupees and the vessel may also 
be detained.  
43. If the master of a vessel fails to
report the particulars of an incident 
in contravention of sub-section (1) 
of section 117.
117(1) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
44. If the master of a vessel fails to
report the particulars of an incident
relating to the loss or likely loss
overboard of dangerous goods in
contravention of sub-section (2) of
section 117.
117(2) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
45. If any master or owner of an Indian
vessel fails to comply with its
communication requirements in
contravention of section 120.
120 Penalty which may extend to fifteen 
lakh rupees and the vessel may also 
be detained. 
46. If any master or owner of a vessel
does not carry onboard the
information required b y 
section 121. 
121 Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
47. If the master or owner of the vessel
causes a vessel to be loaded in
contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 122.
122(1) Penalty  which may extend to four 
lakh rupees and to such additional  
penalty  not exceeding twenty-five 
thousand rupees for every inch or 
fraction of an inch by which the 
appropriate load lines on each side 
of the vessel are submerged or 
would have been submerged if the 
vessel had been in salt waters and 
had no list, as the principal officer 
thinks fit to impose, having regard 
to the extent to which the earning 
capacity of the vessel is or would 
have been increased by reason of 
the submersion. 
48. If the owner, agent or master of a
vessel carries passengers without 
certificates required under Part VI in
contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 123.
123(1) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees. 
49. If the owner, agent or master of
a vessel carrying passengers
fails to make a statement about
the passengers onboard such
vessel in contravention of
sub-section (3) of section 123. 
123(3) Penalty which may extend to 
two lakh rupees. 

99 
50. If the master or owner of a vessel
causes a vessel to proceed to sea
without valid certificates in
contravention of section 124.
124 Penalty which may extend to 
fifteen lakh rupees and the vessel 
may also be detained.  
51. If a person commits misconduct
specified in any of the clauses
under sub-section ( 1) of
section 125.
 
125(1) Penalty which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees. 
52. If any person carries or attempts
to carry cargo without the
required certificates in
contravention of    sub-section (1)
of section 126.
126(1) Penalty which may extend to 
five lakh rupees. 
53. If any person carries or attempts
to carry passengers without the
required certificates in
contravention of sub-section (2)
of section 126. 
126(2) Penalty which may extend to 
five lakh rupees. 
54. If any person or master sends or 
takes or attempts to send or take
to sea unseaworthy vessel in
contravention of sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2) of section 127. 
127(1), (2) Penalty which may extend to 
two lakh rupees and ten lakh 
rupees for every repeat  
contravention and the vessel 
may also be detained.  
55. If the ship owner or master of a
vessel or seafarer fails to take all
reasonable means to ensure the
seaworthiness of a vessel in
contravention of sub-section (1)
of section 128. 
128(1) Penalty which may extend to 
two lakh rupees and five lakh 
rupees for every  repeat 
contravention. 
56. If any vessel, company or port
facility fails to comply with the
requirements for safety and
security management in
contravention of sub-section (1)
of section 129.
129(1) Penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five lakh rupees. 
57. If any owner or master of an
Indian vessel causes polluting
substance to be discharged
anywhere into the sea or owner
or master of a foreign vessel
causes polluting substance to be
discharged within the coastal
waters in contravention of
section 133, then—
133 
(a) where such 
discharge is of harmful 
substances carried by sea in 
packaged form; 
133 Penalty which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees and such security as 
may be considered necessary for 
securing any damages that may 
arise in future; 
(b) where such 
discharge is of sewage; 
133 penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees and such security as 
may be considered necessary for 
securing any damages that may 
arise in future; 
(c) where the 
discharge is of ballast water 
and sediments; 
133 penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees and such security as 
may be considered necessary for 

100 
securing any damages that may 
arise in future; 
(d) where the 
discharge is of any other 
polluting substances. 
133 penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees and such security as 
may be considered necessary for 
securing any damages that may 
arise in future. 
58. If the ship owner, master or any
other person permits any vessel or
port or platform or  man-made
structures at sea to engage in
dumping in contravention of
sub-section (6) of section 133. 
133(6) Penalty which may extend to two 
lakh rupees and such security as 
may be considered necessary for 
securing any damages that may 
arise in future. 
59. If any vessel proceeds to sea
without valid certificates in
contravention of section 135.  
135 Penalty which may extend to 
fifteen lakh rupees and the vessel 
may also be detained. 
60. If the master of a vessel fails to
maintain books of records in
contravention of section 136.
136 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
61. If any master or owner of a vessel
which is detained under
sub-section (3) of section 137
causes such vessel to proceed to
sea before its release in
contravention of section 137.
137(3) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
62. If the master of a vessel fails to
report the particulars of an incident
in contravention of sub-section (1) 
of section 138.  
138(1) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh and fifty thousand rupees. 
63. If any port authority or officer fails
to comply with the directions
issued by the Central Government
under sub -section (2) of
section 142.  
142(2) Penalty which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees. 
64. If a master or person in-charge of a
vessel fails to render assistance in
case of collision in contravention of
sub-section (1) of section 158. 
158(1) Penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees. 
65. If a master fails to enter a statement
in relation to a collision in the
official logbook in contravention
of section 159.  
159 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
66. If the master or ship owner or his
agent fails to transmit a report of
the accident or damage to the
Director-General or the nearest
principal officer in contravention
of section 160. 
160 Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
67. If the owner or agent of any Indian
vessel fails, without reasonable
cause, to give notice of loss of
Indian vessel to the
Director-General in contravention
of   section 161.  
161 Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 

101 
68. If any person fails to maintain
compulsory insurance or other
financial security for maritime
claims in contravention of
section 172. 
172 Penalty which may extend to 
fifteen lakh rupees and the vessel 
may also be detained. 
69. If any master or ship owner does 
not carry the certificate required
under sub -section ( 1) or
sub-section (2) of section 190. 
190(1), (2) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
70. If any master or ship owner does 
not carry the certificate required
under sub -section ( 1) or
sub-section (2) of section 207. 
207(1), (2) Penalty which may extend to 
fifteen lakh rupees. 
71. If any person refuses or wilfully
neglects to comply with a notice or
makes any false statement in
contravention of sub-section (4) of
section 217.
217(4) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
72. If the primary response party fails
to engage in maritime emergency
response under section 226. 
226 Penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees and the vessel may also 
be detained.  
73. If the owner or master of a vessel
fails to conclude contracts with
salvors under section 251. 
251 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
74. If a salvor fails to perform his
duties under sub -section (1) of
section 252.  
252(1) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
75. If the owner or master of a vessel or
the owner of other property fails to
perform his duties under
sub-section (2) of section 252.
252(2) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
76. If the owner of a vessel fails to
comply with the requirements for
safety, security and prevention of
pollution and insurance in
contravention of section 264.
264 Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees and the vessel may also 
be detained. 
77. If any person fails to comply with
the manning requirements under
sub-section (2) of section 265. 
265(2) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees and the vessel may also 
be detained. 
78. If the ship owner, master, tindal or
skipper of a vessel fails to produce
certificates of competency or
proficiency or any other certificate
in contravention of section 270. 
270 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
79. If the owner or his agent or skipper
of an Indian fishing vessel fails to
enter into an agreement in
contravention of clause ( a) of
section 271. 
271(a) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
80. If the ship owner or master permits
a vessel to ply or proceed to sea
without certificates in
contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 273.
273(1) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 

102 
81. If the ship owner or master or tindal
or skipper of a vessel fails to
maintain or cause to be maintained
a statement of crew in
contravention of section 275. 
275 Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
82. If the ship owner or master or tindal
or skipper of a vessel fails to
provide notice of jettisoning of
cargo in contravention of
section 276. 
276 Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
83. If the ship owner or agent or master
or officer of a vessel fails to provide
all reasonable facilities to the
proper officer for a survey or audit
in contravention of sub-section (3) 
of section 277. 
277(3) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
84. If any person hinders or obstructs
any officer or person in
contravention of sub-section (2) of
section 296. 
296(2) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
85. If any ship owner or master or
tindal or skipper or seafarer or port
or any person or authority breaches
any condition subject to which any
exemption is granted under 
sub-section (2) of section 300.
300(2) Penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
86. If any ship owner or his agent or
master or seafarer or tindal or
maritime training institute or
recruitment placement service
provider or port or any person or
body of persons fails to comply
with the directions given under
section 301. 
301 Penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees. 
87. If any owner or master of a vessel
allows a vessel to fly with the flag
of a State in contravention of
sub-section (1) of section 304.
304(1) Penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees and the vessel may also 
be detained. 
88. If any person acts in contravention
of control measures invoked by the
principal officer under
sub-section (4) of section 307.
307(4) Penalty which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees. 
89. If any port fails to discharge the
obligations under the conventions
in contravention of   sub-section (1) 
of section 310. 
310(1) Penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees. 
90. If any port authority or State
Maritime Board or any other
authority or agency fails to render
services or assistance or take
measures in respect of any
abandoned vessel under
sub-section (1) of section 311.
311(1) Penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees.  

103 
91. If the registered owner of an
Indian vessel fails to maintain
compulsory adequate insurance
coverage or such other financial
security in contravention of
section 314.
314 Penalty which may extend to 
seventy lakh rupees. 
92. If any vessel is detained under
the provisions of this Act for
which no penalty is provided.
General Penalty which may extend to 
fifteen lakh rupees. 
93. If any person in the case of any
declaration made in the
presence of, or produced to,
Registrar under Part III or in
any document or other evidence
produced to such Registrar—
(i) wilfully makes or
assists in making or 
procures to be made, any 
false statement concerning 
the title to   or   ownership 
of or the interest existing in 
any vessel or any share in a 
vessel; or  
General Penalty which may extend to 
two lakh rupees. 
(ii) utters, produces
or makes use of any 
declaration or document 
containing any such false 
statement knowing the 
same to be false. 
94. If any person,—
(a) forges or fraudulently
alters any certificate of
discharge or a certificate as to
the work of a seafarer or a
continuous discharge certificate
or a copy of any such
certificate; or
(b) fraudulently uses any
certificate of discharge or a 
certificate as to the work of a 
seafarer or a continuous 
discharge certificate or a copy 
of any such certificate which is 
forged or altered or does not 
belong to him. 
General Penalty which may extend to 
two lakh rupees. 
95. If any person wilfully destroys
or mutilates or renders illegible
any entry in an official logbook
or wilfully  makes or procures
to be made or assists in making
a false or fraudulent entry in or
omission from an official
logbook.
General Penalty which may extend to 
two lakh rupees. 

104 
(3) The offences mentioned in column (2) of the table below, shall be
punishable to the extent mentioned in column (4) of the said table, with 
reference to such offences , respectively.  
Table  
96. If the master or owner or
agent of  a special trade
passenger vessel, after having
obtained any of the
certificates referred to in
Part VI, fraudulently does or
suffers to be done anything
whereby the certificate
becomes inapplicable to the
altered state  of the vessel, or
special trade passengers or
other matters to which the
certificate relates. 
General  Penalty which may extend to 
one lakh rupees for the first 
contravention and five lakh 
rupees for every subsequent 
contravention.  
Serial 
No. 
Offences  Section 
to which 
offence 
is 
referred  
Imprisonment or fine or 
both 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. If any person causes a vessel to
proceed to sea without a valid
incertificate of registration 
contravention of section 15.
15 Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or fine 
which may extend to two lakh 
rupees, or both. 
2. If any person uses Indian national
colour in contravention of
sub-section (4) of section 37.
37(4) Imprisonment which may 
extend to two years, or fine 
which may extend to two lakh 
rupees, or both. 
3. If an owner or a master of an
Indian vessel knowingly
conceals the Indian character of
the vessel in contravention of
section 38.
38 Imprisonment which may 
extend to two years, or fine 
which may extend to two lakh 
rupees, or both. 
4. If any person goes to sea without
holding a certificate granted
under the Act.
General Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or fine 
which may extend to two lakh 
rupees, or both. 
5. If any person causes a vessel or
sailing or fishing vessel to
proceed to sea without the
required certificated personnel.
General Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or fine 
which may extend to two lakh 
rupees, or both.  
6. If any person carries on the
business of recruitment and
placement service agency in
contravention of clause ( a) of
sub-section (2) of section 62.
62(2)(a) Imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, or fine 
which may extend to five lakh 
rupees, or both.  
7. If any person demands or
receives any remuneration from
any seafarer or person in
contravention of clause ( c) of
sub-section (2) of section 62.
62(2)(c) Imprisonment which may 
extend to three months, or 
fine which may extend to 
five lakh rupees, or both. 

105 
8. If any seafarer does or refuses
or omits to do anything in
contravention of section 97.
97 Imprisonment which may 
extend to two years, or fine 
which may extend to five 
lakh rupees or both. 
9. If any seafarer is guilty of an
offence specified in  clause ( d)
of sub-section (1) of section 99.
99(1)(d) Imprisonment which may 
extend to one month and also 
for every twenty -four hours 
of continuance of such 
disobedience or neglect, 
forfeiture out of his wages of 
a sum not exceeding six days’ 
pay or any expenses which 
may have been properly 
incurred in hiring a substitute. 
10. If any seafarer is guilty of an
offence specified in  clause ( e)
of sub-section (1) of section 99.
99(1)(e) Imprisonment which may 
extend to three months, or 
fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees or both. 
11. If any seafarer is guilty of an
offence specified in clause (f) of
sub-section (1) of section 99.
99(1)(f) Forfeiture out of his wages 
of a sum equal to the loss 
sustained and also 
imprisonment which may 
extend to three months. 
12. If a seafarer on or before being
engaged wilfully and
fraudulently makes a false
statement of the name of his last
vessel or alleged last vessel or
wilfully and fraudulently makes
a false statement of his own
name.
General Fine which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees. 
13. If any owner or master of an
Indian vessel causes polluting
substance to be discharged
anywhere into the sea or owner
or master of a foreign vessel
causes polluting substance to be
discharged within the coastal
waters in  contravention of
section 133, then—
133 
(a) where the 
discharge is of oil and 
oily mixtures from  
vessels; 
133 Fine which may extend to 
twenty-five lakh rupees, or 
imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, 
or both, and such security as 
may be considered necessary 
for securing any damages that 
may arise in future; 
(b) where the 
discharge is of noxious 
liquid substances. 
133 Fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees, or imprisonment 
for a term which may extend 
to six months, or both, and 
such security as may be 
considered necessary for 
securing any damages that 
may arise in future. 

106 
14. If the owner, agent, master,
charterer, operator, lessee or
licensee of the vessel fails to
comply with any notice issued
under sub-section (2) of section 138.
138(2) Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or fine 
which may extend to five lakh 
rupees, or both, and if the 
offence is a continuing one, 
the offender shall be liable to a 
further fine which may extend 
to fifty thousand rupees per 
day for every day during 
which the offence continues 
after conviction. 
15. If the owner of any Indian
vessel or any equipment fails to
comply with the directions of
the Central Government issued
under sub-section (1) of section 139.
139(1) Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months or fine 
which may extend to five lakh 
rupees, or both, and if the 
offence is a continuing one, 
the offender shall be liable to a 
further fine which may extend 
to fifty thousand rupees per 
day for every day during 
which the offence continues 
after conviction. 
16. If the owner, manager, operator,
company, pilot, harbour master,
master, or other person in charge
fails to give notice of a marine
casualty to the officer in
contravention of sub-section (2) of
section 231.
231(2) Fine which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees and in 
default of payment, simple 
imprisonment which may 
extend to three months. 
17. If the  master or owner or the
operator of an Indian vessel or
any ship other than an Indian
vessel fails to report a wreck in
contravention of sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2) of section 236. 
236(1), (2) Fine which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees and 
in default of payment, 
imprisonment which may 
extend to three months.  
18. If the owner or operator of a
ship fails to immediately mark
or maintain the mark of the
wreck in contravention of
sub-section ( 1) of section 23 8.
238(1) Fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees and in 
default of payment, 
imprisonment which may 
extend to six months.  
19. If the master permits a vessel
to proceed to sea before such
vessel is released from
detention by any competent
authority in contravention of
sub-section ( 2) of section 2 90.
290(2) Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or 
fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees, or both.  
20. If the owner, master or agent
of the vessel takes to sea any
person authorised under this
Act to detain or survey the
vessel in contravention of
sub-section ( 3) of section 290. 
290(3) Imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, or fine 
which may extend to two 
lakh rupees, or both.  
21. If the master or owner or agent
permits a nuclear vessel to
proceed to any port or place in
contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 298.  
298(1) Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or 
fine which may extend to 
ten lakh rupees, or both.  

107 
46 of 2023. 
282. (1) The authority for imposing the penalty under sub -section ( 2) of
section 28 1 shall be the principal officer.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by the order of the principal officer imposing
the penalty under sub -section ( 1) may within a period of thirty days from the 
date of receipt of such order, prefer an appeal before the Director -General in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Director -General shall dispose of such appeal withi n a period of
thirty days from the date of receipt of the appeal.  
(4) No such order shall be passed under this section unless the parties
have been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(5) Any contravention of the provisions of this Act for which penalty has
been provided may be compounded for the first contravention by an officer 
designated by the Central Government by notification in this behalf. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if any penalty imposed
by the principal officer or the Director -General under this Part is not deposited, 
the amount shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue. 
283. (1) Any person committing any offence under this Act or any rules
made thereunder may be tried for such offence in any place in which he may be 
found or in any court which the Central Government may by notification, direct 
in this behalf, or in any court in which he might be tried under any other law for 
the time being in force. 
(2) No court inferior to that of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall
try any offence under sub-section (3) of section 281. 
284. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2 3 of the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, it shall be lawful for a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class to pass any sentence authorised by or under this Act on any person 
convicted of an offence under this Act or any rules made thereunder. 
285. The Central Government or the State Government may, by notification,
appoint a person who is in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years as 
a Special Public Prosecutor for the purposes of any case or class of cases under 
this Act. 
286. The penalties to which a master or owner of a special trade passenger
vessel is liable under section 281 shall be enforced only on a report made by the 
proper officer in this behalf. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “special trade passenger 
vessel”  means a mechanically propelled vessel carrying more than thirty special 
trade passengers. 
287. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company,
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and 
was responsible to, t he company for the conduct of its business, as well as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
22. If the master or owner or agent
fails to comply with the order
issued under sub -section (2) of
section 29 8.
298(2) Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or 
fine which may extend to 
ten lakh rupees, or both.  
23. If any owner of a ship fails to
comply with directions of the
Director -General under
sub-section ( 1) of section 30 2.
302(1) Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months , or 
fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees, or both.  
Authority for 
imposition of 
penalty and 
procedure 
therefor. 
Place of trial 
and jurisdiction 
of court. 
Special 
provision 
regarding 
punishment. 
Appointment of 
Special Public 
Prosecutors. 
Penalties in 
respect of 
masters or 
owners of 
special trade 
passenger 
vessels. 
Offences by 
companies. 

108 
Depositions to 
be received in 
evidence when 
witness cannot 
be produced. 
Power to detain 
foreign vessel 
that has 
occasioned 
damage. 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable 
to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent 
the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence 
was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect 
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, or any other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “company” includes a co -operative s ociety, a firm or other
association of individuals; and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
288. (1) Where, the testimony of any witness is required in relation to any
legal proceeding before any court or officer or authority under this Act, and the 
defendant or the person accused does not produce the witness, then any deposition 
previously made by the witness in relation to the same subject-matter before any 
court in India or, if elsewhere, before any Indian ambassador, shall be admissible 
in evidence— 
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of the presiding
officer of such court or ambassador, before whom it is made; 
(b) if the defendant or the person accused had an opportunity by
himself or his agent of cross-examining the witness; 
(c) if the proceeding is criminal, on proof that the deposition was made
in the presence of the person accused. 
(2) It shall not be necessary in any case to prove the signature or official
character of the person appearing to have signed such deposition, and a certificate 
by such person that the defendant or person accused had an opportunity of 
cross-examining the witness, and that the deposition, if made in a criminal 
proceeding, was made in the presence of the person accused, shall, unless the 
contrary is proved, be sufficient evidence that he had that opportunity and that it 
was so made. 
289. (1) Whenever any damage has in any part of the world been caused to
property belonging to the Government or to any citizen of India or a company by 
a vessel other than an Indian vessel and that vessel is found within Indian 
jurisdiction, such vessel shall be detained by an order of the High Court upon an 
application alleging that the damage was caused by the misconduct or want of 
skill of the master or any other seafarer of that vessel.  
(2) The order of detention under sub-section (1) shall remain in force until
such time as the ship owner, master or consignee thereof has satisfied any claim 
in respect of the damage or has given security to the satisfaction of the High Court 
to pay all costs and damages that may be awarded.  
(3) Whenever it appears that before an application c an be made under this
section, the vessel will have departed from India or the territorial waters of India, 
any proper officer may detain the vessel for such time as to allow the application 
to be made and that officer shall not be liable for any cost or d amages in respect 
of the detention unless the same is proved to have been made without reasonable 
grounds. 

109 
(4) In any legal proceedings in relation to any damage referred to in
sub-section (1), the person giving security shall be made a defendant and shall 
for the purposes of such proceeding be deemed to be the owner of the vessel 
that has occasioned the damage.  
290. (1) Where under this Act a vessel is authorised  or ordered to be
detained, any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy or Indian Coast Guard or 
any port officer,  police, pilot, harbour master, conservator of port or customs 
commissioner may detain the vessel under instructions of the proper officer. 
(2) If any vessel after detention or after service on the master for any
notice of, or order for, such detention proceeds to sea before she is released 
by any competent authority, the master of the vessel shall be guilty of an 
offence under this Act.  
(3) When a vessel so proceeding to sea takes to sea any person authorised
under this Act to detain or survey the vessel, the owner, master or agent of 
such vessel shall each be liable to pay all expenses of, and incidental to, such 
person being so taken to sea an d shall also be guilty of an offence under this 
Act.  
(4) When any owner or master or agent is convicted of an offence under
sub-section ( 3), the court making the order of conviction may inquire and 
determine the amount payable on account of expenses by su ch owner, master 
or agent and may direct that the same shall be recovered from him in the 
manner provided for the recovery of fines.  
291. (1) When an order under this Act for the payment of any wages or
other sums of money is made by any court or other off icer or authority and the 
money is not paid at the time or in the manner directed, the sum mentioned in 
the order with such further sum as may be thereby awarded for costs, may be 
levied by distress and sale of the movable property of the person directed t o 
pay the same under a warrant to be issued for that purpose by such court.  
(2) Where any court or other officer or authority has power under this
Act to make an order directing payment to be made of any seafarer’s  wages, 
fines or other sums of money, the n, if the person so directed to pay the same 
is the master, owner or agent of a vessel and the same is not paid at the time 
or in the manner directed by such court or other officer or authority, the court 
or officer or authority  may, in addition to any ot her power which it may have 
for the purpose of compelling payment by warrant, direct the amount 
remaining unpaid to be levied by distress and sale of the vessel and her 
equipment.  
292. Where, for the purposes of this Act, any document is to be served
on any person, that document may be served — 
(a) in any case by delivering a copy thereof personally to the person
to be served, or by leaving the same at his last place of residence, or by 
post; and  
(b) if the document is to be served on the master of a vessel, where
there is one, by leaving the same for him onboard that vessel, with the 
person being or appearing to be in command or charge of the vessel; 
and 
(c) if the document is to be served on the master of a vessel where
there is no master and the ves sel is in India, on the owner of the vessel, 
or, if such owner is not in India, on some agent of the owner residing in 
India, or, where no such agent is known or can be found, by affixing a 
copy thereof on the vessel or at a suitable place on the bridge.  
Power to 
enforce 
detention of 
vessel. 
Levy of wages, 
etc., by distress 
of movable 
property or 
vessel. 
Service of 
documents. 

110 
Birth and death 
of persons 
onboard vessel 
during a voyage. 
Inquiry into 
cause of death 
onboard or 
person missing 
from Indian 
vessel. 
Certain persons 
deemed to be 
public servants. 
Power of 
persons 
authorised to 
investigate, 
inquire, etc. 
PART XV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
293. The master of any vessel performing a voyage shall, on arrival at the
next port or place of call, intimate the proper officer, the date of any birth or death 
of any person occurring during the voyage and the cause of death or any other 
relevant details, as the Central Government may by order, specify in this behalf. 
294. (1) If any person dies onboard or is missing from an Indian vessel, the
master shall forthwith inform the Director -General and the proper officer of the 
port or the next port of call. 
(2) On receipt of information under sub-section (1), the proper officer shall
enquire into the cause of death and make an endorsement to that effect in the 
official logbook, either that the statement of the cause of death in the book is in 
his opinion true or the contrary according to the result of inquiry. 
(3) If, in the course of any such inquiry, it appears to the proper officer that
death is caused onboard the vessel by violence or other improper means, he shall 
either report the matter to the Director-General or, if the emergency of the case so 
requires, shall take immediate steps for bringing the offender to trial. 
295. The following persons shall be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of clause ( 28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita , 2023 , 
namely:—  
(a) every surveyor;
(b) every person appointed under this Act to report information as to
marine casualties under Part XI; 
(c) every person authorised under this Act to make any investigation
or inquiry and all persons whom he calls to his aid; 
(d) every person directed to make an investigation into an explosion
or fire on a vessel; 
(e) every other officer or person appointed under this Act to perform
any functions thereunder. 
296. (1) Every person who is empowered by this Act to make an
investigation or inquiry or to board, survey, inspect or detain a vessel,— 
(a) may go onboard any vessel  and inspect the same or any part
thereof, or any of the machinery, equipment or articles onboard thereof, or 
any certificate of the master or other officer to which the provisions of this 
Act or any of the rules  made thereunder apply, not unnecessarily detaining 
or delaying the vessel  from proceeding on any voyage, and if in 
consequence of any incident to the vessel or for any other reason it is 
considered necessary so to do, may require the vessel to be taken into dock 
for the purpose of inspection or survey;  
(b) may enter and inspect any premises, the entry and inspection of
which appears to be requisite for the purpose of this section; 
(c) may, by  summons under his hand, require the attendance of all
such persons as he thinks fit to call before him and examine them for the 
purpose of this section, and may require answers or returns to any enquiries 
he thinks fit to make;  
(d) may require and enforce the production of all relevant books,
papers, or documents; 
(e) may administer oaths or may in lieu of requiring or administering
an oath, require every person examined by him to make and subscribe a 
declaration of the truth of t he statements made by him in his examination; 
and  
(f) may muster the crew of any such vessel.
45 of 2023. 

111 
(2) No person shall hinder or obstruct any officer or person referred to in
sub-section (1) from going onboard any vessel or otherwise impede him in the 
execution of his duties or the exercise of his powers under this Act. 
297. Where this Act requires that the provisions or arrangements for a vessel shall
meet the obligations under the convention, or otherwise, the Central Government may, 
after satisfying itself by trials or based on the convention or its protocol or its 
amendments or otherwise, that any such provision or arrangement is as effective as that 
so required, by order, direct or permit such other provisions or arrangements to be used 
or provided. 
298. (1) No nuclear vessel shall proceed to any port or place in India including
territorial waters thereof without permission of the Central Government. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “nuclear vessel” means a 
vessel with a nuclear power plant. 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, issue such
directions, as it deems fit, to the registered owners of the vessels, for taking such security 
measures as may be necessary. 
299. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the
provisions of this Act or any of them shall not apply to vessels belonging to the 
Government of any State or to any class of such vessels. 
300. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central
Government may, by order in writing and upon such conditions, if any, as it may 
think fit to impose, exempt any vessel or tindal or skipper or seafarer or port or 
any class of vessels, from any specified requirement contained in or prescribed in 
pursuance of this Act or dispense with the observance of any such requirement in 
the case of any such vessel or tindal or skipper or seafarer or port or any class of 
vessels, if it is satisfied that the requirement is substantially complied with or that 
compliance with the requiremen t is or ought to be dispensed with in the 
circumstances of the case: 
Provided that no exemption which is prohibited by the safety convention or 
pollution prevention convention shall be granted under this sub-section.  
(2) Where an exemption is granted unde r sub -section (1) subject to any
conditions, a breach of any of those conditions shall, without prejudice to any 
other remedy, be deemed to be an offence under this section. 
301. The Director-General may, if he is satisfied in the public interest or in
the interest of Indian shipping that it is necessary so to do, give by notice, circular, 
order or guidelines in writing, such directions as he thinks fit to any vessel or 
seafarer o r tindal or ship owner or his agent or maritime training institute or 
recruitment placement service provider or port or person or body of persons. 
302. (1) The Director -General may by order in writing and upon such
conditions, if any, as he may think fit to impose, direct the ship owner who fails 
to comply with the provisions of this Act, or rules made thereunder or is not taking 
action for the safety and prevention of any harm to life, property or the 
environment which may be caused by a vessel owned by such ship owner but not 
abandoned by him, to take such measures as may be directed: 
Provided that if the ship owner fails to comply with such directions, the 
Director-General may take necessary action including confiscation or forfeiture 
of the vessel or cargo, if any, or both, and dispose of the same as may be deemed 
appropriate. 
(2) The cost incurred by the Director -General in averting the harm
mentioned under sub-section (1) due to failure of timely action by the ship owner 
shall be recovered from such ship owner as Government dues. 
Power to permit 
alternative 
provisions and 
arrangement. 
Control of 
nuclear vessels 
and security 
measures. 
Exemption of 
Government 
vessels, foreign 
and Indian. 
Power to 
exempt. 
Power of 
Director-General 
to give 
directions. 
Special 
provisions with 
respect to 
defaulting ship 
owners. 

112 
Right to pursue 
foreign vessels 
in high seas. 
Power of  
Central 
Government 
with 
respect to vessel 
without 
nationality. 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
Agreement with 
other States. 
Control 
measures and 
detention of 
vessels. 
(3) The Director-General shall be competent to adjust the cost referred to in
sub-section (2), with the funds generated by disposal of the vessel or the cargo, or 
both. 
303. The Central Government, if it has a reason to believe that any foreign
vessel has violated any law within the coastal waters, may authorise any vessel 
under its control to pursue into the high seas such foreign vessel for investigations 
and thereafter seize the vessel if considered necessary, for further proceedings:  
Provided that as far as practicable, such foreign vessel shall be given a signal 
to stop before pursuing the vessel into the high seas. 
304. (1) Where it is established that a vessel within India or her coastal
waters is not legally entitled to fly the flag of a State or has lost such right, the 
Central Government may take charge of such vessel and detain the same  as a 
vessel without nationality including its cargo, as may be deemed appropriate, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) A vessel which sails under the flags of two or more States, using them
according to convenience, may be deemed to be a vessel without nationality. 
305. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
306. The Central Government may enter into agreement with other States
or organisations for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 
307. (1) No vessel shall enter into or sail out of or operate within the port,
terminal, anchorages, port facilities, Indian offshore facilities or the territorial 
waters of India, without complying with such requirements as to construction, 
equipment, safety and security, cargo operations, pollution prevention, safe 
manning, maritime labour standards, insurance, classification or such other 
relevant requirements for the purposes of this Act as may be prescribed.  
(2) The principal officer may order any unsafe vessel or vessel which
appears to him to be an unsafe vessel, to be provisionally detained for the purpose 
of being surveyed. 
(3) The surveyor may inspect the vessel referred to in sub-section (2) and if
it is found on such ins pection that the vessel is an unsafe vessel or has failed to 
comply with the provisions of this Act, report it to the principal officer. 
(4) On receipt of report under sub-section (3), the principal officer may by
order, invoke such control measures as may be necessary, till such time the vessel 
complies with the provisions of this Act or may allow such vessel to proceed to 
sea on such conditions as deemed fit, if it does not pose a risk to safety of life 
onboard or at sea, or an unreasonable threat of harm to the environment. 
(5) Control measures under sub-section (4) may include—
(a) denial of entry into port;
(b) expanded inspection;
(c) delaying the vessel;
(d) stoppage of operations or restriction of operations including
movement within the port; 
(e) requirement of any rectification of deficiencies within the specified
period; 
(f) detention of vessel;
(g) expulsion of the vessel from port or place; or
(h) such other measures as may be prescribed.

113 
(6) The master or owner of the vessel may, within seven days from the
receipt of the order issued under sub -section ( 4), prefer an appeal before the 
Director-General who may retain or modify the control measures or order release 
of the vessel subject to such conditions as he may deem fit. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “uns afe vessel” means a 
vessel, including an unseaworthy vessel, which— 
(a) poses a risk to safety of life; or
(b) poses an unreasonable threat of harm to environment by reason of
its safe manning, hull, machinery, equipment, training and working 
conditions of seafarers or operational safety being substantially below the 
required standards; or 
(c) fails to comply with such other requirements as may be prescribed.
308. (1) When a vessel is detained under this Act, the owner of a vessel shall
be liable to pay to  the Central Government the costs incidental to the detention 
and survey of the vessel, as may be determined by the Director-General, and the 
vessel shall not be released until such costs are paid and faults are rectified. 
(2) The form and manner of determination of claims for costs of detention
under sub-section (1) and compensation or damages for detention of a vessel shall 
be such as may be prescribed.  
309. (1) On receipt of information from the Government of any State which
is a party to any conv ention under this Act, that any vessel other than an Indian 
vessel within the territorial waters of India has contravened the provisions of such 
convention, the Central Government may detain the vessel for such period and 
subject to such conditions as may be deemed necessary. 
(2) When a vessel other than an Indian vessel is detained under this Act, a
copy of the order for the provisional detention of the vessel shall forthwith be 
served on the ambassador of the State to which the vessel belongs at or nearest to 
the port in which such vessel is detained. 
310. (1) The Director-General shall,—
(a) ensure that the obligations under the conventions are discharged
by the ports; 
(b) supervise, monitor and ensure that such obligations are effectively
discharged by the ports. 
(2) The Director -General may call for such information and pass such
directions as he may deem fit, for the discharge of obligations by the ports. 
311. (1) The Central Government may give such directions in writing, as it
deems appropriate, to a port authority or State Maritime Board or any other 
authority or agency to render services or assistance or take measures in respect of 
any abandoned vessel which is abandoned on or near the coast of India or within 
the coastal waters. 
(2) The directions given under sub-section (1) shall be aimed at ensuring
safety, security, preventing the abandoned vessel from posing a threat to life or 
property or environment, including protection of India’s coastline or related 
interests from pollution or threat of pollution arising out of the abandoned vessel. 
(3) Any costs or expenses incurred by the Central Government or any
authority or agency, for taking any measures in respect of an abandoned vessel 
under sub-section (1), shall constitute a debt due to the Central Government and 
may be recovered from the proceeds received from the sale of the vessel or its 
cargo. 
Costs of 
detention and 
damages. 
Procedure for 
detention of 
vessel other than 
Indian vessel. 
Obligations of 
ports under 
conventions and 
monitoring 
thereof by 
Director-General. 
Power of 
Central 
Government in 
respect of 
abandoned 
vessels. 

114 
Power to cancel, 
suspend, etc., 
certificate of 
seafarers. 
Re-hearing. 
Maintenance of 
insurance or 
such other 
financial 
security. 
Use and 
maintenance of 
electronic 
records.  
(4) The procedure for reimbursement of costs or expenses, including the
manner of determination of the rates for services rendered, to the authority or 
agency complying with the directions of the Central Government under 
sub-section (1), shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Admiralty (Jurisdiction and
Settlement of Maritime Claims) Act, 2017, the debt due to the Central Government 
under sub-section (3), shall be a charge on the vessel and shall have first priority 
after the following maritime liens—  
(a) claims for wages and other sums due to the master, officers and
other members of the vessel’s complement in respect of their employment 
on the vessel, including costs of repatriation and social insurance 
contributions payable on their behalf; 
(b) claims in respect of loss of life or personal injury occurring,
whether on land or on water, in direct connection with the operation of the vessel. 
312. The Central Government may, by order, cancel or su spend any
certificate granted under this Act to any seafarer for any specified period,— 
(a) if an inquiry report or investigation report reveals that the seafarer
is incompetent or is guilty of misconduct; or 
(b) in a case of collision, where the seafarer has failed to render
assistance; or 
(c) if the seafarer has been convicted of any offence under this Act or
any non-bailable offence has been committed by such seafarer under any 
other law for the time being in force in India or outside India; or  
(d) if any casualty has been caused by wrongful act or default of the
seafarer; or 
(e) if the seafarer to whom the certificate has been granted contravenes
any provisions of this Act: 
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless the pe rson 
concerned has been given an opportunity of being heard. 
313. Whenever an investigation or inquiry is made under this Act, the
Central Government may order the case to be re -heard either generally or as to 
any part thereof, and shall so order, if— 
(a) new and important evidence which could not be produced at the
time of investigation is discovered; or 
(b) for any other reason, there is in its opinion, a miscarriage of justice.
314. Without prejudice to the insurance or other financial security required
to be maintained under Chapters II, III and IV of Part IX, Part X and Chapter I 
of Part XII, every registered owner of an Indian vessel shall, for the purpose of 
covering his liabilit y under this Act, be required to compulsorily maintain 
adequate insurance coverage or such other financial security as may be 
prescribed. 
315. (1) Where any provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder
provide for— 
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any
office, authority, body or agency owned or controlled by the Government in 
a particular manner; 
(b) the issue or grant of any certificate, licence, permit, sanction,
approval or endorsement, by whatever name called, in a particular manner; or 
22 of 2017. 

115 
(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner,
then notwithstanding anything contained in such provision, such requirement shall be 
deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment is effected 
by means of such electronic form. 
(2) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of sub -section ( 1),
prescribe— 
(a) the manner and form in which such electronic forms and documents
shall be filed, created or issued; and 
(b) the manner or method of payment of any fee or charges for filing,
creation or issue of any electronic document under clause (a). 
(3) Any agreement, record, database, logbooks, record books and such other
documents required to be stored, maintained or updated by the Central Government 
or the Director-General or by any other person under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, may be maintained in electronic form. 
316. The Central Government, based  on  activities performed or  services 
provided by vessels, may by general or special order, classify the vessels into different 
categories. 
317. (1) The Central  Government,  in  such circumstances as it may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf,  require  every  service  provider  or  agent  in 
respect of any Indian vessel or other vessel operating in coastal waters in relation 
to import, export or domestic transportation, to specify in the Bill of Lading or 
any other transport document, all charges to be paid by an exporter, importer, 
consignor or consignee in India, subject to the terms and conditions for the 
specification of such charges and the issuance of the Bill of Lading or any other 
transport document, as may be specified in that notification: 
Provided that the charges to be paid by such exporter , 
importer, consignor 
or consignee shall include both fixed and conditional charges: 
Provided further that no service provider or agent shall levy any charges other 
than charges specified by him in the Bill of Lading or any other transport document. 
(2) If the service  provider  or  agent  fails  to  specify  the  charges unde r 
sub-section (1) or levies any charges other than the charges specified by him in 
the Bill of Lading or any other transport document, he shall be liable to penalty 
which may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(3) The authority for imposing the penalty under sub-section (2) shall be such 
officer as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 
(4) Any person aggrieved by the order of imposition of penalty under this 
section may prefer an appeal in  accordance  with  such  procedure as  may  be 
prescribed, before such officer as the Central Government may, by notification, 
specify: 
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed without giving 
the person a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
318. The Director-General shall  have the power to call for such 
information as may be required to ensure compliance with the provisions of this 
Act. 
319. (1) 
Without prejudice to any  other power  to make  rules contained 
elsewhere in this Act, the  Central Government  may  make  rules  generally  to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, an d without prejudic e to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
Classification of 
vessels.  
Transparency of 
charges. 
Power of 
Director-General 
to call for 
information. 
General power 
to make rules. 

116 
Provisions with 
respect to rules. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
(a) the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers under sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(b) the powers and functions of the senior radio surveyors and radio
inspectors under sub-section (2) of section 10; 
(c) regulatory and oversight functions of the body under sub-section (3)
of section 13; 
(d) other functions of the body under clause ( d) of sub-section (4) of
section 13; 
(e) the form and manner in which a person aggrieved ma y prefer an
appeal before the Director-General under sub-section (2) of section 282; 
(f) the manner of detention of vessel under sub-section (1) of section 304;
(g) other relevant requirements under sub-section (1) of section 307;
(h) such other measures which shall constitute control measures under
clause (h) of sub-section (5) of section 307; 
(i) such other requirements under the Explanation to section 307;
(j) the form and manner of determination of claims and compensation
or damages for detention of a vessel under sub-section (2) of section 308; 
(k) the procedure for reimbursement of costs or expenses, including
the manner of determination of the rates for services rendered to the 
authority or agency under sub-section (4) of section 311; 
(l) insurance coverage or other financial security to be maintained by
registered owner of an Indian vessel under section 314; 
(m) the manner and form of filing, creating or issuing electronic forms
and documents and the manner or method of payment of fee or charges for such 
filing, creating or issuing under clause (a) and clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section 315; 
(n) procedure for preferring an appeal under sub-section (4) of section 317;
(o) the form and manner of informing the Central Government of any
requirement or prohibition imposed or threatened to be imposed pursuant to the 
measures taken by any other country under sub-section (2) of section 323; and 
(p) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
320. (1) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official
Gazette. 
(2) In making a rule under this Act, the Central Government may direct that a
breach thereof shall be liable to penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, 
and if the breach is a continuing one, with further penalty which may extend to five 
thousand rupees for every day after the first day during which the breach continues. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions afore said, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi fication or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
321. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to 
be necessary, for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of a period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 

117 
44 of 1958. 
19 of 1838. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
322. (1) The Central Government may, if it thinks fit, constitute one or more
committees consisting of such number of persons as it may appoint thereto , 
representing the interests principally affected or having special knowledge of the 
subject-matter, for the purpose of advising it when considering the making or 
alteration of any rules or scales of fees under th is Act or for any other purpose 
connected with this Act.  
(2) There shall be paid to the members of any such committee such
travelling and other allowances as the Central Government may fix. 
(3) The c ommittees may be constituted under this section to advis e the
Central Government either generally as regards any rules or scales of fees or as 
regards any class or classes of rules or scales of fees in particular or for any other 
purpose connected with this Act. 
323.(1) The Central Government may, by order in w riting, specify that the 
provisions of this section shall apply to measures taken by any other country for 
regulating the terms and conditions upon which goods or passengers may be 
carried by sea, which constitute an infringment of the jurisdiction of Indi a, in so 
far as they apply to— 
(a) things done or to be done outside the territorial jurisdiction of that
country; and 
(b) persons carrying on lawful business in India.
(2) Where an order issued under sub-section (1) is in force, every person who
is subject to such measures taken by another country shall inform the Central 
Government of any requirement or prohibition imposed or threatened to be imposed 
on him pursuant to such measures in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “requirement” includes 
any requirement to submit any contract or other document for approval thereunder. 
(3) Where any information under sub-section (2) is received from any person,
or there are grounds to believe that such in formation is likely to be received, the 
Central Government may, by an order in writing, give to such person directions 
prohibiting compliance with any such measure as it considers necessary. 
(4) The Central Government may, by an order in writing, prohibit or restrict
any person from complying with the requirement to produce any commercial 
document or information compiled from commercial documents, to a court of 
another country, if it appears to the Central Government that such document is 
not within the ter ritorial jurisdiction of that country, and constitutes or may 
constitute an infringement of the jurisdiction of India. 
324. (1) The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (except Part XIV but not including
section 411A therein) and the Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,—
(a) any rule, regulation, bye -law, order, notification or exemption
made, issued or granted under any enactment hereby repealed shall, until 
revoked, have effect as if it had been made, issued or granted under the 
provisions of this Act;  
(b) any office established or created, officer or person appointed and
anybody elected or co nstituted under any enactment hereby repealed shall 
continue and shall be deemed to have been established, created, appointed, 
elected, or constituted under this Act;  
(c) any document referring to any enactment hereby repealed shall be
construed as referring to this Act or to the provision of this Act; 
(d) any fine levied under any enactment hereby repealed may be
recovered as if it had been levied under this Act; 
Power to 
constitute 
committees. 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
protect interest 
of Indian 
Shipping. 
Repeals and 
savings. 

118 
Amendment of 
Act 20 of 2021. 
Power of 
Director-General 
appointed under 
Merchant 
Shipping Act, 
2025 to issue
directions. 
(e) any offence committed under any enactment hereby repealed may
be prosecuted and punished as if it had been committed under this Act; 
(f) any vessel registered under the enactments hereby repealed shall be
deemed to have been registered under this Act; 
(g) any mortgage of vessels recorded in any register book maintained
at any port in India under any enactment hereby repealed shall be deemed 
to have been recorded in the register book un der the corresponding 
provision of this Act;  
(h) any licence, certificate of competency or service, certificate of
survey, A or B certificate, safety certificate, qualified safety certificate, 
safety equipment certificate, exemption certificate, internati onal or Indian 
load line certificate or any other certificate or document issued, made or 
granted under any enactment hereby repealed and in force at the 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been issued, made or 
granted under this Act and shal l, unless cancelled under this Act, continue 
in force until the date shown in the certificate or document;  
(i) any proceeding pending before any court under any enactment
hereby repealed may be tried or disposed of under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act;  
(j) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under
the provisions of any enactment hereby repealed shall continue to be 
proceeded with as if such inspection, investigation or inquiry is ordered to 
be done under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
(3) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses 
Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeals. 
        PART XVI 
AMENDMENT TO THE MARINE AIDS TO NAVIGATION ACT, 2021 
325. In the Marine Aids to Navigation Act, 2021, after section 48, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
10 of 1897. 
“48A. The Director-General appointed under the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 2025 may issue such directions as may be necessary, to 
the Director General appointed under this Act for the purposes 
of implementation of this Act.”. 
—————
 

A  
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to merchant shipping to ensure 
compliance with India’s obligation under the maritime treaties and 
international instruments to which India is a party and also to ensure the 
development of Indian shipping and efficient maintenance of Indian 
mercantile marine in a manner best suited to serve the national interest and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
———— 
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
563	36-*%(–34–27