1
THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (REMUNERATIVE SUPPORT
PRICES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board to fix
the remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits and vegetables
on annual and seasonal basis and timely intervention by the Government at the time
of steep fall in prices of such produce in the open market and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce (Remunerative Support Prices
and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural produce" includes wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton, oil
seeds, coarse grains like maize, millet, jowar, bajra, gram, soyabean, fruits and vegetables
Short title and
extent.
Bill No.  183 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
such as potato, onion, tomato, cauliflower, cabbage including such other agricultural
or horticultural produce which are used for human  consumption or for any medicinal
purposes;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State  Government
and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Board" means the Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board constituted
under section 3;
(d) "Government agency" includes any agency of the Government by whatever
name called or which receives grants from the Government and which is  engaged in
procurement, distribution and canalising agricultural produces; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months
from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board.
(2) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Ranchi in the State of Jharkhand.
(3) The Board shall consist of:—
(a) A Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson having relevant educational
qualifications and experience in field of agriculture, to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(b) one member from each zonal office of the Board;
(c) one member each to represent the Union Ministries dealing with Agriculture,
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Food Processing Industries and
Chemicals and Fertilisers;
(d) one member to represent the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
farmers and agricultural labourers, in rotation from different States; and
(f) four members of Parliament, of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses.
(4) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose off property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(5) The Board shall set up one zonal office each in the eastern, western, northern,
north eastern, central and southern parts of the country comprising of such States and
Union territories, as may be determined by the Board and each zonal office shall consist of
such number of members as may be prescribed.
(6) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and the manner of filling
vacancies and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions shall be such
as may be prescribed.
4. ( 1 ) The Board shall —
(i) fix and declare minimum remunerative support prices of agricultural produce
before every sowing season after examining the recommendations of all the zonal
offices:
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different produce and  for different
zones;
(ii) fix the issue prices of foodgrains for retail sale to consumers every year.
Constitution
of an
Agricultural
Produce Price
Fixation
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
40
45

3
(iii) perform its functions in close liaison with Government agencies,  institutions
including co-operative societies and such other authorities  concerned with the
procurement, supply, distribution, trade of agricultural  produce and avoid duplication
of efforts; and
(iv) give wide publicity to the remunerative prices fixed for agricultural  produce
through electronic and print media throughout the country.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of each zonal office of the Board to recommend to the  Board
the remunerative support prices of agricultural produce in respect of its jurisdiction.
(2) Every zonal office of the Board, before recommending the minimum support
remunerative prices of agricultural produce, shall take into account all relevant factors, but in
particular, the following, namely:—
(a) average capital investment made by farmers in growing the produce;
(b) average labour charges;
(c) interest on loans borrowed for growing the produce;
(d) premium for crop insurance, if any;
(e) maintenance cost of the land;
(f) expenditure on fertilizers, seeds and electricity, etc.;
(g) any concession, rebate or subsidy provided by Government in relation to
agricultural produce;
(h) prevailing open market price of each product;
(i) climatic conditions and incidence of natural calamities like floods, droughts,
hailstorms, cyclones and untimely rains; and
(j) average monthly household expenditure of an average farmer.
6. (1) In case any farmer fails to sell his produce in the open market at the desired
prices, the Central Government shall purchase his produce at the price fixed by the Board
through Government agencies.
(2) If there is a steep fall in the prices of agricultural produce in the open market, it shall
be the duty of the appropriate Government to intervene through its agencies in the market to
ensure that farmers shall get minimum support price of the produce and take such other
measures as it may deem necessary to handle the situation and protect the interests of the
farmers.
7. (1) If any farmer is not satisfied with the declaration of price fixed for any agricultural
produce, he may file an appeal to the Authority designated for the purpose by the Central
Government within thirty days for reviewing of such price.
(2) The designated Authority specified under sub-section (1), shall give its decision
within fifteen days from the date of filing of such appeal.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Function of
the zonal
office.
Government
agencies to
purchase
agricultural
produce.
Appeal to
Central
Government
regarding price
fixation.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
40

4
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country, the farmers and their families entirely depend on the crop they grow
and reap. The farmers always expect remunerative prices of their agricultural produce in
order to repay their loans which they borrowed for growing agricultural produce and to meet
social obligations and household expenditure. But unfortunately, it is an usual phenomenon
that in the immediate post-harvest period the prices of most of the agricultural produce
decline very sharply and farmers are left high and dry and at the mercy of unscrupulous
traders who exploit them to the maximum possible.
Similarly, it is now very common that whenever there is bumper crop of anything, be it
foodgrains or vegetables, the prices of such items fall very steeply. For instance when there
is bumper crop of any commodities, their prices fall to the extent that the growers have no
choice but to throw them on the roadsides and it has been noticed that the farmers sometimes
burn their sugarcanes on the fields. But even the Government does not come to their rescue.
Hence, there is an urgent need to provide that Government should intervene at such times to
protect the interests of the farmers.
The Union Ministry of the Agriculture and Farmers Welfare fixes the minimum support
prices of agricultural produce but generally such prices are not realistic ones and there has
always been discontentment amongst the farmers regarding such prices because they remain
far below the expectations of the farmers. It is, therefore, necessary to set up a statutory
autonomous Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board also representing farmers and
agricultural labourers to fix the remunerative prices for agricultural produce taking into
consideration all the aspects. It will also be mandatory for the Government to purchase
agricultural produce from the farmers through their agencies. It is felt that the guarantee of a
minimum assured price will further give the requisite boost to our agriculture sector and our
farmer will prosper which he really deserves.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
July 5, 2017.
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3) OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 7-9/2017-FES-ES dated 31 August, 2017 from Shri Radha Mohan
Singh, Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Agricultural Produce
(Remunerative Support Prices and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, 2017 by Shri Sunil Kumar
Singh, Member of Parliament, has recommended the consideration of the Bill under article
117(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Agricultural Produce Price Fixation
Board. It further provides for setting up of zonal offices. Clause 4 provides that the Board
shall give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the prices fixed. Clause 6
provides that the Central Government shall purchase agricultural produce at the prices fixed
by the Board. Clause 8 provides for payment of adequate funds to the Board for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
fifty crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board to fix the
remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits and vegetables on
annual and seasonal basis and timely intervention by the Government at the time
of steep fall in prices of such produce in the open market and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2088LS(S3)—23-10-2017.