10K SABRA 
. CORRIGENDA 
to 
I I I 
THE B.ANKn~ G LAWS CA.L'1Ei'JDMENX) BILL, h"<t'78.·· 
\' '. 
(lb'be/As in traduced in Ipk S;3.bha)l . 
1. Page 6, 'g$st line 3, in sert the! marginal ci tat1on,-
"10 of 11)49." 
2. Page 6, line 34,-" 
1Qr. "C 1)" ~ "(1)" 
3. Page 12, aeainst line 48, in the marginal ci tation,-
4. Page 13, line 14,-
:41 
fo r " se c t.j.on " re ad " se c tions " .. 4A. Page ,-,:r,- line 2" for ~gist"'3.tel ~ 'Hagi te"' 
5. Page 1f), line 3,- - .of 
f.Q:r.. H( 4) " ~ n( 2)'1 
,. Page 18,-
(1) aiainst line 5, losert tile marginal citat1on,-
"21 of 1976." 
(ii) against line 7, omit tl-}e marginal citation,-
"2 of 1976." 
7. Page 22, against l~e 38, insert the marginal citiation,-
"23 of 1965." 
8. Page 28, line 33,-
f.Q1: "it" ~ "its" 
9. Page 32, again st line 44, in the marginal ci te.tion,-
£Q.r. "1940" ~ "1949" 

2 
10. Page 38, l:1ne 11,-
!Q1: "se tcion " ~ "sa c tion " 
11. Page 43, line 27,~ 
fQr. "The c 1 aU se " ttaQ. "Thi scI aU se " 
12. Page 54, agad.nst line 11) omit the marginal'citation,-
" 1 of 1956." 
13. Page 55, against line 14, insert the marginal ci tation,-
"14 of 1947." 
-
14. Page 55, in the margina~ heading to section 45,-
fo r"re con s ti tu- " rs"ad "re con s ti tu tion II 
15. Page 60, against line 2 from bottom, insert the 
marginal citation,-
"1 of 1956." . 
1 &:. cPa~ ~, line 1;-
t 
ls2.L. "(x)" ma.d. 
17. Page 67, line 15, -
!9.r.. "succe ssi ve 
18. Page 67, line 19,-
for "from" ~ 
NEW DELHI, 
"(z)" 
se sS,~(;m" 
"form" 
December 12, 1978 . 
Agrabayana 28, 1900 ( Saka) 
.' 
~ "succe s siva se ssion s" 
• 

As INTRODUCBD IN LeI: SAaHA ON 
BIll No. III ollm 
TIlE BANKING LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL. 1978 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
P'RELIMINoUY 
CLAUSM 
1. Short title. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKERS' BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891 
2. Amendment of Act 18 of 1891. 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF hroIA ACT, 19M 
3. Amendment of section 45. 
4. Amendment of section 45 I. 
5. Insertion of new Chapter after Chapter IUB. 
6. Amendment of section 46B. 
7. Amendment of section 58B. 
8. Amendment of. section 5SE. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949 
9. Amendment of section 5. 
iO. Substitution of "corresponding new bank" for "corresponding. 
new bank constItuted under section 3 of the :Banking Com-
panies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 10'70". 
11. Change of name of "Agricultural Refinance Corporation". 
12. Amendment of. section 7. 
13. Amendment of section 8. 
14. Amendment of section lOB. 
15. Insertion of new section 10BB. 
16. Substitution of new section for section lOC. 
17. Substitution of new section for section 18. 
18. Amendment of section 19. 
19. Amendment of. section 20. 
20. Amendment of sectio'l 22. 

ii 
CLAUSES 
21. Amendment of sections 24, 34A and 36AD. 
22. Amendment of section 29. 
23. Amendment of section 35B . 
. ,> ~2" AIIleaclmen1 of section 36AB. 
25. Amendment of section 42. 
26. Amendment of. section 45. 
27. Amendment of section 45A. 
28. Amendment of section 45J. 
29. Amendment of section 458. 
30. Insertion of new Part IIIB. 
- 31. Amendment of section 46. 
32. Amendment of section 47. 
33. Amendment of section 51. 
34. Amendment of section 52. 
35. Amendment of section 56. 
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA Aer, 1955 
36. Insertion of. new section 3SA. 
37. Amendment of section 40. 
38. Amendment of section 42. 
39. Amendment of section 43. 
40. Amendment of section 49. 
41. Amendment of section 50. 
CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSmIARY ;BA1ID) .Acr,: 1_ 
42. Insertion of new section 3SA. 
43. Amendment of section 43. 
44. Amendment of section 44. 
45. Amendment of. section 53. 
46. Amendment of section 62. 
4'1. Amemimentofsection 63. 
CHAPTER VII 
AMENDMENTS TO THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CRIDrr GUARANTI& 
CORPORATION Acr, 1961 
48. Amendment of section 2. 
49. Amendment of section 6. 
SO. Amendment of section 11. 
51. Amendment of section 13. 
52. Amendment of section 32. 
53. Amendment of· section 50 . 
• 

iii 
CHAPTER VIII 
AIoaNDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFD OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1970 
tiUUSII 
54. Amendment of section 3. 
55. Insertion of new section 5A. 
56. Amendment of section 9. 
57. Amendment of section 10. 
58. Amendment of section 19. 
CHAPTER IX 
AMamMENTS TO THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1978 
59. Amendment of section 19. 
60. Amendment of section 20. 
61. Amendment of section 30. 

.'. Bill No. 183 of 1878 
THE BANKING LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
funhe?' to amend the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, the Rese"" 
Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation .Act, 1949, the State 
Bank of India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India {Subsidia.ry Banks) 
Act, 1959, the Deposit Insu'rance and OredVt Guarrantee Corporation 
Act, 1961, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Tran·<;fer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth YeQfl' of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PlmLIMINARY 
S 1. This Act may be called the Banking Laws (Aroendmlllt) Act, 1978. Shert 
title. 
10 
I 1 CHAPTER II 
AMBNDMBNTS TO THE BANKERS' BooKS EVIDENCB A~, 1891 
Z. In the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891,-
(a) in section 2,-
, ,. 1 
(i) for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
, (4) "legal proceeding" means,-
(i) any proceeding or inquiry in which evidence il 
or may be given i 
Amend~ 
men1,. 
at Act 
18 of 
1891. 

~r 
ot court 
to be eon-
.trUed 
to be order 
made by 
apecifled 
oflleer. 
Amend-
mentof 
Metlon 46. 
Amend_ 
1MDt.0f 
MC$lon 
4It. 
2 
(ii) an arbitration; and 
(iii) any investigation or inquiry under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, or under any other law for the 
time being in force for the collection of evidence, COD-
ducted by a police officer or by any other person (not S 
being a magistrate) authorised in this behalf by a malis-
trate or by any law for the time being in force;'; 
(ii) in clause (8). the following shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"and where the copy was obtained by a mechanical or 10 
other process which in itself ensured the accuracy of the copy. 
a further certificate to that effect, but where the book from 
which such copy was prepared has been destroyed in the 
usual course of the bank's business after the date on which 
the COpy had been so prepared, a further certificate to that IS 
effect"; 
(b) after section 7, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'S. In the application of sections 5, 6 and 7 to investigation or 
inquitjlreferred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (4) of section 2. 20 
the order of a Court or a Judge referred to in the said sections 
shall be' construed as referring to an order made by an officer' of 
a rank not lower than a Superintendent of Police as may be speci-
fied in this behalf by the appropriate Government. 
ExpZanation.-In this section, "appropriate Government" 25 
means the Government by which the police officer or any other 
person conducting the investigation or inquiry is employed.'. 
CHAPTER III 
AMmDMEN'l'S TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
2ofl"" 
3. In section 45 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (hereafter in 30 2 of 1934. 
this Chapter referred to as "the Reserve Bank Act"), after sub-section (2) 
and before the Explanation, the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
.. (3) If the Bank appoints the State Bank or any other Bank a. 
its agent, any payment required to be made into the Bank or any billa. 35 
hundis or other securities required to be delivered into the Bank, 
under any law or rule, ,regulation .or other instrument having the 
force of law, may be delivered to or paid into the agency bank.". 
4. In section 451 of the Reserve Bank Act,-
(i) for clause (bb), the follOWing clause shall.be 8ubstitutei, 40 
namely:-
'(bb) "deposit" includes and shall be deemed always to have 
included any receipt of money by way or deposit or loan or in any 
other form, but does not include,-
(i) amounts raised by way.of sUre capital; 45 
(ii) amounts contributed as capital by partners of a ftrm; 
. . 
I 

10 of 1'&4oS1. 
s 
8a of 1951. 
3 
(iii) amounts received from a scheduled bank or a c0-
operative bank or any other ba1\king company 81 tleftned in 
.' 'Iection 5 of the Banking Regulation Act" ,1949; 
(iv) any amount received from,-
(4) the Development Bank; 
(b) a State Financial Corporation eltabli&hed under 
the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951; 
(c) any financial institution specified in or under 
18 of 1964. 10 
section 6A of the Industrial Development Bank of India 
Act, 1964; or 
(d) ·any other financial institution that may be speci-
fied by the Bank in this behalf; 
(v) amounts received, in the ordinary eourse of business, 
by way of security deposit or dealership deposit; 
IS (vi) any amount received from an individual or a finn 
or an association of individuals not being a body corperate, 
registered under any enactment relating to money lending 
which is, for the time being in force in any State; and 
(vii) any amount received by way of subscriptions in 
20 r~ct of a conventional chit. 
E:rplanation.-"conventional chit" means a transaction, 
whether called a chit, chit fund, kuri or by any other name, 
by or under which a foreman en ters into an agreement with a 
specified number of subscribers that everyone of them .hall 
.1S subscribe a certain sum of money in periodical instalments 
over a definite period and everyone of such subscribers shall, 
in turn, as determined by lot or by auction or by tender or 
in such other manner as may De provided for in the chit 
agreement, be entitled to the prize amount, that is to say, the 
30 amount arrived at by deduction from 'out of the total amount 
subscribed at each instalment by all subscribers, the amount 
:which the subscriber has agreed to forego, and which is set 
apart under the chit agreement for payment of commission 
charged by the foreman or for rateable distribution among 
35 the subscribers in terms of the chit agreement or for ,both;'; 
(ii) in clause (d), the words ", of which the capital subscribed 
by its partners exceeds one lakh of rupees" shall be omitted; 
(iii) in clause (e), lor the words "co-operative society or ftrm", 
the words "or co-operative society" shall be substituted. 
40 5. After Chapter IlIB of the Reserve Bank Act, the following Chapter 
45 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"CHAPTER IIlC 
PRoHIBITION OF ACCEPTANCE OF DEPOSITS BY UNINCORPORATED BODIES 
45R. The words and expressions used in this Chapter and. defined 
. in Chapter IIIB shall have the meaninss respectively assigped to them 
therein. . 
Intertion 
of new 
ChaPter 
after 
Chapter 
IIIB. 
Interpre-
tation . 

Deposits 
not to 
be 
accepted 
ih certain 
cases. 
Power 
to issue 
search-
WIIIrrants. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectiOn 
f6D. 
4 
455. (1) No person, being an individual or a firm or an wdncor-
porated 8SS(ICiation of individuals, shall, at any time, have deposit. 
from more than the nwnber of. depositors specified against each, in the 
table below:-
.\ .. 
(i) Individual 
(ii) Fill"m 
TABLE 
I .. f'· 
-Not more than ten deposi-
tors. 
-Not more than ten deposi-
tors ,per partner and not 
more than forty depositon 10 
in all. 
(iiO Association of individuals -Not more than ten deposi-
tors per indiviaual and 
not more than forty deposi-
tors in all. T S 
(~) Where at the commencement of the Banking Laws (Amend- ... 
ment) Act, 1978 the deposits held by any such person are not in 
accordance with sub-section (1), he shall repay such of the deposits ; 
as shall fall due for repayment immediately after the commencement 
of that Act so as to bring the number of depositors within tlie relative 20 
limit specified in that sub-section. 
Explanation.-Where a deposit has been made by two or more 
persons, it shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to have It? 
been made by as many depositors as there aife number of persons '1 
making such deposit. 25 
45T. (1) Any court having jurisdiction to issue a search-warrant 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 may, on an application 2 of 1874:. 
by an .Dfficer of the Bank or of the State Government authorised in 
this behalf stating his belief that certain documents relating to accept-
ance ~f deposits in contravention of the provisions of section 458 are 30 
secreted in any place within the local limits of the jurisdiction of luch 
court, issue a warrant to search for such documents. 
·(2) Such warrant shall be executed in the same way and shall 
hav,", the same effect as a search-warrant issued under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973.". 3S 2 of 1"'. 
6. In section 46B of the Reserve. Bank Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2)-
(a) for the word "five", the word "seven" shallQe subati-
tuted; 
(b) the provisos shall be omitted; 40 
(ii) after SUb-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) Loans and advances may be made under sub-section 
(2) only for the purpose of enabling a State Co-operatlve 
Bank' or a Regional Rural Bank,- 45 

5 
10 
20 
30 
3S 
45 
~ 
(a) to pay any dues it) . ' and promissory notes ~ect of bIlls of exchangt B ok pure ased or rediscounted by tbe 
a d under claUS«! (2) of section 17 or loans and advances 
sr:. e t~/tf by th~ Bank under clauses (3B) and (4) of 
Ion I or agrIcultural operations; &r 
. (b) to make. to central co-operative banks or pri 
agncult~riJl credIt societies loans or advances repayab~ 
the expIry of fixed periods not being less than fifteen months 
and not exceeding seven years from the date of making 
such loan or advance, by way of reimbursement of loans 
and ad~ances made by such co-Operative banks or societies 
for agrIcultural operations or reimbursement of loans or 
advances granted for agricultural operations which have 
been con~erted into .loans or advances repayable on expiry of 
fixe~ penods not bemg less than fifteeri monthS and not ex-
ceedmg seven years from the date of conversion. 
(4) Loans and advances may not be made under sub-section 
(2) . unless the Bank fonns an opinion, that owing to drought, 
i' farrune or other natural calamities or owing to military opera-
tions ,or enemy actions-
'(a) the State co-operative bank or the Regional Rural 
Bank is unable to pay the said dues in time; or 
(b) making of the said loans or advances to central co-
operative banks or primary agricultural credit societies it 
rendered necessary. 
(5) No loan or advance shall be made under sub-section 
(2) unless such loan or advance is fully guaranteoo. as to the 
repayment of the principal and payment of interest-
. (4) in the case of loans and advances to State co-
operative banks, by the State Government; and 
(b) in the case of loans and advan<:es to Regional 
Rural Banks by the Sponsor Bank.". 
''f~ 'In section 58B of the Reserve Bank Act, after sub-seation (5) I the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(SA) If any person contravenes any provision of section 455, ~e 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years, ,or with fine which may eXltend to twice the aJ'niltUnt of 
deposit received by such person in coIlitraventionof that section or 
rupees two thousand, whichever is more, or with both.". 
"Provided that in respect of any offence punishable under sub-
section (SA) of section 58B, a complaint in wrtting may also be ftled 
by an officer of the State Government, generally or specially autho-
rised in writing in this behalf by the State GoverDDlent,". 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
58B. 

Amend-
mentof 
aeetlon 5. 
6 
CHAPI'ER IV 
9. In the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as "the Banking Regulation Act"), in section 5,-
!t .. , . 
(i) for clause (til), the following clauses shall be substi!hlted, S 
namely:-
('\ 
, (a) "approved securities" means,-
(i) securities in which a trustee may invest money under 
clause (0), clause (b), clause (bb), clause (c) or clause Cd) 
of section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882; 102 of 1882. 
(ii) such of the securities authorised by the Central Gov-
ernment under clause (f) of section 20 of the Indian Trusts 
Act, 1882, 86 may be prescribed; 
(oa) "Agricultural Refinance and DevelQPIJlent Corporation" 
means the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation IS 
constituted under section 3 of the Agricultural Refinance and 
Development Corporation Act, 1963;'; 
(n) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
naMely: - . 
'(dd) "corresponding new bank" means a corresponding new 20 
bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Ac-
quisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970;'; 
(iii) clause (gg) shall be re-Iettered as clause (gb), and before 
clause (gb) as 80 re-Iettered, the follawing clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 2S 
'(ga) "Industrial Development Bank of India" means the In-
dustrial Development Bank of India constituted unde.t1 section 3 
2 of 1882. 
10 of 1963. 
5 of 1970. 
of the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964;'; 18 of 1964. 
, .,' (iv) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, 
.. ,"" Jlamely:- 30 
'(k) "Regional Rural Bank" means a Regional Rural Bank 
established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 
1976;'; 
(v) for clause (1), the following clause shaU be substituted, 
namely:- 35 
'(1) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India consti-
tuted 'under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;'; 
(vi) clause (nb) and clause (nc) shall be re-Iettered as clause 
(nc) and clause (nd) respectively, and before clause (nc) as 80-
re-lettered, the following clauSe shall be inserted, namely:- 40 
'(nb) "State Bank of India'" means the State Bank of India 
constituted under seCtion 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955;'. 
21 of 1976. 
2 of 1934. 
230t 1955. 

5 of 1970. 
7 
10. In the Banking Regulation Act, for the words figures and brackets 
"corresponding new bank constituted under sectio~ 3 of the . Banking 
Companlies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970", 
wherever they OCCur, except in section 51, the words "corresponding new 
5 bank" shall be substituted. 
11. In the Banking Regulation Act, for the words "Agri~tural 
Refinance CorporatiQl'l", wherever 'they occur, the words "Agricultural 
Refinance and Development Corporation" shall be substituted. 
, 
12. In section 7 of the Banking Regul8ition Act, in sub--section (1), after 
10 the words "shall use as part of its name", the words "or in connection 
with its business" shall be inserted. 
IS 
20 
2.S 
30 
13. In section 8 of the Banking Regulation Act, for the proviso, the fol-
lowing proviso shall be sub$tUuted, namely:-
"Provided that this section shall not apply tQ any such business. 
as is specified in pursuance of clause (0) of sub--section (1) of section 
6.". 
14. In section lOB of the Banking Regulation Act, in sub-section (1),-
(i) for the words "shall have a chairman of its Board of Direc-
tors", the words "shall have one of its directors as chairman of its 
Board of Directors" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be substi-
tuted, namely: - ' 
"Provided further that nothing in /this sub-section shall apply 
to a banking company until the expiry of a period of three months 
from the date on which the aggregate of the outstanding deposits 
of such banking company becomes, at any time after the com-
mencement 01 the Act aforesaid, 'ten crores of rupees or more, and 
where the provisions of rt:his sub-section have become applicable 
to a banking company, such provisions shall continue to apply to 
such banking company, notwithstanding that the aggregate of 
the outstanding deposits of such ban1dng company has, at any 
time thereafter, fallen beJow ten crores of rupees."; 
(iii) in sub-section (5), 'the words "but shall continue in o1ft.ce 
until his successor assumes office" shall be omitted; 
Substitu-
tion of 
"corres-
ponding 
new 
bank" for 
"corres_ 
ponding, 
new 
bank 
consti-
tuted 
under 
section 3 
at the 
Banking 
Companies 
(AcquUi-
tion and 
Transfer 
of Under-
takings) 
Act, 1970". 
Change of 
nameot 
"Agri-
cultural 
Refi-
nance Cor-
poration" • 
Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 8, 
Amend-
mertt of 
section· 
lOB. 

I~er.tlon 
of new 
section 
10BB. 
Power of 
Reserve 
Bank to 
appolDt 
wt.ole-
time 
chairman 
of. 
banJdn« 
eompany. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
eection 
for 
...... lon 
loC. 
ChairJDan 
and 
certai ... 
directors 
not to be 
required 
to hold 
qualifIca-
tion 
shares. 
Substi-
tution of 
new 
section 
for 
lection 18. 
Cuh 
reserve. 
8 
(iv) after sub-seation (5), the following sub-~ction shall ~ :In-
serted, namely:-
"(&A;) A chail1nan whose u,m of office has come to ,an~, 
either by reason of his rEsignation or by reUQP. of expiry pfJbe 
period of his office;' shall, subjec't to !the apprqval of the Reserve S 
Bank, continue in office until his successor assumes office.". 
15. After section lOB of the Banking Regulation Act, the following 
sectiQll shall be inserted, namely:-
"lOBB. (1) Where the office of the chairman of a banking company 
is vacant, the Reserve Bank may, if it is of opinion that the continua- 10 
tion of such vacancy is likely to adversely affect the interests of the 
banking company, appoint a person, eligible under sub-section (4) of 
section lOB to be so appointed, to be the chairman of the banking 
company and where the person so appointed is not a director :>f such 
banking company, he shall, so long as he holds such :lppointment, be IS 
deemed to be a director of the banking company. 
(2) The chairman so appointed by the Reserve Bank shall be in 
Ithe whole-time employment of the bankli,ng company and shall hold 
ofBee for sucl\"period not exceeding three years, as the ReserVe Bank 
may specify, b~t shall, svbjectto the other provisions of this' Act,be 20 
eligible for reappointmel'l't. 
(3) The chairman so appointed by the Reserve Bank shall draw 
hqn 'the banking company such pay and allowances as the Reserve 
Bank may determine and shall be removed from office only b'y the 
Reserve Bank :l 5 
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions ,pf 
section lOB shall, as far as may be, apply to the chairman appointed 
by the Reserve Bank under sub·section (1) as they apply to a chair-
man appointed by the ba1lking company.". 
16. For section .10C of the Banking Regulation Act, the following sec' 30 
tion shall be s~tituted, namely:-
"lOC. A chairman Of a banking company (by whomsoev~r ap-
pointed) and a director of a banking company (appointed by the 
Reserve Bank under sectioo lOA) shall Ddt be required· to hold quali-
fication shares in the banking company.... 35 
. 11. For sec~ion 18 of the Banking Reg\llation Act,· the foll,o;Wing section 
shall be substituted, namely:-
'18. Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank, shall 
mai~ in India by way of cslh reserve wiltb' ,itself or by way of 
balance in a current aQtount with the Reserve Bank, or by way of net 40 

26 of 1881. 
s 
9 
b411ance in current accounts ex in one ()r more of the said three ways, 
a sum equivalent to at least three per cent. of the total of its demand 
and time liabilities in India and shall submit to >the Reserve Bank 
before the fifteenth day of every month a return showing the amount 
so held on Friday of each week of the preceding month with parti-
culars of its demand and time liabilities in India on each such FrIday, 
or if any such Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instru-
ments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the preceding working day. 
Explana:i<>n.-In this section, and in section 24.-
JO (a) "liabilities in India" shall not include-
2.0 
(i) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit 
balance in the profit and loss account of the banking company; 
(ii) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from 
the Industrial Development Bank of !ndia or frmn the Agri-
cultural Refinance and Development Corporation; 
(b) the aggregate of liahilities of a banking company to the 
Sltate Bank of India, a subsidiary bank, a corresponding new 
bank or a Regional Rural Bank or another banking company or 
a co-operative bank or any other financial institution notified by 
the Central Government in this behalf, shall be reduced by the 
aggregate of. the liabilities of all such banks and institutions to 
the banking company; 
(c) "net balance in current accounts" shall, in relation to a 
banking company, mean the excess, if any, of the aggregate of the 
credit balances in current account maintained by tha1 banking 
company wi th the State Bank of Inrlia or a 9ubs'idiary bank or a 
corresponding new bank over the aggregate cd the credit balances 
in current accoun't held by the z;aid banks with such banking 
company.'. 
30 18. In section 19 of the Banking Re~lation Act, for sub-section (1), 
the following sub-section shall be substItuted, namely:-
35 
U (1) A banking company shall not form any suibsidiary company 
except a subsidiary company fonned fOIl' one or more of the following 
purposes, namely:·-
(a) the undertaking of any' business which, under sub..gec-
tion (1) of !lection 6, it is pennissible for a banking comprmy to 
undertake, or 
(b) with the previoUs permission in writing of the Reserve 
Bank, the carryjng on of the business of banking exclusively out-
side India, or 
(c) fQf undertaking such other b~cQness, which the Reserve 
Bank may with the prior approval of the Central Government. 
consider t~ be conducive to the spread of banking in India or to 
be otherwise useful or necessary in the public interest. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 19. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 20. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 22. 
Amend-
ment ·of 
sections 24. 
34Aand 
36AD. 
10 
Exp14naibiot1..-For the purposes of section 8, a banking company 
shall not be deemed, by reason of its forming or having a subsidiary 
company, to be engaged indirectly in the business carried on by 
8uchsubsidiary company.". 
1,. In section 20 of the Banking Regulation Act, in sub-section (1), in S 
.clause (b), for sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
.. (iii) any company (not being a subsidiary of the banking com-
pany or a company registered under section 25 of the Companies 
Act, 1956 or a Government company) Of which or the subsidiary or 10 1 of 1956. 
the holding company of which any of the directors of the banking 
company is a director, managing agent, manager, employee or gua-
rantor or in which he holds substantial interest, or". 
ZO. In section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, in sub-section (.l) ,-
(i) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, 15 
namely:-
.. (bl) that the general character of the proposed manage-
ment of the company will not be prejudicial to the public inte-
rest or the interests of its depositors; 
(b2) that the company has adequate capital structure and 20 
earning prospects; 
(b3) that the public interest will be served by the grant of 
a licence to the company to carry on banking business in India;"; 
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 2S 
"(d) any other condition, the fulfilment of which would, in 
the opinion of the Reserve Bank, be necessary to ensure that 
the carrying on of banking business in India by the company will 
not be prejudicial to the public interest or the interests of the 
depositors.". 30 
21. In the Banking Regulation Act,-
(1) in section 24,-
(a.) in sub-section (1), for the words "time and demand liabili-
ties", the words "demand and time liabilities" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2A) ,-
(i) in clause (a), after the figures and words 1125 per cent.", 
the words and figures ", or such other percentage not exceeding 
40 per cent. as the ReserVe Bank may, by notification in the 
3S 
Official Gazette, specify," shall be inserted; 40 
(ii) for, clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
II (b) in computing the amount for the purposes of clause 
(4),-
(i) the deposit required under sub-section (2) of 45 
section 11 to be made with the Reserve Bank by a bank-
ing company incorporated outside Indiaj 

2 of 1934. 
21 of 1976. 
26 of 1881. 
5 
10 
11 
(ill) any cash or balances maintained in India by • 
banking company other than a: scheduled bank with 
itself or with the Reserve Bank or by way of net balance 
in current account in excess of the aggregate of the 
cash or balance or net balance required to be maintained 
under section 18; 
(iii) any balances maintained by a scW;duled bank 
with the Reserve Bank in eJreess of the balance required 
to be maintained by it under section 42 Qf the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(iv) the net balance in current accounts maintained 
in India by a scheduled bank; 
(v) any balances maintained by a Region81 Raral 
Bank in call or fixed deposit with its Sponsor Bank, 
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India· .. · , , 
(c) in sub-section (2B) , the words and figures "established 
under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976" !\haU be 
omitted; 
(d) in sUb-section (3),-
20 (i) for the words "time and demand liabilities", the words 
"demand and time liabilities" shall be substituted; and . 
2S 
'}o 
35 
40 
45 
(ii) the words and figures "under the Negotiable' Instru-
ments Act, 1881," shall be omitted; 
(e) after sub-section (3), the follOWing sub-sections shall be 
inserted. namely:-
• (4) (a) If on any Friday during a month or, if such Friday 
is a public holiday, on the preceding working day. the amount 
maintained by a banking company at the close of business on 
that day falls below the minimum prescribed by or under clause 
(a) of sub-section (2A), such banking company shall .. be liable 
to pay to the Reserve Bank in respect of that day's I default, 
penal interest for that day at the rate of three pel' cent. per 
annum above the bank rate on the amount by which the amount 
actually maintained falls short of the prescribed minimum on 
that day. 
(b) If the default occurs again on the next succee4ini Fri-
day or, if such Friday is a public holiday, on the precediIij( 
working day, and continues on succeeding Fridays or preceding 
working days, as the case may be, the rate oi penal· interest 
shall be increased to a rate of five per cent. above the bank rate 
on each such shortfall in respect of that Friday and each 
succeeding Friday or preceding working day, if such Friday is 
a public hoTIday.on which the default continues. 
(5) (a) Without prejudice to the provisiOns of sub-section 
(3), the Reserve Bank may require a banking com~any ~o fu~­
nish to it a return in the form and manner specified by It 

showing particulars of its assets maintain~ in accordance with 
this section and its demand and time liabilities in India, as at the 
close of business on each day during a month. 
(b) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (4), 
00 the .taiJ.ure of a ban&ing company to maintain as on any day, 5 
the amount so required to be mamtamed by or under sub-sect1on 
(2A) the .Reserve Bank may, m respect 01 such de~u1t, requll'e 
the banking company to pay penal interest for that day as pro-
vided in clause ('11) of sub-section (4) and 1f the default cont1-
nues on the next succeeding working day. the penal interest 10 
may be increased as provided in clause (b) of sub-section (4) 
for the concemed days. 
(6) (a) The penalty payable under SUb-section (4) and sub-
section (5) shall be paid within a period of fourteen days from 
the date on which a notice issued by the Reserve Bank demand- J 5 
ing payment of, the same is served on the banking company and 
in the event of failure of the banking company to pay the same 
within such period, the penalty may be lev!ed by a direction of 
the principal civil court having jurisdiction in the area where 
an office of the default.ng banking company is situated, such 2 
direction to be made only upon an application made by the 0 
Reserve Bank in this behalf to the court. 
(b) When the court. makes a direction under clause (a), 
it shall issue a certificate specifying the sum payable by the 
banking company and every such certificate shall be enforceable 25 
in the same manner as if. it were a decree made by the court 
in a suit. . 
(7) When under the provisions of clause (b) of su~section 
(4) penal interest at the increased rate of five per cent. above 
the bank rate has become payable by a banking company, if 30 
thereafter the amount required to be maintained on the next 
succeeding Friday, or if such Friday is a public holiday, the next 
preceding working day, is still below the prescribed minimum. 
every director, manager or secretary of the banking company, 
who is knowingly and wilfully a party to the default, shall be 3S 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
and with a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
for each subsequent Friday or the preceding working day, as the 
case may be, on whreh the default continues. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if 40 
the Reserve Bank is satisfied, on an application in writing by the 
defaulting banking company. that the banking company had 
sufficient cause for its failure to· comply with the provisions of 
tub-section (2A) , the Reserve Bank may not demand the pay-
ment of. the penal interest. 
~lanation.-ln this section. the expressjon "public holiday" 
means a day which is a public holiday under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881.'; 
45 
(2) in sub-section (3) of section 34A and in sub-section (3) of 
section 36AD, the words and fi~res "established under section 3 of 50 
24 of 1881. 
the Regional Rural Banks Act. 1976" shall be omitted 21 of 1976. 

lallllll. 
10119l5e. 
13 
. a. la aectiOD 28 of the Banking Regii]atton Ad, after sub-section 
(3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-- Amend-
ment of 
section 
21. 
.1 '1" "(3~ Notwttbatandiltg anything to the GOIltrary contained in 
';" " .. BIlP a,action ("'~ of _tion 210 of the Companies Act ·1956 the 
::5 fI18riod to which tile .profit ad leas account relates ahell in the' case 
Of a banking company, be the period ending with the iast working 
day of the, year immediately preceding the year in which the 
.nual g~al mee~g is . held.". 
(' d 1 
10 
IS 
20 
23. In section 35B of the Banking Regulation Act,-
Amend-
;(t) in su.~section (1) ,. in clause (a), after the words Clany ment of 
p.roviIio~,relating· to", the words "the maximum permissible num- aection 
her ,afcUrectors, or" shall be inserted; 3GB. 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words and figures ('proVisions 
of section 310", the words and figures "provisions o,f sections 269, 
310" shall be substituted; 
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
Mtlerted', namely:-
.. (8#1) Nothinr containtRi in section 198 of the Companies 
Act, 1956 shall apply to a banking company and the provisions 
er sub-section (1) Gtsection • and of Hection 387 of that Act 
shall, in so far as' they are applicable to a banking c01D@&DY, 
have effect as if no reference to section 198 aforesaid had been 
!!lade in' the said provisions. It. 
24. In:aeotion 3MB of, the Banking Regulation Act, in sub-section 
2S the provis~shall be omitted. 
<n , Amea4,,, 
m_ at.,~: 
sec:tiIIW :'. 
HAB. 
"I •. tn sec'tion 42 o~ the Banking. Regulation Act,-
'.(i) for the words and figures "sections 460, 464 and 465", the 
word and figures "section 460" shall be substitute?; 
,,' '; ,(ii) , the words "or with the appointment of a committee of 
30 T, I "inspection" shall be omitted. 
3S : .. 
26. In section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
(a) in sub-section (5), ill clause (i) ,--
(i) in the ftrst proViSo; for the words "as ate applicable": in 
the two places where they occur, the words "as arc, at the time 
of suCh pay~ent 01' grant, applicable" shall be substituted; 
(ii) atter the' second proViso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
Amend-
ment of 
sediea& 
4" 
"Provided also that any sl.U:h doubt or d,iiference shall be 
referred to the Reserve Bank before the expiry of a period 
of three years. from the date of the payment or grant referred 
to in the first proviso·;"; 

Amend-
mf!ll1tof 
st'ction 
45A. 
Amend-
mc;tlt of 
section 
45J. 
.AaJend-
melbt of 
aectJen 
468. 
Insertion 
of new 
Part fiIB. 
Power 
of Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
to make 
rules far 
the pre-
aervatlon 
of re-
corda. 
14 
(b) in sub-section (8), the following shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"including the trustees or other persons managing, or con-
nected in any other manner with, any provident fund or other 
fund maintained by any such company or the transferee bank"; S 
(c) in sub-section (9), for the words "On and from such date 
as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf", the 
words "On and from the date of the coming into operation of the 
scheme" shall be substituted; 
(d) in sub-section (15), for the words and figures "any other 1'0 
banking institution notified by the Central Government under sec-
tion 51", the words "a subsidiary bank or a corresponding new 
bank" shall be substituted; 
(e) after sub-section (15), the following Expl~tion shall be 
inserted, namely:- 'S 
"Erplanation.-References in this secti'on to the terms and 
conditions of service of an employee shall not be construed u 
extending to) the rank and rstatus of such employees.". 
2'1. In section 45A of the Banking Regulation Act, for the fli1JN 
"1898", the figures "1973" shall be substituted. 
28. In section 45J of the Banking Regulation Act, for the ftlUl'll 
"1'898,", wherever they occur, the figures "1973," shall be substit':lted. 
29. In section 455 of the Banking Regulation Act, for the woro. 
20 
"Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magistrate", wherever 
they occur the words "Chief Metropolitan MagiStrate or the Chief Judicial 25 
Magistrate shall be substituted. 
30. After section 45X of the Banking Regulation Act, the following 
Part shall be inserted, namely:-
"PART lIIB 
PRovISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN OPBRATIONS or BANKING COMPANIIB 
45Y. The Central Government may, a1Iter consultation with the 
Reserve Bank and by notification in the OffiCial Gazette, make rules 
specifying the periods for which-
(a) a banking company shall preserve its books, accounts 
and other documents; and 
(b) a banking company shall preserve and keep with ltAlf 
different instruments paid by it. 
30 
35 

s 
10 
IS 
ez. (1) Where a banking company is required by its 
customer to return to him a paid instrument before the expiry of 
the period specift.ed by rules made under section 45Y, the banking 
eompany shan not return the instrument except after makjing and 
keeping in its possession true copies of all relevant parts of such 
instrument, such copies being made by mechanical processes which 
in themselves ensure the accuracy of the copy. 
(Z) The banking company shall be entitled to recover from the 
lh customer the cost Of making such copies of the instrument. 
Expla.nation.-In this section, "customer" includes a Govern-
ment department and a corporation incorporated by or under any 
law. 
Retum 
of paid. 
instru.;. 
menta 1;0-
custo-
mers. 
45ZA. (1) Where a deposit is held by a banking company to the 
credit of oo.e or more persons, the depositor or, as the case may be, 
15" all the depositors together, may nOminate, in the prescribed manner, 
one person to whom in the event of the death of the sole depos:tor 
·or the death of all the depositors, the amount of deposit may be 
returned by the banking ·company. 
Payment 
of depo-
sitors' 
money. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
45 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force or in any disposition, whether testamentary or 
otherwise, in respect of such depOsit, where a nomination made in 
the prescribed manner purports to confer on any person the right 
to receive the amount of deposit from the banking company, the 
nominee shall on the death of the sole depositor or, as the case may 
be, on the death of all the depositors, become entitled to all the rights 
of the sole depositor or, as the caSe may be, of the depositors, in re-
-- . lation :to such deposit to the exclusion of all other persons, unless 
the nomination is varied or cancelled in the prescribed manner. 
(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the 
depositor making the nomination to appoint in the prescribed 
manner any person to receive the amount of deposit in the event 
. Of his death during the minority of the nominee. 
(4) Payment by a banking company in accordance with the 
provisions of this section shall constitute a full discharge to the 
banking company of its liability in respect of the deposit: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect 
the right or claim which any person may have against the person 
to whom any payment is made under this section. 
45ZB. No notice of the claim of any person, other than the per-
sOn ar persons in whose name a deposit is held by a banking 
~ompany, shall be receivable by the banking company, nor shall 
_ ~e banking company be bound by any such notice even though 
'~sly given to it: 
. Provided that where any decree, order, certificate or other 
authority from a court of competent jurisdiction relating to such 
deposit is produced before a banking company, the banking com-
.' ,pany shall take ~e note of such decree, order, certificate or other 
authority. 
45ZC. (1) Where any person leaves any article in safe custody 
NotiCe 
of claim 
of other 
persons 
regardine 
deposits 
not re-
ceivable. 
50 1 Wttha banking company, such person may nominate, in the pres-
. ,crib!ec!' manner, one person to whom, in the event CYf the death of 
Return 
of arti-
cleskept 
In safe \ 

Notice 
of claims 
of other 
persons 
regarding 
articles 
not re-
ceivable. 
Release 
of COD-
tent. of 
safety 
lockers. 
16 
the person leaving the artiic1$: 4n sale cus~, suc;h ~ may be 
returned by the banking company. 
(4~ Where the nGlllinee .is. ,a mUlQl', it :sMHbe ~w~6tr the 
person making thenoJlllitl,aUon to appoint in t.be prescribe4 JMIUler 
any per.son to r.ectnV8 the· ~le ~posiW i.o ~ e"{ent qf ... death ~ 
dur~ the minotity .Qf the nQ~ett. 1 
(3) The bankillg ·.company .sball, bellore T'etuI'Dbl •. a" 'deles 
under this section to the noro,inee or the ,PeI'SQ~ apJil0inted ~der sub-
section (2), prepare, in ~uch manner ~ Dlay. b~ ~~~e4Qy' the 
Reserve Bank from time to time, an inventory of the ~~ articles 10 
which shall be signed by such nolJ1inee or person and shan deliver 
a copy of the inventory so prepared to such nominee or pel"IOli 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the ,time being in foree or bl any diapoait4on, whe~ taitamentary 
oro~ise, in respect of such vtiele, Wlbne ·a DamJAatloa made 15 
m tlw prescribed DUlIlQe.f ~pOl'ta t9 CODfer . on aD)' )MDi01l. the 
rigbtto recei~ Ute ar~le from ~ bsmkjQg ,»q>aQy, th~ .-omi-
~ litball, on the death ot the peNOn leaving ~ .ami~o il\,.ssfe 
custody, become entitled to th~ MUJal. at *be ,",Ucle to ·'~l_clu­
sion of all other persons, unless the nomination is varied 01' cancelled 20 
in the prescribed manner: 
Provided that notllmg con~e<;l in this section shall ~~t. the 
~igP.t «;u' claim which any J)9rBOD may have ~~t tbe.pellKlQ to 
whom the artiqle is ratumad in pu,r~uanOE) ot this su~n, 
45ZD. No notice of the claim ,of any ,pemOllotber than the lper- 25 
son or persons in whose name. any article is held br a ~jng 
COmpaDy in safe custody, sh~ be ~vable by ~he Nnking com-
'pany, nor shall the banking company be 'bound by anylBucb.Ddtice 
even though expJ'essly giyen to it: 
Prov.iQed that where any decree. order~ certificate or other 30 
authority . .from a court of competent juriadi~ relating to auch 
article is woduced before a b~ing comp~y', tAe ba~ng ~any 
shall take due note of such d~e.e,ordAr, ~tibte .or f:)U1er 
authority. 
45ZE. (1) Where an individuaJ is th~' sale hirer of a l~k~ from a 35 
banking company, whether such loc1~er is located in the ~afe de~t .,' 
vault crf such banking company ·or elsewhere, such individual'may , 
nominate one person to whom, iD' the event of the death of such 
individual, the banking c()mpany may give access to the leek.·and 
liberty to remove the contents of the locker. . 40 
(2) Where My such locker is hired from a banking company 
t, ~ two or more individuals joifttly, and, under the eon .. act of hire, 
the locker is to be operated· under, the joint signatures of· two or 
. DIIIl"e of such hirers, su,eh bkers may nom.tnate one or more per-
sons to whom, in the event of the death of such joint 'hire!- or 4S 
bir'tf$,the· banking company Play live, joiD.t.1y, With the nrviving 
~~ hirer 0: joint pjrera, as theC4ie ~ be. 8Ca.esa:to the lCDCkat)ed t .. 
Ub~ torexuove the ~~,ot SUW11~. 
(3) Every nomination under sub-eection (1) or su~tion :(2) 
shall be made in the prescribed manner. " So 
<') Tme banking company abell;'. 'before· permittmg the -r~va1 
of Qte Mn,tents of &l\Y locker· by arrynomillee or jomtly"by . any 
D~ee and. ~vor. 88 afOirelaid,prepue, ill lUCk 1n'8ftfter:h' mq 

17 
. i ,," ·dk~~ :by the Re$ervt Bank from time to time, an inventory 
,~ ij)e.cOQtents Qf. the locker w~h , .• 11 be sigp,ed by 'iuch...nominee 
,<9l" Pnt~ by tJuchnom.iJlee ~d survivors and shall ~¥.efi a copy 
,Qf",tqe mv.entory 80 Pfep~red. ~ such nominee or ~ee and 
.5 !, '~ivOJ!" 
J i ' (5.) On the llemcwal Gf dle·lContents of any looker :by any nomi-
.nee or jointly by any nominee and survivors as atbresaidthe lia-
bility of the banking DOmpany in relatiOn to Ithe ooMeB_ of the 
locker shall stand discharged. 
10 . ,(6) No suit, prosecution or ,other legal proceedUlg shall lie 
agltilst' a b,ankmg company for' any damage caused, or likely to be 
caused, for stloWing access to any locker, and liberty to remove the 
,.cl>~~·of such lockttr, in p~rsual'1Ce of the provisions of sub-section 
(1), or sub-section (2), as the case may be. 
45~. No notice of the claim of any ;persoll other than hirer or 
1$ ""hW!~ % " l~~ke;r ahalI be rece~vab1e by a ban~g company nor 
. ~: ,shall .~}Je: PfU,lki.ng Cf>ll1paoype bolUld by;,~ ~ch notice even 
~~ e~pX'essly ~ven to it: , 
r] Rzlwi4eci tilat wbere any decree, order, certificate or other 
~ from a court of competent jurisdiction, i, relating to the 
2,Ol,s)QIIer 01' its, oontents is produced ·,before the banking company, the 
banking company shal:l ~ake due note of such,decree, order, certificate 
or~th.r. au&hority!'. 
31. In section 46 of the Banking Regulation Act, for sub-section (4), 
tJite fotlowtng sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
2$. "(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if any 
default is made' in-, 
(i) complying with any requirement of this Act or of any 
order, rule or direction made or condition imposed thereunder, 
or 
30 (ii) complying with any term, or any other provision con-
kmtd in..,llDy such order, rule or (lirection, or 
'#i) c:arryjn.g out the terms of, or the obligations under, 
.at lIQbQle sanctioned under su~tion (7)' of section 45, 
.., 'penen guilty of such contravention or' ·default shall be punish-
35 .a~ w~t4 fine which mB3. extend to two thousand l~' aDCi where 
a contravention or default is a continlling one, with aL' ~,flDe 
which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day '8fter"the 
~t, dul4ng '!Which the eonll'avelMiOll . or defalllt, Oontinues.". 
~ Ill, section 47 of the Bankini~tion Act, f~" the'~w,.ords "no 
4~ ~~~)pIe~ :to .*~t of. a Presicl~nc¥ Magistrate or. a Ma~w. at .the 
ftJ:st~aa,s",tbe. werds "nG court other .than that of ~ ~~litan 
Magistrate' or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or,aJly ~1J1i supe-
riqr thereto" shall be sv.b~tuWd, 
33. Section 51 of the BankiJlg ~u.l~u.n Act ,hall t~e ~num~ered 81 
4~ ;su,~~~n i (l~ of t~at se(:tiop, andT ,;~. 
(4) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered,-'''' 
I J . " 
,,,)!~r,,., r)! ~O?tot ·tbe~res"aQd word "4' to _,~",tbe ,a,uNdJ letters 
{,.tl ' ....... '. "{if{ to 4WI. 46 to 48!' ahan ,be subt*tu.ted,. 
Notice of 
claims 
01 other 
persons 
regarding 
aafel7 
lockers. 
not 
receivable. 
Amend-
ment of 
eection 48. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 47. 

..f:J" I 
'I, ;,1 
18 
(ii) for the words, ftgures and brackets "or any eorrespond-
ing new bank constituted under section 3 of the BankIng Com-
. patties (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 19'10 or a 
Regional Rural Bank estabJished under section 3 of the Regional 
Rural Banks Act, 1976, or any other banking institution ftOtlft.ed S 
by the Central Government in this behalf", the WOI'ds ,"or any 
corresponding new bank or a Regional Rural Bank or any 
subsidiary bank" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in the proviso,-
(A) in clause (0), for the words "general manaaer", the 10 
words "Managing Director" shall be substituted; 
(8) for clauses (b) and (c), the following clauses shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(b) ngthing contained in sub-clause (iii) of clauae 
(b) at sub-section (1) of sec~ion 20 shall apply to any 15 
bank referred to in sub-section (1), in so far as the said 
sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) precludes that bank from 
entering into any C()lJ)mitment for grIlhting oy loan or j 
advance to or on behalf of a company (not being a Gov- . 
ernment company) in which not less than forty per cent. 20 
of the paid-up capital is held (whether singly or taken 
together) by the Central Government or the Reserve 
Bank or a corporation owned by that Bank; and 
(c) nothing contained in section 46 or in section 47A 
shall apply to,- 2 
(i) an officer of the Central Government or the 5 
Reserve Bank, nominated or appointed as director of 
the State Bank of India or any corresponding new 
bank or a Regional Rural Bank or any subsidiary 
bank or banking company, or 
(ii) an officer of the State Bank of India or a 30 
corresponding new bank or a Regiobal Ruril Bank 
or a subsidiary bank nominated or appointed as 
director of any of the said banks, not being the bank 
of which he is an officer, or of a banking company."; 
(b) after SUb-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub- 35 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) References to a banking company in any nUe or direc-
tion relating to any provision of this Act referred to in JUb-
section (1) shall, except where such rule or direction provided 
otherwise, be construed as referring also to the . State Bank (1)40 
India, a cOrresponding new bank, a Regional Rural Bank and e" 
subsidiary bank.". 
U. In section 52 of the Banking Regulation Act,-
(a) sub-aection (3) shall be omitted; 
!,' .JI. 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sectton shall be 45 
inserted, namely:-
II (5) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this Act shall be laid, as lOOn as may be after it u!made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in BtIIiClll,'" a total 
5 of 1970. 
J 01 1976. 

I"~ 
5 
10 
20 ' 
'. , .. 
35 
19 
~od of thirty days which may be comprised 'in one session or 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the caSe may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
,validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 
II. 'In" section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act,- Amelbd-
ment of 
(. f section ') or clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, I ~ 
name y:-
'(f) for section 7, the following section shall be substituted, 
iwnely:-
"7. (1) No co-operative society other than a co-operative 
bank shall use as part of its name or in connection with its 
business any of the words "bank", "banker" or "banking" 
and no co-operative society shall carry on the business of 
banking in India unless it uses as part of its name at least 
one of such words. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to--
(a) a primary credit society, or 
(b) a co-operative SOCiety formed for the protection 
of the mutual interests of co-operative banks or co-
operative land mortgage banks, or 
(c) any co-operative society, not being a primary 
credit society, formed by the employees of-
(!) a banking company or the State Bank of 
India or a correspnndin8 new bank or a subsidiary 
bank of such banking company, State Bank of India 
or corresponding new bank, or 
(ii) a co-operative bank or a primary credit 
society or a co-operative land mortgage bank, in 
so far as the word "bank", "banker" or "banking" 
appears as part of the name of the employer bank, 
or as the case may be, of the bank, whose subsidiary 
the employer bank is." "; 
(ti) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted. 
namely:-
Use of word 
"bank", 
"'banker" 
or 
"banking". 
40 '(ti) in section 8, for the proviso, the fIOllowing proviso shall 
4S 
,be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that this section shall not apply-
(a) to any such business as aforesaid which was lD 
the course of being transacted on the commencement 
of the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978. so. how-
ever that the said business shall be completed befnl'lt 
the ~xpfry of one year from such commencement. or 

Cae 
reserve. 
'., 
''l"! 
,. 
I 
" 
'., 
1':&0 
. ~ 10 any' ~ "u:'l,hi)ietMW' 1ft \ tittt'luance of 
elku~(b) ,Of S\!b,;sediitm. (J.) of section";"'!' . 
')' \ ,;,~'L ' ,. 
,(iii) efter c~ (Ii), the following clauaeshall. be. inserted, 
.~y:-. 
'(fii) in section 9, for the seeond pr:ov.is1t, the fbUowing pro- 5 
·/;tl~ shaiJ be aubstituted; namely::--
"Provided farther that j '1nthe case' of a primary 
6-edit society. Whieh 'beeomes' a:' cptinUtry·t. 'c~tive bank 
after the commaacement of ~ ;BaDking 1iiaW5(~dialent)/ 
Am, 1978, the period of seven years shall commence from the 10 
day it so becomes a primary do-operative bank: 
Provided also that the Reserve Bank may. ii1 any parti-
cular ease, extend' the' aforeeaid r}lft'iod of· ~ years by 
such period as it may consider necessary where it is satisfied 
tha,t ,su~h extension would be in the interests of the deposi- I.S 
. to,rs of .the co-operative b~."'~ 
(i~' in'~lBUge (g)', for the figures >ami 1~··'tOB, IOC", the 
ft~~ aria letters "1~, lOBB; lOC" shall be stlbst1tti~t1; 
(t1> for clause (j), the following. clause shell. .Jle substituted, 
namely:- 20 
'(j) for section 18, the following sec~QJl shall be sub6tituted, 
namely::-
"18. E\l"ery ~pt"ratIve bank; not bettlgi a' State co-operative 
bank for the time beb\gflK'lu&d in ,the 'seMftd Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1984 (hereinafter referred to as a 2S 2 ot 193 .. 
"scheduled State co-operative bank"), shalt maintain in India, by 
way of cash reserve with itself or in current aceount opened with 
the R.serveBallk or the State c()ooperatlve bank of the State 
c:oncemed or by way of .net balance in ~urr.ent accounts, 0,1", in the 
ease of·al'rima~ ~opera1ivebaIlk, with the central co-opera-.~ 
tive bank of the district ,(-oDcer,~ ·or in, one or more or such 
ways, a sum equivalent to at least three pE'r cent. of the total of 
Its"demand Ilnd"titne liabilities in IrtdiB, and shall submi!t to the 
RetJenre"lmnk b~;:lt'e th" flfteenth day of every month a return 
showing the amount so held on Friday of each week of the pre- 35 
eeding month wtth particulars of its demand and time liabilities, 
in India on eBen SlXhFriday, or, if any such Friday is a public 
holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close 28 of 1881. 
of business on the pre~edin~ working day. 
E3:planation.-In this sectIon, and in sedtion ~--
(a)' "liabilttte~ In ltl8ia" shall nbt inalu&;-
(i) the paid-up capital or the reserves' or any credit 
belanee in, the , profit and 1088 Iccount,of the co-operative 
bank; 
40 
(ii) any advance taken from a State Government, 45 
. tile ~serve Bank. the Indll~tria1 Development Bank of 
~ or.' the Aericutt.ural l\efblance and Development 
Cal'porationj 

5 
10 
:u" 
I 
'" 
20 
30 
35 
• of 1958. 
45 
21 
(iii) in the case o£ a State or central co-operative 
bank, also any deposit of money with it representing the 
reserve fund or any part thereof maintained With it by 
any other co-operative society within its area of opera-
tion, and in the case of a central co-operative bank, also 
an advance taken by it from the State co-operative bank 
of the State concerned; 
(iv) in the case of a primary co-operative bank, also 
any advance taken by it from the State cq-operative bank 
of the State conce-rned or the central co-operative banJa 
of the district concerned; 
(v) in the case of any co-operative bank, which has 
granted an advance against any balance maintained with 
It, such balance to the extent of the amount outstanding 
1n respect of such advance; and 
(vi) in the case of any co-operative bank, the amount 
of any advance or other credit arrangement drawn and 
availed of against approved securities; 
(b) the aggregate of the liabilities of a co-operative bank 
to the State Bank of India, a subsidiary bank, a correspond-
ing new bank or a Regional Rural Bank or a banking com-
pany or any other financial institution notified by the Central 
Government in this behalf shall be reduced by the aggregate 
of the liabilities of all such banks and institutions to the 
co-operative bank; 
(c) any cash with a co-operative bank or any balance 
held by a co-operative bank with another bank, shall not, to 
the extent such cash or such balance represents the balance 
in, or investment of, Agricultural Credit Stabilisation Fund 
of such co-operative bank, be deemed to be cash maintained 
in India; 
(d) "net balance in current accounts" shall, in relation to 
a co-operative bank, mean the excess, if any, of the aggregate 
of the credit balances in current account maintained by that 
co-operative bank with the State Bank of India or a subsidiary 
bank or a corresponding new bank, over the aggregate of the 
credit balances in current account held by the said banks 
t ' b ks'" with such co-opera lve an ; ; 
(tJi) for clause (m), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
I (m) in section 20A, in sub-section (1),-
(i) the words and figures uNo.twithstanding anything to 
the contrary contained in section 293 of the Companies Act, 
1956" shall be omit.ted; 
(ii) in clause (a), for the words "any of its directorB", 
the words "any of its past or present directors" shall be sub-
~tuted;'; 
, " ..... " 

(vii) for clause (0), the following clause shall be subs,tituted, 
DIIDely:-
'(0) in section 22,-
(i) for Bub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely~- 5 
"(2) Every co-operative society carrying on business 
as a c~peratjve bank at the commencement of the Bank-
ing Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 
1965. shall before the expiry of three montbs from such 23 of ~. 
commencement, every co-operative bank which comes 10 
into existence as a result of tbe division of any other c0-
operative society, or the amalgamation of two or more co-
operative societies carrying on business in either case sa 
a co-operative bank or banks • the commencement of 
the B8I"..kfng Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) 15 
Act, 1965 or at any time thereafter shall before the ex-
piry of three months from its so coming into existence, 
every primary credit society which becomes a primary 
co-operative bank after such commencement shall before 
the expiry of three IllDnths frQlll the date on which it so zo 
becomes a primary co-operative bank and every c0-
operative society other than a primary credit society 
shall before commeneing banking business in India, apply 
in writing to the Reserve Bank for a licence under this 
aection: 2.5 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) shall be deemed to prohilhit-
(i) a co-operative society carrying on business 
as a co-operative tank at the commencement of the 
Banking Laws (Application to Co-operaUve Societies) 30 
Act 1965' or 23 of 1966. , , 
(ii) a co-operative bank which has come into 
existence as a rE'SUlt of the division of any other co-
operative society, or the amalgamation ofi two or 
more co-operative societlies carrying on business, in 35 
either case, as a co-operative bank or banks at 
the commencement of the Banking Laws (Applica-
tion to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965 or at any 
time thereafter; or 
(iii') a primary credit society which becomes a 40 
primary co-operatIve bank after such commence-
ment, 
from carrying on banking buSiness until it is gran,ted a 
licence in pursuance of this section or is, by a notice fnl 
writing, notified by the Reserve Bank that the licence 45 
cannot be granted to it."; I 
,.,.. 
(ii) in sub-section (3). clause (c) shall be omitted;'; 

5 
10 
2 of 1930&. 
20 
2S 
23 of 1963. 
30 
(' 
jV 
3S 
2 of 1934. 
40 
4S 
23 
'(17iii) for elallSe (q), ~he following clause shall be substituted; 
namel,.:-
". I 
'(q) in section 24,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the words "After the expiry of 
two years from the commencement of this Act" shall be 
omitted; 
,(ii) for sub-sections (2) and (2A) , the following sub-
secbons shall be substituted, namely;-
"(2) In computing the amoun,t for the purposes of 
sub-section (1) ,-
(a) any balances maintained in India by a ~ 
operative bank in current account with the Reserve 
Bank or by way of net balance in current account", 
and in the case of a scheduled State co-operative 
bank, also the balance required under section 42 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, to be so 
maintained; 
(b') any balances maintained by a central co-
operative bank with the State co-operative bank of 
the State concerned, and 
(c) any balances maintained by a primary co-
operative bank with the central co-operative bank of 
the district concerned or with the State co-operative 
bank of the State concerned, 
shall be deemed to b~ cash maintained in India. 
(4::A) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1) or in sub-section (2), after the expiry of two 
years frQlIl the commencement of the Banking Laws 
(Application to Co-operative Societies) 'Act, 1965, or ot 
such further period not exceeding one year as the Reserve 
Bank, having regard to the interests of the co-operative 
bank concerned, may think fit in any particular case to 
al1)w.-
(i) a scheduled State co-operative bank, in addi" 
tiqn to the average daily balance which it is, or may 
be, required to maintain under section 42 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and 
(ii) every other co-operative bank, in addi,tion 
to the cash reserve ~hich it .is reqlrired. to maintaiD 
under section 18, 
shall maintain in India in· cash, gold or unencumbered 
approved securities, valued at a price not exceeding the 
current market price, an amount which shall-not at the 
close of business on any day be less ~han twenty-five 
per cent., or such other percentage not exceeding forty 
per cent., as the Reserve Bank may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify of the total of its demand 
and time liabilities in 1ndia; 

Power to 
exempt. 
24 
(h) in computing the amount for the purpose ot 
clause (a), the following shall be deemed to be cash 
maintained in India, namely:-
(i) any cash or balances maintained in India by a 
C\;rOperati ve bank, other than a scheduled State co- S 
operative bank, with itself or in current account with 
the Reserve Bank or with the State co-operwtive bank 
of the State concerned, or by way of net balance in 
current accounts and, in the case of a primary co--
operative bank, also any balances maintained with 10 
the central co-operative -bank of the district con-
cerned, in excess of the aggregate of the cash or 
balances required to be maintained under section 18; 
(ii) any balance maintained by a scheduled State 
co-operative bank with the Reserve Bank in excess 15 
of the balance required to be maintained by it under 
section 42 of, the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 20t 1934-
(iii) any net balance in current accounts. 
Erplanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section-
(a) approved securities, or a portion thereof, 20 
representing investment of Agricultural Credit Stabi-
lization Fund of a co-operative bank shall not be , 
deemed to be unencumbered approved securities; 
(0) in case a co-operative bank has taken an 
advance against any balance maintained with the 25 
State co-operative bank of the State concerned or 
with the central co-operative bank of the district 
concerned, such balance to the extent to which it has 
been drawn against or availed of shall not be deemed 
to be cash maintained in India."; 30 
(iii) in sub-section (6), in clause (a), for the words 
"fourteen days", the words "thirty tlays" shall be Bub~t:u~.t~d·': 
• "0-
(i%) after clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, 
1UllJ1ely: -
'(qq) after section 24, the following section shall be inserted, 35 
namely:-
"24A. Without prejudice to the provisions oil section 53, the 
Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, 
declare that, for such period and subject to such conditions 
as may be specified in such notification, the whole or any 40 
.part of the provisions of section 18 or section 24, as may be 
specified therein, shall not apply to any co-operative bank 
or class of co-operative. banks, with reference to all or any 
of the omees of such cp~operative bank or banks, or with 
reference to the whole qr any part of the assets and liabilities 
of such co-operative bajnk or banks."'; 4S 

S 
10 
20 
3S 
45 
(x) in clause (w) relating to the modincation ot section 15-
, , 
(a) in sub-clause (i), for item (b), the following item shall 
be substituted, namely: _ ' , 
, (b) the following ,proviso shall be insetted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that the Reserve Bank may, jf It considers 
it necessary or expedient so to do, cause an inspection 
to be made of a primary co-operative bank under this 
sub-section by one or more officers of a State co-opera-
tive bank in the State in which such primary co-operative 
bank is registered." '; 
(b) sub-clause (iii) shall be re-numberei as sub-clause (w), 
and before sub-clause (iv) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
clause shall be inserted~ namely:-
'(iii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4A~ Without prejudice to 'the proVISIons of sub-
section (4), the Reserve Bank may, if it considers it 
necessary and expedient so to do, supply a copy of the 
report on any inspection to the State co-operative bank 
and the Registrar of co-operative societies of the State 
in which the inspected bank is registered." 'j 
(xi) for clause (z), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(z) in section 36, in sub-section (1), clause (b) shall be 
omitted, and for clause (d), the follQwing clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
~ '. 
,. (d) at any time, if it is satisfied that for the re-organisa-
¥o~ or expansion of, co-operative credit on sound lines it is. 
necesSiil'y So to do, by an order in wr.iJting and on such terms 
atrdconditions as may be specified therein,-
(i) depute one or more of its officers to watch the 
proceedings at any meeting of the Board of Directors. of 
the co-operative bank or of any other body constituted 
by it. require the co-operative bank to give an oppor-
tunity to the officers so deputed to be heard at such meet-
ings and offer such advice on such matter as such 
officers may consider necessary or proper for the re-
organisation and expansion of co-operative credit 01' 
sound lines, and also require such officer to send a rep"t 
of such proceedings to the Reserve Bank; i 
(ii) appoint one or more of its oftlcers to 0 the 
manner in which the a1f8lirs of the co-operatiw 011' 
its offices or branches ~are being cooducted aJJI1 '. ' '. report thereon."';; 
.. r:.' 

Inlertion 
01 new 
sectiOil 
8M. 
Arrange-
ment 
with the 
State Bank 
on 
appoint-
mentol 
directors 
to prevail. 
Amend. 
mentot 
lIt!dion 40. 
(:ni) for clause (zc), the following clauae shall be su.bStttuted, 
namely:-
'(zc) in section 46,-
(i) clause (iii) of sub-section (4) shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause (4) of the Erpl.ana.tion" after the wOfds 5 
"includes a", the words "co-operaJtive society" shall be 
inserted;'. 
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA Ac:r, 1955 
36. In the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (hereafter in this Chapter ro 23 C1f 1955. 
referred to as "the State Bank Act"), after sectiOlll 35, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
" 
"35A. (1) Where any arrangement entered into by the State 
Bank with a company provides for the appointment by the State 
Bank of one or more directors of such company, such provision and IS 
any appointment of directors made in pursuance thereof shall be 
valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
tained in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time 
being in force or in the memorandum, adicles of association or any 
other instrument relating to the company, and any provision regard- 2.0 
ing share qualification, age limit, number of directorships, removal 
from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any 
such law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director 
appointed by the State Bank in pursuance of the arrangement as 
aforesaid. 
(2) Any direetor appointed as aforesaid shall-
(4) hold office during the pleasure of the State Bank and 
may be Il"emoved or substituted by any person by order in writing 
of the State Bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liabilitv'l}.l·b· b .... t.' "t\J~u,s , 'to ,..iJha e su ~ ', .. - PI'· • 
his being a director or for anything don,. -'~ . .... L" ,_". ~~ 
in good faith in the discharge of hi'~ .JtIes as a director 01 
anything in relation thereto; H . 
-, It . 
(c) not be liable to retiremen' ~ rotation and shall not be 
taken into account for computtnp ./Dumber of directors Hable 35 
to sueh retirement.". ' 
3'7. In section 40 of the State Bank' 
~ 
(i) fot sub-section (1), the fol Ig sub-section shall be lubstt· 
tuted, namely:-
\ "(1) The State Bank shall furnish to the Central Govern- 40 
, ment and to the Reserve Bank its balance-sheet, together with 
\the profit and loss account anEl the auditor8~ report and a report 
by the Central Board orr the working and aetlvtties of the State 
Bank durina the period clvered bytheaecouna."; 
lot 1956. 

f, I \ 
·' a, 
(ii) after sUb-section (3), the following sub-sec:tion shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4) The Central Government shall cause the auditors' 
report and the report on the working and activities of the State 
S Bank to be laid, as soon 8S may be after they are received, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
or more successive sessions.u • 
38. In section 42 of the State Bank Act, in SUb-section (2), after the 
10 word "working", the words "and activities" shall be inserted. 
39. In section 43 of the State Bank Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
words "as may be", the words "as may, by general or special order, be" 
shall be substituted. 
40. In section 49 of the State Bank Act, after sub-seCtion (2), the 
I S following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made by the Central Government unqer this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period ofi thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
2.0 successive sessions, and if, before the expjry of the session imme-
diately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified fonn or be of. no effect, 
2.5 as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.". 
'1. In section 50 of the State Bank Act, after sUb-section {3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
30 "(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made 
under ,this Act by the Central Board, be forwarded to the Central 
r: teec..~~ and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to 
be ·~;;-ea.~h House of Parliament while it is in session for a 
total period of. thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or 
3! in two~'- l&.vre~essive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
sesSlon immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regu-
lation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, 
the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
40 or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validiY 
. of anything previously done under that regulation.". 
CHAPTER VI 
AMlalBMJDmI'TO 'I'RI: STATJ: BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDI.AJ(Y BANKS) A t, 1"9 
38 of 1l1li. 45 a. In the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 Jlereafter 
in thia Chapter referred to as Uthe Subsidiary .Banks Act"), in ,:bapter VI, 
Amend-
mentol 
section 42. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 403. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 4e. 
Amend-
mentOf 
section 50. 
InsertioD 
01 new 
aection 
31A, 

Arranp-
ment 
with 
subsidiary 
banks 
on appoint 
mentof 
direct-
tors to 
prevail. 
Amend-
mentof 
1eCti0ll .:i. 
". 
ai 
after section 38, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
CI38A (1) Where. any arrangement entered into by a subsidiary 
bank with a company provides for the appointment by the subsidiary 
bank of one or more directors of such company. such . provision 
and any appointment of directors made in pursuance .thereof shall 5 
be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law far the 1 of 1956. 
.' ',". 
time being in force or in the memorandum, articles of association or 
any other instrument relating to the company, and any provision 
regarding share qualification, age limit, number of directorships, 10 
removal from office of directors and" such like conditions contained 
in any such law or instrument aforesaid. shall not apply to any 
director appointed by the subsidiary bank in pursuance of the 
arrangement as aforesaid. 
(2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall-
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the subsidiary bank 
and may be removed or substituted by any person by order in 
writing of the subsidiary bank; 
IS 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of 
his being a director or for anything done or omitted to be done 20 
in good faith in the d.i&charge of his duties as a director or any. 
thing in relation thereto; 
(e) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be 
taken into account for computing the number of directors liable 
to such retirement.". 25 
43. In section 43 of the Subsidiary Banks Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) in the opening paragraph, for the words "and the 
Reserve Bank", the words .. , the Reserve Bank al"d !h:.. ~entral 
Government" shall be substituted; . " 30 
(b) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
. namely: - ,. .'\ .... ' '-
CI (a) it balan<:e-sheet, together with the profit and loss 
account and the auditor's report, and a report by the Board 
of Directors on the working and activities of the subsidiary 3S 
bank during the period covered by the accounts; and"; 
(ii) after sub-section (2) • the following sub...eeti-cm shan be 
;". inserted, namely:-
". 
"(3) The Central Government shall cause the auditor'. re-
.: port and the report on the working and activities of the subsi. 40 
:~iary bank to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, 
~ore each House of Parliament while it is in session fora total 
petiod of thirty days which may be comprised in one dSIlOD 
or hi two or more successive sessions.". 
I 
.\ 

&'1 of 1981. 
10 of 1948. 
29 
.f4. In section 44 of the Subsidiary Banks Act, in sub-section (2). Amend-
after the word "working". the words "and activities" shall be inserted. ment of 
leCtion 44. 
5 
45. In section 53 of the Subeidiary Banks Act, after sub-section (2). 
the following sub-section shall be inserted. namely:-
.. (3) Where the State Bank nominates any of its ofD.cers as direc-
tor of a subsidiary bank, such director shall not incur any obligation 
,Of liability by reason only of his being a dire<:tor or for anything 
done or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his 
duties as director or anything in relation thereto .... 
IC) .. In section 62 of the Subsidiary Banks Act, for sub1ection (3). the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
". ... (3) :Every rule made under' this section .shall be laid, as soon as 
'may be a1ter it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in sess.on, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or m:>re successive sessions, and if. before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any' 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made. the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. " . 
IS 
20 
25 
r, 
,.35 
• .,. In section 63 of the Subsidiary Banks Act, after sub-section (3), 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
., (4) Every !l'egulation shall, as SOOn as may be after it is made 
under this Act by the State Bank, be forwarded to the Central Gov-
ernment and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be 
laid before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
perj~d of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two 
or more successive sessions, and if. before the expiry of the session 
~ ~(.~~~:~ following the session or the. su'Cc.essi~e sessions afo~esaid, 
". '~~ree in making any modificatIOn 10 the regulation or 
~ Houses agree that the regulation shOUld not be made, the regu-
lation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
.91 aoeftet!t, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that regulation .... 
'"J" 
CHAPTER VII 
.AIoNDUDfTs TO THE ~ INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARAwr' 
CORPORATION ACT. 1961 
48 In ection 2 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Gu~tee Cor-
. poratlO1lAct, 1961 ~hereaf~~ i~ this Chapter referred to 8~the Deposit 
':+·lnIt1tat1ee COrporation Aet ) ,- )Jl. " 
. (i) 'in clause (b), fO!l' the ~ords ~ tlgW-eS c~:c-=cl~o:':! 
45 and any other banking institutIon notIfied under sub ·d· b k" 
Banking Regulation Act, 11,._" e wor an 1Un. .. th cis t d· SI lary an 
Amend-
ment of 
section 53. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 62. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
68. 
Amend. 
mentof 
sectiori 2. 

Amend-
ment 
of sec-
tion 6. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
11. 
Amend-
ment of 
leCtion 
13. 
Amend-
ment Of 
BeetlOD 
32. 
Shan be,substituted; 
(ii) in clause (i),-
(a) after the words "banking company", the words "or a 
corresponding Dew bank o, "Shall be inserted and shaUbe deemed 
to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of July, 1971; S 
(b) for sub-clause (i), the following sub-clauses shall be 
substituted, and shall be deemed to have been substituted with 
effect from the 1st day of July, 1971, name1y:-
.. (i) a banking company referred to in clause (4) or 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13, or 10 
(ia) a corresponding new bank to which the provisiOO8 
of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 13 apply, Ol'''; 
(i1.i) in clause (k), the words and figures co, and includes any 
banking institution notified under section 51 at the said Act after 
such commencement" shall be omitted. IS 
49. In section 6 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act-
(a) in sub-section (2), after the word, brackets and letter ''clause 
(d) ", the words, brackets and letter "or clause (e)" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-iection (3), in the opening paragrapn. alter the word" 
braekets and letter "clause (d) ", the words, brackets and le~r "or 20 
clause (e)" shall be inserted; 
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(5) If a director nominated under clause (e) of sub-
section (1)- 2S 
(a) becomes subject 1x>t any of the disqualiftcations men-
tioned in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (3); or 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for more than 
three consecutive meetings thereof, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.". 
50. In section 11 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, the words 
Ipd b.gures "or. as the case may be, after it is notified under section 51 of 
_ said Act" shall be omitted. 
~, In section 13 of the Dreplsit Insurance Corporatioll Ad, in sub-
section, (2), the brackets and letter" (b)" shall be omitted. , 35 
52. In -.:tion 32 of the Deposit Insurance CorporatioB Act, iD. ~b­
section (2), lor the words "for not less than thirty ~1.lHdol'e each .HouIe 
01. Parliament as soon as may be after each such report is received 1»7 
the Central Government", tbe words "as soon as may be after they are 
;. I : 

5011970. 
~ 
. __ ·~$A. 
,~ 
\1 
, 
31 
received, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
er in two or more successive seslions" shall be substituted. 
53. In section 50 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, after sub-
S seotien (a" the following sub-seetion slWl be inserted, namely:-
10 
15 
"(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made 
under this Act by the Board, be forwarded to the Central Government 
and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one sesmn or in two or 
more successivp. sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houles agree in makin~ any modification in the regula-
tion, or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, 
the regulation shall thereafter have eft'ed only in such modified 
form or be o~ no eft'ect, as the case may be: so, however, that any 
sue!! modifteation or annulment shall be without prejudice to t~e 
vaUdity of anything previously done under that regulation.". 
CHAPTER VIII 
20 A.MENDMENTs TO THE BANKING COMPANIm (AcQUISmoN AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) Acr, 1970 
H. In the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertak-
infnJ) Act, uno (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as ''the Bank 
NMionalilation Act"), in section 3, in sub-section (5), for the words "one 
25 or mare forms of business", the w:ords "one or more of the other forms 
of husift.ess" shall be substituted. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
55. In the Bank Nationalisation Act, after section 5, the following 
section shall be inserted. namely:-
"5A. (1) Where any arran~ement entered into by a corresponding 
new bank with a companv provides for the appointment by the cor-
respondin~ new bank of one or more directors (1f <'11ch company. such 
pro~~ .an~ ap'l:K1int~ent of di~ectors ~ade in pursuance there-
tec!Il.. .. .;, .. ,~.:,;jiIIdtl!'and effective notwlthstanomg a,.,,,thine: to ~he con-
~ontained in the Companies Act. 1956. or in anv other law for 
the time bein(!. in force or in the memorandum. articles of associa-
tion (1r any other instrument relatincr to the company. and any provi-
.~egai.lk Mare qualification. aile limit. number n' c:Hrectorship~. 
removal from officp of director!: aoo such like conditions contained 
m any such law or instrument aforesaid. shall not apply to aT"" 
dkeet-or appointed bv the et)nesp')nding new bank ill pursuancE' of 
the arrangement as aforesaid. 
(2) My director appOinted a9 aforesaid shall-
(a) hold oftice durin£! the pleasure of the corresponrlng new 
bank and may be rem(1ved or substituted bv any perso' by order 
in writing of the correspondin!! new bank; 
(6) not incur any obligation Ol" liability b~,:;1Oft onlv of 
bis beine: a directnr or for anythin~ done or omhr-be done 
in "eod faitn in the discharge of his duties as r or or any-
thing in relation theretoi 
Amend-
mentot 
section:. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 3. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 5A. 
Arrange-
ment 
with 
corres-
pond_ 
in~ 
bank 
onAP-
p4'int-
.1lent of 
directors 
to prevail. 

AmeDcl-
meat 01 
Mdion 9. 
Amend-
ment Of 
~on'lO. 
32 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotatioD and shall not be 
taken into account fOr computing the number of directors liable 
to such retirement.". 
56. In the Bank Nationalisation Act, in section 9, sub .. ection (5) 
shall be re-numbered as sub-section (6) and before sub-section (6) as so 5 
re-numbered, the following sub-section and EzplGft4tion shall be insert-
ed, namely:-
\ 
'(5) On and from the date of coming into operation of a scheme 
made under sub-section (l) ,-
(a) the scheme shall be binding on the corresponding new 10 
bank or corporation or corporations or banking institutions, and 
also on the members, if any, the depositors, and other creddtors 
and employees of each of them and on any other person having 
any right or liability in relation to any of them including the 
trustees or other persons, managing or in any other ~er IS 
connected with, any provident fund or other fund maintaiDed 
by any of them; 
(b) the properties and assets of the corresponding new bank 
or, as the case may be, of the banking institution shall, by virtue 
of and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand transferred 20 
to, and vested in, and the liabilities of the corresponding new 
bank or, as the case may be, of the banking institution shall, by 
virtue of, and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand trans-
ferred to, and become the liabilities of, the corporation or cor- 2 
porations brought into existence by reconstitution of the bank- 5 
ing institution or the corresponding new bank, as the case may 
be. -
E%pZanation.-In this section, "banking institution" means a 
banking eompany and includes the State Bank of India and a sub-
sidiary bank.'. 30 
57. In section 10 of the Bank Nationalisation Act,- -,w " 
(i) after sub-section (4), the fcllowing Explanations shall . be 
inserted, namely:-
\ 
"\ "\ 
\, 
"ExPlanation I.-For the purposes ofi this A.ct,- . 
(a) the balance-sheet shall not be treated ai· nOt di~clos- 35 
tng a true and fair view of' the affairs of the corresponding 
new bank, and 
(b) the' proftt and loss account shall not be treated as 
not showing a true balance of profit or loss for the period 
vered by such account, 40 
mere! by reason of the fact that the balance-sheet or, as the 
. case m be. the proftt and loss account, :does not disclose any 
matters . ch are, by the provisions of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949, ad with the relevant provisions of this Act 'Or any 10 of 1940, 
other Act, required to be disclosed. . , 45 

lOot 1949. 
• \ 
/1, 
\ \ i 
',I .' 
s 
ExplanatiOn II.-For the pU'l"poses of this Act, the accounts 
of the corresponding new bank shall not be deemed as having 
not been properly drawn up on the ground merely that they do 
not disclose certain matters if-. 
(i) those matters are such as the corresponding new 
bank is, by virtue of any provision contained in the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, read witfi the 'l'e1evant provisions of 
this Act, or any other Act, not required to disclose;. and 
(ii) the provisions referred to in clause (i) are specified 
10 in the balance-sheet and profit and loss account of the cor-
responding new bank or in the auditor's report."; 
(ii) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(7 A) Every corrt-sponding new bank shall furnish to the 
15 Central Government the annual balance-sheet, the profit and 
loss account, and the auditor's report and a report by its Board 
of Directors on the working and activities of the bank during 
the period covered by the accounts."; 
(iii) in sub-section (8), for the words "for not less than thirty days 
20 before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after each such 
report is received by the Central Government", the words "as soon 
as may be after they are received before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions" shall· 
25 be substituted; 
(iv) after sub-section (R), the following sub-section shall be in~ 
serted, namely:-
II (9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Cen-
tral Government may, at any time, appoint such number of audf-
30 tors as it th:nks fit to examine and report on the accounts of a 
corresponding new bank. and the auditors so appointed shall 
h~ve.';a?:r~.· .• "1JS . ~ts, privileges and authority in relation to the 
~ .. ~~~counts of the corresponli~ng new bllnk which an 
A'i:J.W]YF' appoInted by the corresponding new bank has under 
35 this section.". 
45 
J& In ~lfIIftro'hhe Bank Nationalisation Act, after sub-section (3), 
tbe following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(If) Every re~laflon shall. as soon as may be after it is made 
under this Act by the Board of Directors of a corresTlOnding new 
bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government 
s1aa11 cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House 01 parlia-
,ment, while it is in session, for a total period of. thirty days which 
maybe 'comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if,before the expiry of the session immediatelv following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Housrs agree in 
making any modification in the re~latfon or both Houses a.li{l'ee that 
the regulation should not be made. the regulation sJl1JJ thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no erect, as the case 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 19. 

Am~d­
ment of 
IeCtioo 19. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
20. 
Amend-
ment of 
lection 
30. 
34 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or anDUlment shall 
be without prejudice to tbe validity of ~thing previou.s1y done 
under that regulation.&>. 
CHAPTER IX 
A.KmiDMDTS TO nu: RBmeNAL RUIW. BANKs Ar:r, 1976 
5 •. In section 19 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1978,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "Central Government", the 
words and figures c'Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934," shall 'tie substituted; 
S 
(ii) in sub-section (2). for the words c'Regional.Rural Bank may 10 
fix with the approval of the Central Government". the words ''Re-
serve BUlk may, in consultation with the Central Government, flx" 
shall be substituted; - . 
(iii) tn sub-section (4),-
(a) in the openin~ para~aph, after the words c'shall make IS 
8 l'enorl to that bank", the words "and the Central Government" 
shall be fnserted; 
(b) in cllUl.le (e). after the WOl'ds .Cto the notice of the Re-
2Ional Rural Bank". the wol!ds Cland the Central Government" 
shall be inserted. 20 
6ft. Tn I':f>~tion 20 of thf' 'Re~onal Rural Banks Act, 1976. the followfDl! 
proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that the Central Government mav, if it conslifers it 
necessarv so to do in any case. extend, the saiet J)erfoet of slxtv days for 
the fumishine; of the renort by such further period or periods not 2S 
exceedfn~ sixty days in the aggregate.". 
--
81. Section 30 of thp RellionAl 'RuT'Al Bank!; Art. 1976. shalt be re-num-
bered liS sub-R~ction (1) thereof. !'met Rfter !rub-I':el'tion en as so re-num-
bered, the following Inth-sedion !;hall be inserted, namelv:-
CC (Z) Everv rel1U1.ation Shllll. as soon as may be after It i!ll ",ade 30 
under thiR Act bv the Bnard. he forwarded to the Central Government 
and, thRt Government shall ca1.1:'qe " cnmr of the same tf)bP. lRid before 
each House of Parliament. whHe it i8 in session. for a totAl ~od of. 
thirty cUlys ",latch may be comprised in one session or in tWOOT' more 
~ccessfve sessions. and if. before the expiry of the session Immeff'at,.]v 3S 
follow\nf! the !l!e!!Rinn or thf' ~lcc9Mive 8eMtons afo1"esRff!. both "OUA-
es agree in making any modUication in the reJtWation or both HOURPI': 
agree that the resmlatJon sho~ld not be- made. the rectUlation· shan 
thereafter have effec:t onlv in such modHi@d fonn ot be of no effect. 
as the ~se May be: so. however. that aftV such mnMfteatfon or an- 40 
nulment, shall be without 1Jreju~e to the valtdity of ~nyft\fnti· -pre-
vIously do~ under tbat regulaUOft.". . 
21 of 19'16. 
201 1934. 
21 of 1976. 
21 of 1976. 

STA±EMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to amend the Bankers' Books Evidence Act 1891 the 
Reserve 'Baftk 'Of India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation Act: 1949: the 
State Bank of kldia Act, 1955, the State Bank of, India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959, the Deposit Insurance and. Credit Guarantee Corpora-
tion Act, lt61, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Trander of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1m, in 
pursWlllCe of the recommendations of the Banking Commission and of 
the Committee on Subordinate Legislation and also in the light of the 
experlenee gaiBed in the administration of those Ads. The following 
are the !l'lOl'Ie important of amendments proposed in the BiU:-
(i) It is proposed to provide for the facility ~ nomination to 
a 'deposi'to'!", to nominate a person Who could be paid, on the depo-
liter'. death, the amount to the credit of the depositor's accounts. 
Likewise, the Ilominee ~f a person who has kept articles in safe 
custody with the bankers or has hired a lockler will be able to get 
the articles kept in the bank's safe custody or locker in the event 
ofi the death of such a person. The banks wi'n be required to keep 
an inventory of the artiCles returned to the persons concerned in the 
JII8lIDIer as may be directed by the Reaerve BaRk flom time to time. 
(ti) '!be scope of the purposes for which banks can form subsi-
diaries is being widened. 
(iii) It is proposed to authorise the ReserVe Bank of India to 
increase the liquidity ratio to be maintained in India by banks 
from 25 per cent. up to a maximum of 40 per cent. of the total 
demand and time liabilities of banks in India and also to empower 
the Reserve Bank to impose a penalty on banks which do not com-
ply With 'the liquidity requirements of section 24 ofi the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, on the lines of similar provision regarding 
mam'teDalloe of ,cashreaerves contained in section 42 of the Reserve 
. Buk of Iadia Act, It34. 
(w) Seetlons 45R, 45S and 45T of new Chapter IIlC, sought to 
be fn8~ ...;tr\e..ACs~rve Bank of India Act, 1934, provide that 
f' JiO'1i1d!vidu!lt ar "Bffii or ';m unincorporated association of individuals 
shan at any tiihe, have deposits from more than the specified 
iUD!lber of deposrtbrs mentioned therein. The officers <sf the Reserve 
Dank or the State Governments, authorised in this behalf. will 
have ~W:J'.';'11 search warrant from a court so as to enable 
tnem to· enter into and search any premises suspected to be used 
for purpose» connected with the receip.t of deposits in contraven-
tion of the provisions of the Act and also to inspec:t and seize 
registers, books of accounts and other documents. 
~) Provision is being made to empower the Reserve Bank to 
grant medium term loans from the National Agricultural Credit 
(StabillBation) Fund to State co-operative banks by way of reim-
bursement of medium term conversion loans granted. by the latter 
owing to drought, famine or other natural calamities, if the State 
co-opera:tive bank concerned has no due'3 in respect of the bllla of, 
exchange and promissory notes outstanding to the Reserve Sank. " 
TbeStabiliution Fund is also proposed to be utilised for giving relief 
35 

wherever crops are damaged on account of war or military opera-
tions with another country. The period o~ repayment 'is proposed 
to be extended from five years to seven years. 
(vi) It is proposed to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955 
and the State Bank of India (Subsichary Banks) Act, 1959 for lay-
mg before each House of Par~iament, as in the case of nat.onaliaed 
banks, the auditors' report and the annual report on the working of 
the activities of the banks. 
(vii) The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 is being amended-
(a) to empower the Central Government to frame rules 
specifying the periods of the preservation of the various types 
of records, such as, books of accounts and documents required 
to be maintained as also of the different instruments paid by it; 
All. 
(b) to provide that banks may return at the request of a 
customer a paid instrument before the prescribed preservation 
• period., only after making and keeping' in the bank's possession 
a true copy thereof made by mechanical processes. 
,(viii) The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 is being amended-
(a) to provide that during police investigations it would be 
sufficient for a bank to produce before police authorities 
certified copies of relevant extracts from its books unless the 
production of copies is considered not adequate by an officer of 
a rank not lower than a Superintendent of Police; 
(b) to make it clear that if, the original documents are des-
troyed by a bank in the usual course of its business and docu-
ments have been microfilmed before such destruction, the posi-
tives of the films shall be admissible as evidence provided they 
are properly produced and proved in court. 
(iz) It is further proposed to amend the State Bank of India 
Act, 1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 
and the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertak-
ings) Act, 1970 so as to provide a certain me~~1,ll'~, of protection to 
th~ directors nominated by such banks on i~ boarda Of ~ompanies 
assisted by them against prosecution as a result of non-compliance 
with provisions, like, share qualification, age limit, n~ of 
directorships, removal from office, retirement by rotation, etc., con-
tained in the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law or the memo-
randum or articles of association of the concerned unit. 
(:.:) It is further proposed to include the usual provision for 
laying of rules and regulations made under Acts before Parliament 
in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the State Bank of India Act, 
, ,).950, the St.\lte Bank o£ India (Subsidiary Banks.) Act, ;1969, the 
~I!posit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
AM, 1970 and the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976. 
2:' The ,notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions con-
t:~ined in t'tJe Bill. 
NEW Da.m; H. 'M~ PATEL. 
The 15th December, 1978. 

Notes on claus~ 
, ' , 
CZtw.se 2.-This clause seeks to substitute clause (4) of aectIon 2 of 
the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 so as to amplify the deftnition of 
t4e term "legal proceeding" by including therein any investigation or in-
quiry under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or under any other 
law for the time being in force for the collection of evidence conducted 
by a police officer ~r by any other person (not ~g a magistrate) autilQ-
Psed in this behalf by a magistrate or by any law for the time being in 
force. This clause also seeks to amend clause (8) of the said aection so 
as·to provide that a copy made from the original document by mechanical 
or other process insuring the accuracy of such copy, together with a 
certificate to that effect, as also a copy prepared from the origlnal docu· 
ment prior to the destruction of the original by a bank .in the usual course 
of its business, together with a certificate to that effect, shall be admissible 
in 'evidence. These amendments are based on the recommendations cd! 
the Banking Commission. This clause further seeks to mcorporate a 
new section in the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, 10 88 to provide 
that the order of a court or judge for production and inspectioD of boob 
of the Bank shall be construed as referring to an order made by an oJBcer 
of a rank not lower than a Superintendent of Police as may be apecifte4 
ill ,this behalf by the Government by which the police officer or any other 
person conducting the investigation or inquiry is employed. 
Cla1tSe 3.-Under section 45 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the 
Reserve Bank may appoint any other bank, except the State B8Dk or a 
subsidiary bank, as its agent only under the direction of the Central Gov-
ernment. This clause seeks to amend this section permitting any pay-
ments required to be made into the Reserve Bank or in any bills, huDcIi8 
or other securities, required to be delivered into the Reserve Bank UDder 
any law, to be delivered to, or paid into, the agency bank. 
Clause 4.-This clause· seeks to amend section 451' of the Reserve Bank 
()f.,I\,\'liia p.~~ .so. as to revise the existing definition of the terms 
··dep.. tee\.. I¥. •. ~, .... ~d make consequential amendments as a result ot. 
the rr:s~ of' n~Section 45S in the Act vide clause 5. 
Clause 5.-This clause seeks to insert new sections 45R, 45S and 45T 
Under new Chapter IIIe of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, 80 88 to 
prQvide th~t lIQ~dual or firm or ~ unincorporated association ot. in-
divi~uals shall, at any time, have deposIts from more, than the number at 
depositors mentioned therein. It also seeks to vest m the oftlcers of the 
Reserve Bank or the State Governments, authorised in this behalf, the 
power to obtain search warrants from a court so as to enable them to 
enter in to and sea~ch any premises suspected to be . used for the purpOMl 
~onnected with the receipt of deposits in contravention of these provisiODl, 
as also to j'nspect and seize any registers, books of accounts and docu· 
ments or any literature found therein. Such warrants shall be exeeu~ 
in the same way and shall have the same effect as a search warrant iIIl1 
tmder the Code of Criminal Proce,dure. 
I CZ 6 Thl' clause seeks to amend section 46B of the Reserve Bank ouse.- s meW term. loana from 1be at India Act so as to empower it to grant um . 
37 

\ ... ' 
National Agricultural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund to State c()-()perativa 
banks by way of reimbursement of medium term conversion loans grant-
ed. by the latter owing to drought" famine -or other natural: calamities, it 
the State co-operative bank: concerned has no dues in respect 0' the bill. 
~ .. f'-e""imBe' and pI'O!RililDrr notes outstanding to the Reserve Bank. The 
~ StIIiMliaitibn)1\m4 Js also plIOposed to, be utilised for giving relief whei'-
-(8VW c:rOpa' are <lamased on account of military ~ti.ons with aIlOther, 
-,:eotmtry.: TIle ,period 'of repayment of medjmn term loans sanctioaed to 
b.' State ".co-operatlve" banks is prOposed to be extended from fiVe ye8!l'. 
iO ... en yeara.' , .. ~ 
,:, l,. I 
1·,,;.gJaw~.'7 Gad 8.~Th,ese clauses seek to amend respectively sMdon 
•• _d sectioll SSE of the Reserve Bank of India Act with a view to 
1.~:tor penalties for· contravening the provision ot new section 45S 
, Qf. iha~,Act.; 
n .. 
';,,' :~~¥Se 9.-Th;if ,cia" seeks to amplify the existing definitions ,in sec-
tiOQ..'~ ~f the Banking ,Regulaiion Act, 1949 of the term "approved 'Iee\l. 
,ritieaf'.,lt;·a4o seeks to incorporate in that sectilon the c:leftaitions otthe 
~ "Agric~tural Refinanoe and Development Corporation", "corne-
1P9~g ~,bank", "IDdwltrial Development Bank of India", "Regional 
~:~". ",~ Bank", and "State Bank of India". 
j-".<~, I" 
.; Cl4~ JO.-TlUa clause js consequeatial to the inclusicm. in seetioD' & G! 
the :s8nkingiWlgWation Act, 1949, of a deftnition of the tenD "con __ 
ponding new bank". 
~1' I', 
;.~~ 11.~~ clause i. consequential to the' amendment made bJ. 
~o1i '5' of th'e xgrl~fural' Reft11ance Corporation (AJnenamen~ ACt, 
'11M by' wtrlt.-h'Agrkditul-aJ. ~ftnanc'e Corporation haS been renamed sa 
~tUra1 'ftefininice and Development Corporation. I 
.. r~: ,'~ '\ ' . ,'\.," . • 
ClaUse 12.-'rif1k clause 'seen to amend section 7 of the B~ Begu-
~ Act, 1t49.,so, as ,to clarifytberein that no, ~ ot.ha': thm a 
:Ntawng ,~~ shall ;use Bl!ly of the words, Piz. "ba:&~,', ~ba~. or 
~h~'''L'U'pari of ita.name, or even in ~ Wltn da busineae. 
. ,CZause,13.-:Tbis clause seeks to amend section 8 of the Banking Beau-
:BlUOD: A.ct/f9.d~in pumUrnce Q1. the reconunendatlon of the Bankt.D.g Com· 
~oll' to"proViae'~al the provisions of the said section do not' btt the 
b~~whiCh the 'Central Gov-emment may sp~1fy under section ",(t)(o) 
~'iu; a'fortb''of bUSfuess'in whiCh it is lawfUl tor a banlting compant. 
f61-.J.~tli.· '" , 
',)ii ~ilO ,~ 
~" CUZ~·l4.-This c18uSe'seeks:'to amend section lOB of ' the Banldbf 
~~~~n, Act;' r~; ~ as to ~ inapp1i~able' to' banks witli',depos1-r.: 
9f""ltS. 10 erores or less, the'mandatory provision' of tbts sectlatx'that eftl'J: 
t.I~n~,,,c~~y ~~a~'have a ~hoie-tJme chairman. This cla~'''' 
... W pro~4~ that once the deposits of a bank have aggregated lb. It 
crorei or'mo~e, it 'sha11always have such a W'hol~t1m'e chaitman eVeD" 
though its deposits may, rater, go below Rs. 10 crol'es. This clarl.J..'fUrtliet' 
seeu to pPO'ritte 'that a chairman whose term at oftice bas COIDe" to- lID cd 
iAcitertatn dlwll1S'la1lcea shall, aubject to the approval of the' B • .ve. 
Bank, continue in office until his IUC~ 8yum81 omce. ... : " -.!-,.,....,i 
, • I 

" 
~e 15.-T~ elauee seeks to insert a new section lQ~B, in :~. 
B~kin8' Re~ation Act, 1949,80 as to empower the Reserve, ~D,k to, Aq)_ 
pomt, pending agreement between the Reserve Bank and the' banking 
-company concerned, any person as the chairman of that bankiQ.gcpDij)any 
when the. o.fflce of its chairman remains vacant fora,long ~ -an~ ,w~~, 
tnthe op~on of the Reserve Bank, the interests oi .. the,Said'lJ~,CSWl­
pany are likely to be adversely affected hy ~the smd office $0' i.emar~418' 
vacant. . , r, ('. 
Cl4U1e 16.-This clause seeks to substitute section' lOe of ~e. ,B~g 
Regulation Act, 1949, so as to provide that a chairn)an, ,of a bim~ .CQ~­
rpany. whether appointe~ by the banking company jtseU or br' theJ~~~i:ve 
Bank, shall not be requIred to bold any ;Qualifi,catipn sbar:es in ~~e. ~Wt-
1", company. , • 
~ ! i 
Clause 17.-This clause seeks to substitute section 18 'of the J~~ilkful 
RegulatIon Act, 1949, so as to provide, in accordance with the ~m.men. 
dations of the Banking Commission in this behalf, tha,t the cash "serve 
which t!Very nlon-scheduled banking company is .required to .l1)atn~l3fn 
In India shall be maintained by it only with #).e Reserve B~k a~4' not, 
wIth the Reserve Bank or the state Bank or Tndfa or ;my otlt~r .~abk 
notified by the Central Government in this behalf. At the"S~llle tfm~: it 
, - ., . .( .' I( 
seeks to introduce the concept of "net balance" for tbe purpose Of atjrv. 
Ing at the amount of "balance in current account" whicQ. ,is .to be .~reated 
a! liquid asset In terms of this provision, each bank will be reqUi1"E'd 
to work out the difference between the balance1l held by, it i~,\~ent 
aecount with the public sector banks and the balances whicry. ,ther p~p,1fc 
sector banks mav have in current account with it and include in its liquId 
9SS~tS only the ·~xcess. if an:v. of the former o,'er the latte~. Th~ cllf\'l"le 
further seeks to modlfv the definition of tile tf'rm "liabilities in rn~na" 
ot'alrring in the "E:rplanati01l" below existing' section .18. Dr n~e a.fo:~e­
said Act in respe~t of which minimum ('ash balances ,are' t., .b~~atn­
tained by everv banking comp~ny, not peint:r a scheduled bank. !~ .the 
ease of a bankin~ company. not being" a scheduled bank, only ~he"Eet 
lJl:lbflitv of that bank to th!' entir? ban~7in~ system, that is, after decftl(,-
flon ~f tt\i.. ~r~~es 1ntained by it :"ith all ~th~r b~.nks. ~r~m .it~ l!t'os~ 
in '.,.. __ ~,.:.~' er hanks. ~mn he deemed .~ be its !Ni"'~llo/ to 
tors Of'{'.ftnKs, 1 rposes of sections 18 and 24 of the s9f~ Act. 
hirers of safety . " 
the manner lau1le seeks to amenrl !'!edion 1!l of the TIa!!kfl1lr 
under the said so as to ampur", in pursuance of the 'recomh:ten~li-
,.c~~~.! the p ~ Commission. the sec"", of the. gaid 1leot'llOn "rfth A 
view t, enahl nt! t ~ 'banks to form lnlbm<li;)ri~~ for ~ar'1':vin'St ono"p',o!' 
mo~E' kinds of hU'line!>s which thE'v tire permitted to enRa~ \hi; OT' ~h1ch 
mliV be ('on-:1ur.ive to, the 1lprNIr'! (If bn"ki,,!! in TnrliQ. At present, -the 
l'O~er of the banks iR connncrl OT\h, to ""orm.tion, elf subsidiartes for 
undertakinQ; and executin~ tMlstC;. oomini.stratio." r (')f 'ec:tates as ~tltor. 
tru!':tees or· otherwise, the providin~ of sa"c rl('posit vault!':, ctr 
Clcrtt..e 19.-This clause seeks to pm~.,a s(>cti~n 20(1) (h) nm.~"'f thp. 
Bankin(! Re!!Ulation Art, lr149. l'lO as to provl~e that a banJdn.!{f·c9pm~InY 
ig pre~luded from .~antjn!:! nnv lO"lns ~r ~dvano:'e~,to ~.sp~lIJ,I;llary or 
hnMln~ eompnnv evE''' when the b~nkin~ c(')mp~T1:V s dlI1'ctt)t ,is only 
4mter.~ted in th; hClldJng compam"s ~\.lb~ldiar;v Qr ~ H~e bo.lding-Hmpttny 

• 
'of the subsidiary as director, managing agent, manager, employee or 
guarantor or in which he holds substantial interests. 
ClmI.re 2O.-This clause seeks to amend sub-s~tion (3) of section 22 
~ the BankIng Regulation Arl, 1949 so as to widen the scope of the 
matters which the ReServe Bank may consider before granting a licence 
. to a company 'to carry on banking business in India. ' , 
Cla.uae 21.-Th'is clause seeks to amend section 24 of the Banking 
~atton Act, 1949, so as to em-power the Reserve Bank to incr~ase the 
llquid,ity ratio which the scheduled and non-scheduled banks nre required 
to tnaintain in India" from the present statutory minimum limit Of 251 
per cent. to a maximum o~ 40 per cent. of their total demand and time 
UabUites in India. The cl~use also includes amendments consequehtial 
to the amendments proposed to section 18 of the Act; vide clause 17 of 
the Bill 
Cl4use 22.-This clause seeks to amend sectiop. 29 of the Banking 
~lation Act. 1940, so. as to clarify that the period soccified in sub-
eect:lon (3) of section 210 of the Companies Act, 1956. relating to prepa-
ration of the balance-sheet and profit and loss account shall. in the case 
~ a banking company, be the period ending with 'the Jast working day 
01. the year immediately preceding the year in which its annual general 
m~ting is held 
Cl4uae 23.-This clause seeks to amend section 35B of the ;Bjlnking 
Regulation Act, 1949. 90 as to make the Reserve Bank's approval neccs-
sny for any change in the maximum permissible number of directors 
of a banking company. It a1s> seeks to remove the existing' dual control 
In regard to the managerial remuneration in the case of a banking c~m­
'Pany, one bv the Reserve Bank under section 35B of th .. Rankin[! R.e(l'Il-
Jation Act, .1949 and the other by the Government of India in the cil"'Cum-
stances mentioned in sub-section (4) of section 198 of the Companies 
Act,1956. 
CIcmse 24.-This clause seeks to amend secfl~i36AB of the BankiII~ 
Regulation Act, ,1949. so as to remove the limit on the number of adcli .. 
tiona! directors which the Reserve Bank can appoint under that section. 
(.'lause 25.-Under section 464 of the Companief. ACt, H}56. as amend-
• in 1980, the High Court maY' digpense with the appo1ntment f)f a 
committee of inspection. Thi,~ clause seek!': to " mdkl" t.'nnsequential 
amendments to section 42 of the Banking P..egula~ion Act, 1949. 
- . 
ClatMe 2S.-In additfon to making some textual changes in section:' 45 
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, this clause seeks to amend:' 
(i) sub-section (8) Clf the aforesaid sectif)n !;O as to makr- it ('1(',,.. 
that the scheme of amalgamation of one banking company with any 
1?ankfng institution shall also be binding on the tnlstces or other per-
IODs managing, or in any other manner connected with. any ,provi-
dent fund or other fund maintained by any such company or the 
transf~ Dank' , ..... '"'" , J 

4t ' 
• 
'(Ii) sub·section (15) of the said section with a view to conflDJDa 
th@ scope of the definition of the tenn ''banking institution" to aIl1 
bankin,E!: company, State Bank of India, a subsidiary bank or a cor-
responding new bank; and 
(iii) the said section by adding an E;rpoZanation thereto 10 as to 
avoid a claim by an employee of the transferor bank that he should 
be ¢ven in the transferee bank the same "rank or status" as he had 
in the transferor bank at the time of amalgamation. 
Clatl.8e's 27 and 28.-These clauses seek to amend respectively section 
45A and section 45J of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, 10 as to replace 
c the. reference to Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, by a reference to the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
Clause 29.-This clause seeks to amend section 45S of the Ban1ciDr. 
Regulation Act, 1949 so as to replace the reference to Chief Presidency 
Magistrate or the District Magistrate by a reference to Chief Metrooolf-
tan Magistrate or the Chief Judicial Magistrate respectively. These 
amE'ndments are necesflitated by file corning into force of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
Clause 30.-This clause seek~ to insert new sections 45Y, 46Z. 45ZA, 
45ZB. 45ZC, 45ZD. 45ZE and 45ZF in thE" Bankin'! Re~tion Act, INt, 
based on the recommendations of the Banking Commission, so as-
(i) to empower the Central Government to frame rules speelfyfn~ 
the periods of preservation of various types of records . such 
as books, accounts and documents required to be maintained by a 
bankinC! company as also of the different instruments paid by It (sec.-
tion 45y); 
'(ii) to enable a bnnk to return at the request of II customer "(in-
cluding Government Departments and ~atutory co~tilJns) a paid 
instrument, before thE" prescribed preservation period, only after 
eout~kin--; and keeping in the bank's p:>ssession a true copy thereot 
in ~h~K" I processes (section 45Z); 
tors'~S', pe. er a bank to makE' payment 'to the nominee of • 
hirers of safety 10 ount to his credit, in the event of the latter's death, 
!(;he manner presc 
under the said A 
celled in the pre ct a bank against any claim of the third party to the 
_'*~Y.... _1 
deposit (sec IOn '45ZB); i 
(v) to enable a bank to return the articles kept by a person in 
the bank's safe custody to the nomineE" or the person appointtid 
under SUb-section (2) of new section 45ZC in the event of the death 
of the person leavin~ the articl~ in safe custody. after maldng 
inventory of th(' articles in the manner directed by .th~ t~aer;e 
Bank, the inventory being signed by the person rcccl': g ,e ar -
cles (section 45ZC); 
(vi) to protect a bank against any claim, to any articles, made ~ 
ther than the person who placed the article in l8.1.e 
any person o· , ti 45ZD) • custody with the banking company (sec on , 

... 
• 
. (Wi) to enable a bank to release the contents of a safety locker 
to the nominee or survivor of the hirer of such locker in the, event 
of -the 'death of the hirer, by making an inventory of the contents of 
a safety locker in the manner directed by the Reserve Bank, the 
inventory being signed by the nominee or the survivor as also to 
~protect the bank against any liability for so releasing the contents 
; . . of the loeker (section 45ZE); 
(~ii) to protect a bank against any claim to the conten,ts of. 
safety locker, made by any person other than the hirer (or his nomi~ 
nee) of such. locker who placed the articles in the safe custody 
with the baaking company (section 45ZF). 
Clause 31.-This clause seeks to substitute sub-section (4) of section 
46 of the Banking Regulation. Act, 1949, so as to make a failure to comply 
wtth any term e.ontained in, or condition imposed by. any order. rule or 
direction,. and a failure to carry out the terms of an amalgamation sanc~ 
tioned, under section 45, as offences punishable under section 46. ' 
Clause 32.-This clause seeks to amend section 47 of the Banking'Regu-
Iation Act. 1949. eonsequent on the coming into force of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
ClmUe 33.~Tbis clause seeks to amend section 51 of the Banking Regu-
tilUbn Act 80 as: 
(i) to make the prohibition contained in seetion 20 thereof against 
making advances to companies having a.common diredtor, inapplicable 
to advances by the public sector banks to companies in which the 
. Central Government or the Reserve Bank or a Corporation owned by 
,tluatbaDk.holds 40 per cent. or more of the paid-up capital; 
(ii) to extend the statutory protection given by clause (c) of the 
proviso to sedion 51 thereof also to an officer who may be nominated. 
on the Board Of a conesponding new bank 01' a Regional RUral Bank 
or'of a' banking company an,l also to an officer of a corresponding 
,!'lew bank or a Regional Rural Bank or a subsidiary bank who ma~ 
be nominated on the Board of another bal"Y~_"~I,. _ " ),'" 
'(iii) to provide that a nlle or direction made under the Act shan 
also apply to the State Bank of India. any corresponding new bank, 
a Regional Rural BanK and a subsidiary bank. 
OUler amendments proposed to be made by this clause are of a con-
Sequential nature. 
,C14ue 34.-This claUse seeks to amend section 52 of the Bankin~ Regu-
:1atlcn. Act, 1949, so as to provide f.C"!r layinr, of rules made by 'the Central 
-Govemment under the aforesaid Act before each House of Parliament. The 
·ra:Deftdment41lso'Seeks to dispense with the ('On~ition of previous pubUca-
·1jan ot the niles to be framed under this section. 
Clame 3.'i.-Section5ft of the BankinJ! Regulation Act, 1949, specifie! 
the modifications to certain sections of the Act in their application to 
·~rative ·banks. This dause deals with the modifications of. the 
teJevant sections as a result of. the proposed amendments to the ~l1kJng 
HtJ1.llatiQn Mt. ~ Jm~t mocU1\Clltion/J ~~~: . 

(i) the, proviso' proposed. to be substituted for the ex:istin"J'ft'O-
viIo to sectIon 8 (relating to prohibition of trading), pr.ovidea thatl ~ 
period for completing any business referred to in that SectiOll '\YiU 
De extended only up to the expiry of one year from the commence-
ment of the amending legislation. 
(ii) the proviso proposed to be substituted for the second pm--i 
viso to section 9 empowers the Reserve Bank to ex:teBd the period' 
of seven years for disposal of non-banking assets of a co-operative 
bank, if the Reserve Bank. is satisfied that such extension would.be 
in the interests of the depositors of the co-operative bank. 
(iii) a new section--section 24A-is proposed to be inaertacl' 
empowering the Reserve Bank to exempt, by notification, my eo.. , 
operative bank or class ot co-operative banks from· the appU~ , 
of the whole or any part of the provisions of section 18. or,section,'~ 
of the Act with reference to all or any of the offices of such co-opera .. 
tive bank or co-operative banks or with reference to the whole' ,O~ 
any part of the assets and liabilities of such co-operative baD&-«! 
co-operative banks and for such period and subject to such COndi;tilQal 
as may be specified in the notification. 
(iv) clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 36 isproposecl to 
be substituted by a new clause which would enable the Reserve ~ 
to depute one or more of its officers to watch the prcx:eedfugs at,~, 
meeting of the Board of Directors of a co-operative bank or to' 
appoint its officers to observe the manner in which the affairs of the 
co-operative bank or its offices or branches are conducted and make 
a report thereon. 
Clause 36.-The clause seeks to insert a new section 35A in the State 
..Bank of India Act, 1955, with a view to providin, certain pmtect.Mm\ to 
diRectors appointed by the State Bank on the boards of companiea ~~ 
g1 it against prosecution as a result of nOIrcomp~e withtbepro~ 
, ~Ii.'~,ad in the CODl~ Act, 1956, or any other law or the Memorall4UDI . 
or Articles ot Assoe~n further seeks to provide that such a ~tor 
IIhall ~ld office during the pleasure of the state Bank and may be JIVDlOved 
by it. :i-Itrther, such a director will not incur any, obligation or ~bruty b7 
reason only of his being a director or for anything done or onutted to be 
cio:i1e in good faith in the discharge of his duty as a director. . 
. Cl""~"" ~7~"""'Inadditjon to rnakingsornetelttya!' changes m:.lIC.'tioW-e 
of the State Bank ollnaia Act, 1955, this cllmSe'SeeB toamf!lMi't)~~ ~ 
80 as: 
(i) to disperuiewithtbe period within which the accounts of.the 
bank. are to be submitt«Ho the Central Government and the ReIerM 
Bank'i and 1 
(to to provide ,for laying before each House of p.,liament tlw, 
auditaIS' report aDd the report on the WOll'JQng and ~vi~ ot the 
State ,Bank of India, as is done in the case of the nationalised. hanks. 
C101AoSe 38.-The amendment to section 42 of the State Bank of ~ 
Act 1955 is consequential to the amendmenf prop0A4 te' .1CtioIl-4ft;! , , " " 
11M Ae$ bF clauae 87. g 

44 
-Czau,u 39.- This clause seeks to amend section 43 of the State Bank 
CIIIlDdia Act, 1955, so as to empower the Central Board of the Bank to 
delegate by general or special order the powers to the officers of the Bank. 
Clauses 40 and 41.-These clauses seek to amend section 49 and section 
50 respectively of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, so as to provide for 
layiDg of rules and regulations made under the aforesaid Act before each 
HoWIe of Parliament. 
CIa.se 42.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 38A in the State • Hank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (on the lines of new section 
35A proposed to be inserted in the State Bank of India Act, 1955, by clause 
36) with a view to providing certain protection to directors appointed 
bya subsidiary' bank on the boards of companies assisted by it against 
prosecution as a result of non-compliance with the provisions contained 
in the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law or the Memorandum or 
Articles of Association. It further seeks to provide that such a director 
shall hold office during the pleasure of the subsidiary bank and may be 
removed by it. Further, such a director will not incur any obligation or 
liabilliy by reason only of his being a director or for anything done or 
omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duty as a director. 
Clause 43.-This clause seeks to make some verbal amendments to sec-
tion 43 of the State Bank of India (Sub~diary Banks) Act, 1959 and also to 
pro\?ide for the auditors' report and the report on ,the working and activi-
ties of 8 subsidiary bank being laid bef~re each House of Parliament. 
Clcute 44.- The amendment to section 44 of the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 is consequential to clause 43. 
CI.GuIe 45.-1'his clause seeks to amend section 53 of the State Bank 
of India (Sublidiary Banks) Act, 1959, with a view to prOviding that the 
ofB.cer nominated. by the State Bank 8S a director of its subsidiary bank 
IIha1l not incur any obligation or liability iby t'e~~y of hi~ hp.iug 'a 
director or for anything done or omitted to be dol 10 good faith in the 
discbarge of his duty 88 a director. .~ .. ~) , 
~ 
(.;tau.Be, 46 crnd 47.-These clauses seek to amend section 62 and section 
63 respectively of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, 
ao as ~ pl'ovide for laying of rules and regulations made UD'det ~~.N<?re- I 
Mid Act before each HOWle of Parliament. 
Clause 4B.-This clause seeks to amend the definition of the term 
"blaJring company" in clause (b) of section 2 of the Deposit Insurance 
IIJd Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 by omitting the expression 
"and any other banking institution notified under section 51 of the Bank-
ing Regulation Act, 1949". This clause also seeks to amend the definition 
of the term '"insured bank" in clause (i) of that seCtion so as to include 
therein H8 corresponding new bank", with retrospective effect from the 
1st July, 1971, since clause (1) of section 2, as substituted by t~e Deposit 
.\JUUrance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1968 which came m~o force 
from tbe 1st Jwy, 1971 did not include a reference to correspondmg neW 
»ankI. Thii clause also mu,s 'amiitndmenta consequent on claus~ 33:~ .. 

45 
C&cuse 49...... This clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 6 
4».f. the, D~t lnsura,nceand Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 
MPI~ a VleW to providing that the additional directors appointed under 
~iiQD &(1) (e) of the Act shall hold office for a t~rm not exceeding four 
yeu;a as may be ~ecified by the Central Government. Further, it seeks 
. kio . .amend iaub-secti.on (3) of. section 6 of the Act so as to provide that 
• 4ke.cto,r nominated by Central Government under clause (e) of Bub-
MCtiOl) ~1,) ()f ~ction 6 shall not be capable of being nominated as a 
,dir~tOl' In the CIrcumstances indicated in sub-section (3). It further seeks 
~ insert a new sub-section (5) so as to prOVide that the seat of a direc-
.. nominated under sub-section (1) (e) of section 6 shall become vacant 
in, ,speeided circumstances. 
,C1a.use 5O.-The amendment is consequential to clause 33. 
Clause 51.-This clause seeks to amend section 13 (2) of the Deposit 
Iuurauce and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 so as to omit 
tQe n..f,reQoe ~ clause (b) in that section on the ground that the provi-
aiOllS of section 2.2 of the Banking Regulation Act, 194e, are not appli-
(_Ie to the corresponding new bank vide section 51 of that Act. 
Clause 52.-This clause seeks to make textual changes in sub-section 
(,2) of sec,tion 32 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Cor-
,pQIation Act, 1961 . 
. CIause sa.-This Clause seeks to amend section 50 of the Deposit 
1n8urance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, so as to provide 
~r~1ng of regulations made under the aforesaid Act before each 
House of Parliament. 
ClA~e M.-This clause seeks to make textual changes in sedtion 3 
of the. ~ Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970. 
CWU3e 55.-'I'his elause seeks to insert a new section SA in the Bank-
ing Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (on 
"rtlJe_~esof .new; sec~on 35A proposed, to be inserted in the State Bank 
pf"lndiaAct, 1955, by clause 36) with a view to providing certain pro-
.' tectiOlli to~: ;"~'Rppointed by a nat~onalised bank AIl the ~ of 
~~kg ~. by it against prosecutIOn as a result of non-compliance 
with,f .... provisions contained in the Companies Act, 1956 or any other 
1a~~ the Memorandum or Articles of Associati~n. It further seeks to 
pr. tlde that such a director shall hold office dunng the pleasure of the 
nationalised ~d may be removed by it. Further, such a director 
will .. ~ •. .. ----Ty obligation 01' liability by reason only of his being a 
CI ~
OrrnYthing done or omitted to be done in good faith in the ause . 
to e of his duty as a director. 
co-~ 
'h 
Clause 56.-This clause seeks to insert a new sub-section in section 9 
o! the Banking Companies (AcqUisition and Trallsfer of Unde~akings) 
Act 1970 so as to specifically provide that a scheme made under section 
9 (2) () f that Act shall be binding on the creditors, depositors, em-
leo d ther persons affected by it. This clause further seeks t;Q 
~ oyees ~ °definitiOn of the term "banking institution" in the said 
~rpora tha lines of definition in sub-section (15) of section 45 of the i7C'\iWon on e 
B 1ri n ...... l .. tion Act 1949 as proposed to be amended by clause 26. 
~ni~"'- " 

Clause 57.-This clause seeks to introduce two "Explanations" in sec-
tion 10 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970 on the lines of the corresponding provisions in the 
Companies Act, 1956 dealing with the scope of the auditors' reports in 
the matter of certifying that the balance-sheet exhibits a true and fair 
view of the affairs of the nationalised bank concerned. This clause fur-
ther seeks to insert new sub-section (7A) in section 10 so as 'to rationa-
lise the existing arrangements regarding the furnishing of ita 'annual 
balance-sheet and accounts together with the auditors' report and the 
annual report on its working and activities by each nationalised bank 
to the Central Government and to make textual changes in sub-seetion 
(8) of the said section. It also seeks to insert new sub-section (9) in 
section 10 of the Act so as to empower the Central Government to appoint, 
at any time, such number of auditors as it thinks fit to examine and 
report on the accounts of a nationalised ba~k. 
ClaUSe sa.-This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 80 88 
to provide for the laying of regulations made by the Board of Directbrs 
of a corresponding new bank under the aforesaid Ac,t before each Heuse 
of Parliament. 
Cla.1L8e 59.-This clause seeks to amend sub-sections (1) and (2) of 
section 19 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 so as to vest, the power 
of approving the appointment of auditors of a regional rural bank and 
fixation of their remuneration, in the Reserve Bank instead of in the 
Central Government. It further seeks to amend sub-section (4) of sec-
tion 19 so as to provide that every auditor shall make a report also to 
the Central Government. 
Clause 60.- This clause seeks to amend section 20 of the Regional 
Rural Banks Act, 1976, so as to empower the Central Government to 
grant extension up to a maximum of sixty days for furnishing the annual 
report and the balance-sheet, etc., to each shareholder of a regional 
rural bank. 
ClDuse 61.-This clause seeks to amend sect.fon 30 of the 'Beifonll 
Aural Banks Act, 1976, so as to provide that regulae:~~~"'~~ under • 
aforesaid Act shall be placed before each House of Parn;;. ~... 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend the definition of "approved 
se<!urltles" in section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, as meaning, 
inter alia, such of the securities authorised by the Central Government 
under clause <f) of section 20 01 the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 as may be 
preserlbedby rules made by the Central Government under the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949. This is a matter of detail necessary for the effec-
tive administration of the statutory provisions relating 'to maintenance 
by banks of the requisite percentage of assets. 
At present, every bank is required to maintain the liquidity ratio of not 
less than 25 per cent. of the total of its demand and time liabilities under 
section 24 (2A) (a) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Clause 21 vf the 
Bill and clause 35, as applicable to co-operative societies, seek to amend 
that section so as to empower the Reserve Bank to increase the said raltio 
from the present statutory minimum limit of 25 per cent. up to a limit not 
exceeding 40 per cent. as may be '?ecified by the Reserve Bank in the 
notification. 
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to~' '- a new section 45Y in the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, which emr ers the Central Government, after 
consultation with the Reserve B( ,to make rules specifying ·the periods 
for which banks shall Pf--" !~r':;lnd keep their books of accounts and 
other documents as well ~ ,.erent instruments paid by them. Diffe-
rent periods may lyt,Y4ilp.t,p ,l~d for different types of records, depend-
ing upOn the natUre of each record, and keeping in view the needs and 
practical difficulties of the banks, and usefulness in connection with 
tax and other regulatory proceedings. It is not possible to visualise at 
this stage as to what should be the various minimum periods for pre-
servation of various records. 
This clause further seeks to insert new sections 45ZA, 45ZC and 45ZE 
in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, in pursuance whereof, the deposi-
tors of banks, persons leaving articles I in safe custody with banks, ami 
hirers of safety lockers from bnnk, are given the rip,'ht of nominaf'ion in 
the manner prescribed under rules made by the Central Government 
under the said Act. The nomination so made can also be varied or can-
celled in the prescribed manner. 
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 24A as applicable 
to co-operative societies for empowering the Reserve Bank to exempt. 
by notification, any co-operative bank or class of co-operative banks from 
the .applicability of the whole or any part of the provisions of section 18 
or section 24 of the Act, with reference to all or any of 'the offices of such 
co-operative bank or co-operative banks. or with reference to the whole 
or any part of the assets and liabilities of such c(\-operative bank or co-
operative banks, and for such period and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified in the notification. This is a matter relating to imple-
mentation of policy, in suitable cases. 

Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to amend section 43 of the State Bank 
of India Act, 1955 so as to provide for delegation of powers to 'the ofticers 
of the ~ alae. ,by ge~ or ~ial or4erama(ie by tM Cen~,J39ard 
of the Bank. 1" I r . ..,,, 
The matters in respect of which an authority is eB\powered io ~. 
any autbm'ieation, notification or order or to mallie rulei, reJlaq, WI. 
matters of procedure and administrative detail. It is nGtpfa_able." 
provide for them in the relevant enactment. The delegation d. MeW'" 
tive power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

9 of 1932. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRAcT . FROM THE BANKDS' BooKs EvIDENCE AcT. 1891 
(18 01' 1891) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or 
context.-
• • • • • 
(4) "legal proceeding" means any proceeding or inquiry in 
which evidence is or may be given, and includes an arbitration; 
• • • •• 
(8) "certifted copy" means a copy of any entry in the books of 
a bank together with a certificate written at the 'fodt of such copy 
t~t it is a true copy of such entry, that such entry is contained in 
one of the ordinary books of the bank and was made in the usual 
and ordlinary course of business, and that such book is still in the 
custody of the bank, such certificate being dated and subscribed by 
the principal accountant or manager Qf the bank with his name and 
oftlclal title . 
• • • • • 
ErrRACTS FROM THE RESERVE{~AN1t OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
(2 OF 19M) 
• • • • • 
Deflnl· 
tiona. 
m. In this Chapter, unless the ~xt otherwise requires,- De1lni. 
• • • .ft!·. • tiona . 
• 't)i 
(bb) "deposit" shall includ ".d shalI be deemed always to 
have included, any money rece~.by a non-banking institution by 
way of deposit •. QIr'roml at in any other form, but shall not include 
alMn:11its raised, by way of share capital, or contributed as capital 
by partners ot a firm; 
• • • • • 
(d) "firm" means a firm as defined in the Indian ParlnerSlkip 
Act, 1932, of which the capital subscribed by its partners exceeds 
one lath of rupees; 
(e) cellon-banking institution" means a company, cort>oration, 
co-operative society or firm. 
• • • •• 
(8B. (1) • • • • (2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the Bank only 
to the making to State co-operative banks or Regional Rural Banks of 
loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being 
less than fifteen months and not exceedin!! five year~ from the date of 
maldllg such loan or advanee and on such terms and condftlons as may 
be specified in this behalf by the Bank: 
Provideii that no such loans or advances shall be made-
(a) except for the purpose of enabling the State co-operatlve 
banks to pay any dues in respect of bills of exchange and promissory 
notes pUt'cha~~ or rediscounted by the Bank under clause (2) of 
section 17 or loans or l1dvances millie t.o them bv thp Bank undM' 
c}.Ute (4) of section 17, and unless. fn the opfnlon of the Bank, the 
State co.operative banks aTe unable to pay such dues in tfme owing 
to drought, famine or other Dlltural calamitfes; and 
49 
National 
Agricul· 
tural 
Credit 
(Stablll .. 
aation) 
Fund. 

Cogni-
zance of 
offences. 
Interpre-
tation. 
Use of 
words 
"bank", 
"banker", 
"banking" 
or "bank-
ing com-
pany". 
Prohibi-
tion of 
trading. 
&0 
(b) unless such loans and advances are fully guaranteed as to 
the repayment of the principal and payment of interest by the State 
Government: 
Provided further that no such loans or advances shall be made- ' 
(a) e~ept f()r the purpose of enabling the Regional Rural Banks 
to pay any dues in respect of bills of exchange and promissory notes 
purchased or re-discounted by the Bank or loans and advances made 
to them by the Bank under section 17 and unless, in the opinion of 
the Bank, the Regional Rural Banks are unable to pay such dues in 
time owing to drought, famine or other natural calamities, and 
('b) unless such loans and advances are fully guaranteed 88 to 
repayment of the principal and payment of interest by the Sponsor 
Bank. 
• • * • • 
58E. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer 
of the Bank, generally or specially ~uthorised in writing in this behalf 
by the Bank, and no court other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate 
or a Judicial Magistrate of the- firlt class or a court superior thereto 
shall try any such offence. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKIN"G REGULATION ACT, 1949 
• • 
(10 OF 1¥9) 
• • • 
5. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subjert or 
context,-
(4) "approved securities" means securities in which a trustee 
may invest mone-y under clause (4), clause (b), clause (bb), clause 
(c) or clause (d) of section 20 ot the Indian Trusts Act, 1882; 2 of 1882. 
• • • • • 
(1) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India; 
• • • • • 
'1. (1) No company other th:m a banking company shall use as part of 
its name any of the words "bank", "banker" or "banking" and ~o com-
pany shall carry on the businesSl of banking in India unless it \lSef; .as 
part of its name at least one of such words. 
• • • • • 
•. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6 or in any contract, 
no banking company shall directly or indirectly deal in the buying or sel-
ling or bartering of goods, except in connection \\.Jth the realisation of 
security given to or held by it, or" engage in any trade, or buy, sell or 
barter goods for others otherwise than in connErlion with bills of ex-
change received for collection or negotiation or with such of its business 
as is referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 6: 
Provided lhat this section shall mt apply to any such business as 
aforesaid which was in the course of being transacted on the (lommence-
ment of this Act,· sO however, th~ the sa~d business shall be completed 
before the expiry o~ one year frO)1l such commencemp.nt. 

18 of 1988. 
2f of 1881. 
II 
Explanotion.-For the purposes of this section, "goods" means every 
kind of movable property, other than acConable claims, stocks, shares, 
money, bullion and specie, and all instruments referred to in clause (a) 
of sub section (1) of section 6. 
... * • ... ... 
lOB. (1) Nothwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force or in any contract to the contrary, every banking com-
pany in existence on the commencement of section 3 of the Banking 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1968, or which comes into existence thereafter 
shall have a chairman of its Board of directors who shall be entrusted 
with the management of the whole of the affairs of the banking company: 
Provided that the chairman shall exercise his powers subject to the 
superintendence, control and direction of the Board of directors: 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a 
banking company in existence on the commencement of the said section 
for a period at three months from such commencement. 
• ... ... ... ... 
(5) A chairman of the Board of directors of a banking company may, 
by writing under his hand addressed to the company. resign his office 
but shall continue in office until his successor asswnes office. 
... . . ... ... 
I 
lOC. Any director or chairman apf>oi~ted by the Reserve Bank under 
section lOA or section lOB, as the calie may be, shall not be required to 
hold qualification shares in the ba,'king company. 
::~ 
.,j~ 
.f 
'\,'i 
.. ", 
,- " ' /"', 
• ... • ... ... 
BanJUa, 
compaoy 
to be 
managed 
by whole-
time 
chairman. 
Chairman 
or 
director 
appointed 
by the 
Reserve 
Bank,not 
to be 
required 
to hold 
quallftca-
tion 
shareL 
18. Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank, shall main- Cash 
tain in India, by way of cash reserve with itself or in current account reBel'Ve. 
~ned with the Reserve Bank or the ~tate Bank of India or' any other 
bank notified by the Central Government in this behalf or partly in cash 
with itselt and partIy in such account or accounts, a sum equivalent to 
at least three per cent. of the total of its time and demand Uabilities in 
India, and shall subm!'t to the Reserve Bank before the fifteenth day of 
every month a return showing the amount so held on Friday of each 
week of the preceding month with particular~ of its time and demand 
liabilities in India on each such Friday, W, if any such Friday is a public 
hollday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of busi-
ness on the preceding working day. 
Expltmation.-In this section and in seetion 24, "liabilities in India" 
shall not include-
(0) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit balance in 
the profit and loss account of the banking company; 
(b) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from the 
State Bank of India or from the Industrial Development Bank of 
India or from the Agricultural Refinance Corporation or from any 
bank notified by the Central Government under clause (c) of the 

Restric-
tion on 
nature of 
subsidiary 
--panles. 
Restric-
tions on 
loana and 
advances. 
Llcensin" 
otbank-
in .. COlD-
p~ •. 
Main. 
tenance 
Of a rer-
centage of 
anets. 
52 
EzplaaatioA to sub-section (1) of section 42 of, the Reserve Bank of 
lnella Act, 1934. 2 of 1934. 
19. (1) A banking company shall not form any Bubsidiary OQIIIpUly 
except a subsidiary company formed for one or more 01 the folJt>wmg 
purposes, namely, the undertaking and executing of trusts, the under-
taking of the administration of estates aspecutor, trus.tee or oleerwise, 
the providing of £ale deposit vaults or, with the prev~ous permisaioa:in 
:writing Qf the Reserve Bank the carrying on of the buaioesa of baAlWJg 
exclusively outside India, or such other purposes as are incidental to 
the busin~s of banking. 
• • • • • 
.•. (1) Notwitbatanding anything to the ccmtrary contained'in .section 
77 of·tAle Companies Act, 1956, no bankingcompafty shall,-
• • • • • 
(b) enter into .y commitment for granting ·my loan or 
advance to or on behalf of-
• • • • • 
(iiijaay compD1 ,(Got being a subsidiary of 'rtke 'banking 
company or a oompaDy ltefi8te1'ed unciersecti:cIJR 25 of the Com-
1 of 1958. 
panies Act, 1'956, w .• Gwenuraent oompany) ,of which any of 1 of 1956. 
the directors of the banking company is a director, managing 
agent, manager, employee or guarantor or in which he holds 
substantial interest, or 
· . ' . . . 
2Z. (1)· • • • • 
(3) Before granting any licence under this section, the Reserve Bank 
may require to be satisfied by an inspection of the books of the company 
or otherwise that all or any of the following conditions are fulfUled, 
namely:-
• • • • • 
(b) that the a1fairs of the company are not being, or are not 
likely to be conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of its 
present or future depositeD; 
• • • • • a (1) After the expiry mi two years trOll} ,the comDl8lleement of tt1is 
-1, every bant:iDgc~ aball maintain in lDdia in cash, .gold :or 
i1JDeIlCUlDbered appr,ewd securities, valuec1 at ,a plioe not eJlleeediBg the 
,C!1ImeI1t iJIlarUt price, an amoant wlaich s1:aan not at the ,close of ftaiaess 
'OIl any day be leiS thaD 29 per cent. of the mtal of its time ad demand 
Jiebll:ities in lndda. 
E:rplanati<m.-For the purposes of this section, "1,Ulencumbel1!d ap-
proved securities" of a banking company shall include its a~v~d 
seeurities lodged 'with another institution for an advance or any o~her 
credit arrangement to the extent to which such securities have not been 
aawn .against or availed of. 
• • • • •• 
~A) (41) Notwithstandmg anything eeMatned. m sll"~n (1) or 
in SUb-section (2), after the .upky of twoG yeaN kom tbe cor.nence-
~ent of the Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1962,--
(i) a scheduled bank, in ·additi~n to the average «ally balance 
which it is, or m~ be, req~ to maintain under .se<::1ion 4Z.af .the 
Reserve Bank of Indi,8 Act. 193',.and 
> Ii' t 
88 of 1982. 
2el1* 

2 of 1934. 
26 of 1881. 
& ot 1970. 
21 of 19'16. 
.......... 
(U) every other banking company, in addition to the cash reserve 
which it is required to maintain under s~ion 18, 
~aU maintain in India in cash, gold or unencumbered approved securi-
ties. valued at a price not exceeding the current market price, an amount 
which shall not at the close of business on any day be less than 25 per 
cent. of the total of its demand aDd time liabilities in India; 
(b) in computing the amount for the purposes of clause (a),-
(i) the deposit required under sub-section (2) of section 11 to 
be made with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incorporated 
outside India, and 
(ii) any cash or balances maintained in India by a banking 
company other than a scheduled bank with itself ot' in current 
account with the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or with 
any other bank which may be notified in this behalf by the Central 
Government, in excess of the aggregate of the cash or balance or 
both required to be maintained ·.~nder gec1tion 18, and 
(iii) any balances maintain i by a'scheauled bank with the 
Reserve Bank in excess of t~';'alance required to be maintained. 
by it under section 42 of the serve Bank of India Act, 1934, and 
any balances in current accou t maintained in India by.a scheduled 
bank with the State Ban~ '0 India or with any other ballk whi~ 
may be notified in this behalf by the Central Government, 
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India. 
* • * • * 
(3) For the purpose of, ensuring compliance with the provisions of 
this section. every banking company shall, not later than .fifteen days 
after the end of, the month to which it relates, furnish to the Reserve 
Bank in the prescribed form and manner a monthly return showing 
particulars of its assets maintained in accordance with this section, and 
its time and demand liabilities in India at the close of busines5 on each 
Friday during the month, or if any Friday is a public holiday under the 
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the p!'e-
ceding working day. 
• • * • . * 
MA. (1) • * • • • 
(,!) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes 
the .IJldustrial Development Bank of India, the Reserve Bank, the State 
Bank of India. a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of 
the Ba,pking Companies (AcqutBltion and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Ad, 1970, a Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the 
Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, and any subsidiary bank. 
* • • • * 
Produetion 
of docu-
ments of 
conftdentIal 
nature. 

Amend-
mentl of 
provi-
_ionlre-
lating 
to appoint-
ments 
ofmanag-
ing 
director', 
etc., 
lobe 
lubJect to 
prevlou. 
approval 
of the 
ReIerve 
Bank. 
Power of 
Relerve 
Bank 
lo appoint 
addlttorial 
direeton. 
Punish-
ments for 
cert81n ac· 
tIvitiel in 
relation to 
banking 
Compa-
nJea. 
• .. - .. _ ... __ ... -
&4 
1'-' 
358. (1) In the case of a banking company-
(0) no amendment o~ any provision relating to the appointment 
or re-appointment or termination of appointment or remuneration 
of a ehairman, a managing director or any other director, whole-
time or otherwise or of a manager 01' a chief execUiLive officeI' by 
whatever name called, whether that provision be contained til the 
company's memorandum or articles of association. or in an agree-
ment entered into by it, or in any resolution passed by the company 
in general meeti."lg or by its Board of directors shall have effect 
unless approved by' the Reserve Bank; 
• . ' .. • • • 
Ezplanotion.-For the purposes of this sub-section. any provision con-
ferring any benefit or prOviding any amenity or perquisite, in whatever 
fonn whether during Ofl' after the termination of the term of office of the 
chairman or the manager or the chief executive oftlcer by whatever 
name called or the managing director, or any other director, whole-time 
or otherwise, shall be deemed to be ,a provision relating to his remune-
ration. ..ir 
• ~e 
1 of 1958 . 
(2) Nothing contained in secti, , 1S 268 and 269, the proviso to sub-
section (3) of section 309, sectionl ·310 and 311. the proviso to section 
387, and section 388 (in so far as ~tion 388 makes the provisions of 
aections 310 and 311 apply in relati 'to the manager of a company) 
of the Companies Act. 1956, shall appl.~? any matter in respect of ~hich 
the approval of the Reserve Bank has 1;(, be obtained under sub- 1 of 1958, 
section (1). .. ~.. . ". . 
• • • • • 
MAB. (1) If the Reserve Bank is of opinion that in the interest of 
banking policy or in the public interest or in the interest'S of the bank-
ing company or its depositors it is necessary so to do, it may, from time 
to time by order in writing, appoint. with effect from such da~ as may 
be specified in the order; one or more persons to hold office as additional 
directors of the banking company: 
Provided that the number of additional directors so appointed shRIll 
not at any time exceed five or one-third of the maximum strength fixed 
for the Board by the articles, whichever is less . 
• • • • * 
MAD. (1)' • • • • • 
(3) For the . purposes of this section, "banking company" includes 
th, Reserve Bank, the Industrial Development Bank of India. the State 
Bank of· India, a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 
of the BapkmgCompanies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970. a Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the 
Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, and any subsidiary bank. 
• • • * • 
;2. 
5 Of 1970. 
21 of 1976 . 

1956. 
55 
c. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sections 
460, 464 and 465 of the Companies Act, 1956, the High Court may, in 
the proceedings for winding-up a banking company, dispense with any 
meetings of creditors or contributories or with the appointment o~ a 
committee of inspection if it considers. that no object will be secured 
thereby sufiicient to justify the delay and expense . 
• • • • • 
45. (1) • • • • • 
(5) The scheme aforesaid may contain provisions for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
I ' 
• • • • • 
(i) the continuance of the services of all the employees o~ the 
banking company (excepting such of them as not being workmen 
within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act. 1947 are specifi-
cally mentioned in the scheme) in the banking company itself on 
its reconstruction or, as the case may be, in the transferee bank at 
the same remuneration and on ~he same terms and conditions of 
service, which they were gettin!1..or. as the case may be, by which 
they were being governed, imm~ately before the da1e of ',he qrder 
o~ moratorium: 
.' _,(errr..J Provided that th~....;;.I A-.-- shall contain a provision that-
. (-i) .. thibanking company shall payor grant not later than 
the expiry of the period of three years from the date on which 
the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government, to the said 
employees the same remuneration and the same terms and con-
ditions of service as are applicable to employees of correspond-
ing rank or status of a comparable banking company to be deter-
mined for this purpose by the Reserve Bank (whose determina-
tion in this respect shall be final); 
(ij) the transferee bank shall payor grant not later than 
the expiry of the aforesaid period of three years, to the saJd emplo-
·yees the same remuneration and the same terms and conditions 
of service as are applicable to the other employees of correspond-
ing rank or status of the transferee bank subject to the qualifi-
cations and experience of the said employees being the same as 
or equivalent to those of such other employees of the transferee 
bank: 
Provided fiurthet that if in any case under clause (ii) of the 
first proviso any doubt or difference arises as to whether the quali-
fication and experience of any of the said employees are the same 
as or equivalent to the qualifications and experience of the other 
employees of corresponding rank or status of. the transferee bank 
the doubt or <Jifference shall be referred to the Reserve Bank whose 
decision thereon shall be final; 
• • • • • 
Powerte 
dispenM 
with 
meetin •• 
of credi-
tors, etc. 
Power of 
Relerve 
Bank to 
apply to 
Central 
Govern-
ment tor 
BUapen-
sion ot 
business 
by. 
bankin. 
company 
and to 
prepare 
acheme 
ot re-
coutitu-
or ama18a 
mation. 

Part IlIA. 
to over-
ride other 
laws. 
Special 
provisions 
for t 
punillhing 
offences in 
relation to 
banking 
companies 
being 
wound 
up. 
II 56 
(8) On and from the date 01 the coming into operation of the Bcbt!rne 
or any provision thereof, tile zteheme or such provision shall be binding 
or! the banking company or, 'as the case may be, on the transferee baJ'lk 
and any other banking company concerned in the amaigamatio!) aDd 
also on all the members, depositors and other creditors and employees 
of each of those companies and of the transferee bank, and on any other 
person having any right or liability in relation to any of those compa-
nies or the transferee bank. 
(9) On and from such date as may be specified by the Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf, the properties and assets of the banking com-
pany shall, by virtue of and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand 
transferred to, and vest in, and the liabilities of the banking company 
shall, by virtue of and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand trans-
ferred to, and become the liabilities of, the transferee bank. 
• • • • • 
(15) In t.hi£ section, "banking }nstitution" means any banking com-
pany and includes the State Bank "~f India or any other banking institu-
tion notified by the Central Gover~ment under section 51 . 
• • • • • 
45A. The provisions of this Part an)~~~;:-.,.s made thereunder ~hall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained 
in the Companies Act, 1956 or the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or any other law for the time being 
in force or any instrum~nt having effect by virtue of any such law; but 
the provisions of. any such law or instrument in so far as the same are 
not varied hy, or inconsistent with, the provisions of this Part or rules 
made thereunder shall apply to all proceedings unt!er this Part . 
• '" '" • • 
W. (1) The High Court may, if it thinks fit, take cognizance of and 
try in a summary way any offence alleged to have been committed by 
any person who has taken part in the promotion or formation of the 
banking company which is being wound up or by any director, manager 
or ;officer thereof: 
Provided that the otJence is one punishable under this Act or under 
the Companies Act, 1956. 
(2) When trying any such offence as aforesaid, the High Court may 
also try any other offen{!e not referred to in subo.66!Ction ,(1) whfch i. an 
offence with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898, be charged at the same trial. 
(9) In any caSe tried summarily under sub-section (1), the High 
Court-
(a) need not summon any witness, if it is satisfied that the evi-
dence of such witness will not 'be material; 
•• 
lof 1956. 
, 5 of 1908. 
5 of 189b 
1 of 1956. 

'. 1898. 
f 1898. 
,956. 
1898. 
If 1898. 
._- ." S7 
\' 
(b) shall not be bound to adjourn a trial for any pwrpose \U\leSi 
such adjournment is, in the opinion of the High Court. necessary m 
the interests of justice; 
(c) shall, before passing any sentence, record judgIJ?ellt. em-
bodying the substance of the evidence and also the parUcUIRrs specI-
fied in section 263 ;of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1890, 80 far u 
that section may be applicable; 
and nothing contained in sub-section (2) of section 262 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply to any such trial. 
(4) All offences in relation to winding up alleged to have been com-
mitted by any person specified in sub-sectton (1) which are punishable 
under this Act or under the Companies Act, 1956, and whi.ch are not tried 
in a summary way under sub-section (1) shall, notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in that Act or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898 or in any other law for the time being in force, be taken cognizance 
of and tried by a Judge of the High Court other than the Judge for the 
time being dealing with the proceedings for the winding up of the banking 
company. 
I 
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, the H~~h Court may take cognizan~e of any 
offence under this section ~itho~the accused being committed to it for 
trial nnd all such trials ~ __ be without the aid of a jury. 
-;" ~ . 
" -
• • • • • 
45S. (1) For the purpose of enabling the official liquidator or the 
special officer appointed under sub-section (3) of section 37 to ~e into 
his custody or under his control, all property, effects and actionable 
claims to which a banking company, is or appears to be entitled, the 
official liquidator 'or the special officer, as the case may be, may request 
in writing the Chief Presidency Magiltrate or the DistriQi MllIlstnte, 
within whose jurisdiction any property, books of account ,orotl* docu--
me!lts of such battJting company may be situate or be found, to 1akepos-
session thereof, and the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District 
Magistrat~, as the case may be, shall, on such request being made to 
him,-
(a) take possession of such property, books ofaccouftU or other 
docurnents. and ' 
(b) forward them to the official liquidator or the special ofBcer.· 
(2) Where any such property and effects are in the possession of the 
Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magistrate, as the' oase may 
be IlUch Magistrate shrill, on request in writing beitlg made to 'bim by the 
offiCial liquidator or the speclahnBcer referred. to in !ll}).aedion (l), sell 
such property snd effects and forward the net proceeds of. the 181ello the 
official liquidator or the special officer: 
Chief Pre-
sldency 
Magistrate 
and Dis-
trict Ma-
gistrate to 
assist om-
cial Uqul. 
datorin 
takinl 
charltof 
property 
of'b8t1t-
ing com-
pan)' 
~. 
wWntt''*P; 

Penalties. 
Cogni. 
zanceot 
offences. 
AppU-
cation of 
certalr. 
proviaiODB 
to 
the State 
Bankot 
India and. 
otherDOtl-
ftedbaDD. 
S8 
Provided that such sale shall, as far as practicable, be effected by 
public auction. 
(3) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of 
stib-section (1), the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magis-
trate may take or cause to be taken such steps and Use or cause to be used 
such force as may, in his opinion, be necessary. 
(4) No act of the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magis-
trate done in pursuance of this section shall be called in question in any 
court or before any authority. 
• • • • • \ 
46. (1) • • I 
• • 
(4). If any other provision of tl¥s Act is contravened or if any default 
is made in complying with any ~uirement of this Act or of any order, 
rule or direction made or condition, imposed thereunder, any person guilty 
of such c:mtravention or default sllan be punishable with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, add where a contravention or default is 
a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees for every day during which the contravention or default continues. 
• • • • • , 
47. No court shall take cognizance of any ofi'enl'e punishable under 
sub-section (5) of section 36AA or section 46 except upon complaint in 
writing made by an officer of the Reserve Bank generally or specially 
authorised in writing in this behalf by the Reserve Bank, and no court 
inferior to that of a Pre9idency Magtstrate or a Magistrate of the first 
class shall try any such offence. 
• • • • • 
51. Without prejudice to the provisions of the State Bank of India 
\ 
\ 
l 
! : 
,. 
Act, 1955, or any other enactment, the provisions of sections 10, 13 to 15, 23 ot 19t1tl. 
17, 19 to 21, 23 to 28, 29 [excluding sub-section (3)], 31, 34, 35, 35A, 36 [ex- .. 
cluding clause (d) of sub-section (1)], 46 to 48, 50, 52 and 53 shall also 
applYi so far as may be, to and in relation to the State Bank of India or 
any corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, or a 5 of 1970. 
Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural 
Banks Act, 1976, or any other banking institution notified by the Central 21 ot 1976. 
Government in this behalf as they apply to and in relation to banking 
companies: 
Provided that-
(4) nothing contained in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 
10 shall apply to the chairman of, the State Bank of India or to a 
general manager of any subsidiary bank in so far as the said clause 
precludes him from being a director of, or holding an office in, any 
institution approved by the Reserve Bank; 

181'1. 
_ .... -.-........ --~ 
59 
(b) nothing contained in section 19 shall apply to the holding 
by the State Bank of India of shares in the capital of any such sub-
sidiary bank; and 
(c) nothing contained in section 46 or in section 47A shall apply 
to any officer of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank or the 
State Bank of India, nominated or appointed as director of the 
State Bank of India, or any f>uch subsidiary bank or any other bank-
ing institution notified by the Central Government under this 
section. 
sz, (1) • • • • • 
(3) All rules made under this s~tion shall be subject to the condition 
of previous publication, and the date to be specified under clause (3) of 
section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall not be less than six 
months from the date on which the draft of the proposed rules was pub-
lished: 
Provided that in respect of the first occasion on which rules are made 
under this section (including the rules made for the first time on matters 
specified in secti'ons lOA and 47A), the provisions of this sub-section shall 
not apply. 
I 
• • • 
,I 
• • 
J 
I 
56. The pro~~_~'f. • Act, as in force for the time being, shall 
apply to, or,,,~' .... dLlon to, co-operative societies as they apply to, or in 
relati'?l'l to, banking companies subject to the following modifications, 
-1i'iame1y:-
• • • • • 
(f) for section 7, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
<7. (1) No co-operative society other than a co-operative 
bank shall use as part of its name any of the words "bank", 
"banker" or "banking" and no co-operative society shall CIU'I'J' 
on the business of banking in India unless it uses as part of its 
name at least one of such words. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to-
(eI) a primary credit society, or 
(b) a co-operative society formed for the protection of 
the mutual interests of co-operat~ve banks or co-operative' 
land mortgage banks; 
(e) any co-operative society, not being a primary credit 
society, formed by the employees of a banking company 
or the State Bank of India or any other banking institution 
notified by the Central Government under section 51 or the 
employees of a subsidiary of such banking company or the 
State Bank of India or, as the case may be, such banking 
institution.'; 
(g) sections 10, lOA, lOB, lOC and Ion shall be omitted; 
• • • • • • 
Power of 
Central 
Qovern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
Act to ap-
ply to co-
operative 
80cieties 
8ubject to 
modifica-
tion .. 
Ule of 
word 
"bank", 
"banker" 
er "bank-
ing". 

Cash 
reserve. 
" 
i . 
... -... _- 60 
(1), fo;r Retion 18, tlle ff9Uowing section shall De substituted, 
~ely:-
'18. Every co-operative bank, not being a State co-operative 
bank for the Wne being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank, of India Act, 1984, shall maintain in India, by 
way of cash reserve with itself or in current account opened with 
the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or the State co-
operative bank of the State concerned or with any other bank 
notified by the Central Government in this behalf or, in the case 
of a primary co-operative bank, with the central co-operative 
bank of the district concerned or partly in cash with itself and 
partly in such account or accounts, a sum equivalent to at least 
three per cent. of the total of its time and demand IiabWties in 
India, and shan submit to the Reserve Bank before the 15th day 
of every month It return showing the amount so held on Friday 
of each week of' the preceding month with particulars o~ its 
time and demand liabilities in India on each such Friday, or, i'f 
any such Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instru-
ments Act, 1881, at the ::lose of business on the preceding work-
ing day. 
I 
Exp14n.at'i.on.-In this section and section 24, "liabilities in 
India" shall not include,-
• 
(a) the paid-up ca~tql or the reserves or any credit 
balance in the profit and loss accm'~ the co-operative 
bank; '"'" . 
(b) any advance taken from a State Government, the' 
Reserve Bank, the State Bank of India, the Industrial Deve-
lopment Bank of India, the Agricultural Refinance Corpora-
tion or any 'bank notified by the Central Government under 
clause (c) of the Explanation to sub-section (1) of section 
42 of. the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(~) in the case of a State or central co-operative bank, 
also any deposit of money with it representing the reserve 
fund or any part thereof required to be maintained with it 
by any other co-operative society within its area of opera-
tion, and in the case of a central co-operative bank, also an 
advance taken by it from the State co-ope~ative bank of the 
State concerned; 
(d) in the case of a primary co-operative bank, a110 
any advance taken by it from the State co-operative bank 
o~ the State concerned or the central co-operative bank of 
the district concerned;'; 
• • • • 
(m) "in section 20A, in sub-section (1), the words and figures 
·'Notwtthstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 293 
of the Companies Act, 1956," shall be omitted; 
:1-
• • .. • • 
2 of 
26 of 
2 of 1934 

'.I 
" 
'('./' . 
~~ 
I' 
, . 
! ; 
( 
" ~98S. 
I I ~ 
), 
,r 1986 ,\ . 
,at I"" 
61 
{~) in. section 22.- . 
(i) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following 8ub-lMCtioM 
,hall be substituted, narne1y:-
" (l) Save as hereinafter provided, no co-operativa 
society shall carryon banking business in India unleu-
(a) it is a primary credit society, or 
(b) it is a co-operative bank and holds a licence 
issued in that behalf by the Reserve Bank, subject to 
such conditions, if any , as the Reserve Bank may deem 
fit to impose: 
Provided that nothing in this sUb-section shall 
apply to a co-operative society, not being a primary 
credit society or a co-operative bank carrying on bank-
ing business at the commencement of the Banking Laws 
(Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965, for a 
period of one year from sUch eommeDcement. 
(2) Every co-operative society carrying on business as 
a co-operative bank at the commencement of the Banking 
Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1963, shall 
before the expiry of three months from such commence-
ment, every primary cret;!it society which becomes a prim-
ary co-operative bank pfter such commencement shall 
before the expiry of t,biee months from the date on which 
it so beco~, A 'primary ,co-operative bank and every co-
~v.r-8ociety other than a primary clTedit society shall 
< ... ..- ... ' before commencing banking business in India, apply tn writ-
: ..... ,t<' lng to the Reserve Bank for a licence under this section: 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
'shall be deemed to prohibit-
(i) a co-operative society carrying on business a8 a 
co-operative bank at the commencement oil the Bank-
ing Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 
1965. or 
(ii) a ccroperative bank which has come into 
existence as a result of the division of any other co-
operative society. or the amalgamation of other co-
operative societies <,arrying on business in either case as 
a co-operative bank or banks at such commencement. or 
(iii) a primary credit society which becomes a pri-
mary co-operative hank after such commencement, 
from carrying on banking business until it is granted a 
licence in pursuance of. this section or is, by a notice in 
writing, notified by the Reserve Bank that. the licence can-
not be granted to it."; 
(U) in sub-section (3), clause (c) shall be omitted; 
• • • • • 
(fI) in section 24.-
(i) in sub.section (1), the words "after the expiry of two 
JUrs from thecommeaCl!ementof this Act," shall be omitted; 

62 
(ii) for au:1>sections (2) and (2A), the following sub-sections shall 
be substituted, name1y:-
.. (2) In computing the amount for the purposes of sub-
88clion (1),-
(4) any balances maintained in India by a co-operative 
bank in current account with the Reserve Bank or the State 
Bank of India or with any other bank which may be notift.ed 
in this behalf by the Central Government, including in the 
cue of a Sta,te Co-operative Bank, the balance required under 
section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, '1934, to be so 
maintained, 
(b) any balances maintained by a Central Co-operative 
Bank with the State Co-operative Bank of the State concerned, 
and 
(e) any balances maintained by a primary co-operative 
bank with the Central Co-operative Bank of the district con-
cerned or with the State Co-operative Bank of the State con-
cerned, 
Ihall be deemed to be cash maintained in India. 
I 
(2A) (a) Notwithstar~ding anything contained in sub-section 
(1) or in sub-section (2), \after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of the Ban);ing Laws (Application to Co-operative 
" 
2 ot 
Societies) Act, 1965, or of Stich further' period not exceeding one 23 of 1" 
year as the Reserve Bank, having regartl to the interests of the 
eo-op,eratlve bank concerned, may think fit in a .. :> particulat case 
to allow,-
(i) a State Co-operative Bank, in addition to the average 
daily balance which it is, or may be, required to maintain 
under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and 2 of , 
(ii) every other co-operative bank, in addition to the 
cash reserve which it is requiTed to maintain under section 18, 
shall maintain in India in cash, gold or unencumbered approved 
securities, valued at a price not exceeding the current market 
price, an amount which shall not at the close of business on any 
day be less than twentY-five per cent. of the total' of its demand 
and time liabilities in India; 
(b) in computing the amount for the purpose of clause 
(a),-
(i) any cash or balances maintained in India by a eo-
operative bank, other than a scheduled State Co-operative 
Bank, with itself or in current account with the Reeerve 
Bank or the State Bank of India or with any otller bank 
which may be notified in this behalf by the Central Govern-
ment and also any balances maintained with the State Co-
operative Bank of the State concerned. and, in the case of a 
primary co-operative bank, also any balances maintained with 
the Central Co-operative Bank of the district concerned or 
with the State ~rative Bank of the State concerned in 
excess of the aggregate of the cash or balances or both re-
quired to be maintained under section 18; and 

63 
(it) arty balance maintaiDed by a scheduled. State Co-
oper'ative Bank with the Reserve Bank. in excess of the 
balance required to be maintained by it under section 42 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and any balances in 
current account maintained in India by a scheduled State 
Co-operative Bank with the State Bank of India or with any 
other bank which may be notified by the Central Government, 
Ihall be deemed to be cash maintained in India. 
ErPZanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,-
(Q) approved securities, or a portion thereof, represent-
ing investment of Agricultural Credit Stabilization Fund of 
a cO'-OpJerative bank shall not be deemed to be unencWD-
bered approved securities; 
(b) balance with the State Co-operative Bank of the 
State concerned or with the Central Co-operative Bank of 
the district concerned, or a portiOn thereof, representing in-
vestment of Agricultural Credtt Stabilization Fund of a c0-
operative bank shall not be deemed to be cash maintained in 
India; }i 
(c) in case a co-ope~. e bank has taken an advance 
against any balance main, , ed with the State Bank of India 
or with any other bank T, ,ell may be notifted. in this behalf 
by the CentralGP~nment or with the State Co-operative 
Bank q.~ 'State concerned Or with the Central Co-opjera-
,,...~ of the district cOncerned, such balance to the 
...,,,~.,,"i 
,. . extent to which it has been drawn against or availed of shall 
not be deemed to be cash maintained in India."; 
• • • • • 
(w) in section 35,-
(i) in sub-section (1),-
• • • • • 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end. 
namely:-
"Provided that the Reserve Bank may, if it considers neces-
sary or expedient 10 to do, cause an inspection to be made of 
a primary co-operative bank under this sub-section by one or 
more officers of a State Co-opetative Bank in the State in which 
such primary co-operative bank carries on business and may, if 
it considers it necessary and expedient 90 to do, suWly a copy 
of the said report to the State Co-operative Bank or the Regtatrar 
of Co-operative Societies of the State in which the impected 
bank is registered."; 
• • • • • 
(iii) the Expl4natiOn shall be omitted; 
• • • • • 

Return •. 
Balltnce-
sheet, 
6:1c:., of 
State 
Bank 
maybe 
discus-
sed at 
general 
meetinJ. 
State 
Bank 
mayap-
point 
oftlcera 
and 
othfitr 
employ-
~ 
Returns 
to be 
turniahe4 
bya 
nblidiary 
ltank. 
:64 
(~) in section.", in sub·_Uoft (1). clauses (b) .and (d) shall b. omit. 
teaj 
• • • '" • 
(zc) in section 46, in clal.l.se (a) of the Ea"Pla~ion, at~r the words ''In· 
.cl1,ldes a", the words "co-operative society," shall be inserted; 
• 
'" 
• • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955 
(23 OF 1955) 
• '" • • 
4G. (1) The State Bank shall furnish to the CentrJll Government and 
to the Reserve Bank within three months from the 31st day of December, 
as on which its books are closed and balanced its balance-sheet, together 
with the profit and loss account and the auditors' repprt on the working 
of the State Bank during the period covered by the accounts: 
.-Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with 
the Reserve Bank, extend the said period of three months by such further 
periOd, not exceeding three months, as it may think fit. 
• '" '" '" '" 
42. (1) '" '" '" • 
(2) Th-: shareholders presem at an annual general meeting shall be 
entitled to discuss the balance-sheet and the profit and 10es . account of the 
State Bank made up to the previous m&tday of December, the repori of 
the Central Board on the working of the St~te-Bank for the Pterlod. c0-
vered by the accounts and the auditors' report on the balimce-sheet and 
accounts. 
* • • • • 
43. (1) • * '" '" 
(2) The officers, advisers and employees of the State Bank shall exer-
cise such powers and perform such duties as may ~ entrusted or dele-
gated to them by the CentTal Board. 
• • • '" • 
E~CTS FROM mE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSD)IAIlY BANKS) ACT, 1_ 
(38 OF 1959) , 
• • • 
' . • 
c. (1) A supsidiary bank shall furnish to the State B~nk ~d the Be-
server~- . 
(a) within three months from the 31~t day of December u on 
which its books are closed and balanced, its balance-sheet, together 
with the profit and lOllS account alld the audi~r's report, ~ a report 
by the Board of Directors on the working of the subsidiary baDt 
during the period covereQ by the accounts; and ' 
• • • • , . 
\ 
I, 

9. 
• '" '" • 
'. (2) The shareholders pI'eserit lit an annual.general meeting shall be 
e~tJ~ed to discuss the balance-sh~t and profit and loss account of the 
bank concerned, made up to the previous 31st day of DecC!lUber, the re-
port of the Board of Directors oq the working of that bank for the period 
covered by the accounts and the .uditors' report on the balance-sheet and 
accounts. i 
• • 
12 .. (1) '" 
(3) All rules made under this 
thirty days before each House of 
are made, and shall be subject t 
ma~(t d~ring the session in whi~ 
diately following. 
'" '" '" 
'" '" 
'" '" 
ction shall be laid for not less than 
rliament as soon as may be after they 
uch modifications as Parliament may 
ey are SO laid or the se~iQll imIne-
'" '" 
EXTllACTS FROM 1'HE DEPOSIT INVRANCZ CoItl!OItATlON ACT, 1961 
(47 O~I) 
'" '" '" io '" '" ~; 
2. In this Act, unless the contex~therwise requires,-
'" '" -- '" '" .,. 
,i!?1. .w~ki~~ company" means any company which transacts the 
"""..,J:..nJiOe&6 of banking in India and incll,ldes the. State Ban~, a sub-
.. sidiary banll and any other banking institution notifief.l under section 
51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, but does not include the 
Tamil Nadu Industrial Investment Corporation Limited; 
Exp~ion.-Any company which is eng~ged in the manufac-
ture . of gpods or c~rries on any trade and which accepts de~ita of 
money from the public mtitfely for the pu~ of flnlUlciDg U. bUli-
n("ss as such manufacturer or trader shall not .be dee.tned to traDl8ct 
the business of banking within the meaning of this clause; 
'" '" '" '" '" 
. (i) "~., 'red 'bank" mean. s a banking company or a Regional Rural 
.... ·~n eligible co-opel'Btive bank for the time being registered 
derthe PIl'ovisions of this Act and includes for the purposes of 
sections 16, 17, 18 and 21,-
(i) a banking company referred to in clause (a) or clause 
( b) of. section 13, or 
(ii) a co-operatiVle blank referred to in clauae (a) or cla~ <,,> 
of secttan 1i3C, 
the registrat~op whereof. has ~q cance~led under aection. 13, or as 
the case may ~, under seCtion 1IC; 
'" '" . . . 
General 
meetlnll. 
Power Of 
Central 
Govern-
Dlent to 
mate 
rulee. 
Delhli-
tiOM. 

Board of 
cIlrecton. 
Reliltn-
tiOD of 
new 
baDkine 
com-
paniea. 
CanceUa-
tlonof 
registra-
tion. 
(k) "new banking company" means a benking company which 
begins to transact the business of banking after the commencement 
ot this Act under a licence' iI'an~ to it under section 22 of the, Bank-
ing Regulation Act, 1949, and includes any banking institution noUfted: 
under iection 51 of the said Act a£fr such commencement; 
• • • • • 
6. (1) • • • • • 
(2) A director nominated under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-
section (1) shall hold office during ~e pleasure of the authority nomi-
nating him and a director nominatedjtnder cl~ (d) of sub-section (1) 
shall hold office for such period rft exceeding four years as may be 
specified by the Central Governmellf 
(3) A person shall not be capa\fe of being nominated as a director 
under clause (d) of sub-section (l)iif-
(a) he has been removed 0 dismissed from the service of Gov-
ernment or of a local authorit'! or of a corporation or company in 
which not less than ftfity~:)De ,.r cent. of the paid-up share capJtal 
is held by Government; Or 
(b) he is or at any time hs been adjudicated as insolvent or 
has suspended payment of his t'!bts or has compounded with his 
creditors; or 
(c) he is of unsound mind and stan\!i,,~:, declared by a competent 
court; or 
(d) he has been convicted of any offence which, in the opr.l~n 
of the Centl'1l1 Government, involves moral turpitude . 
• • * * * 
11. The corporation shall re-giater every new banking company 88 an 
insured bank as lOOn u may ·beafter it is granted a1ieence under section 
22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, or, as the use may be, after it 
is notified under section 51 of the said Act. . . 
* * * * '" 
13. (1) * • '" • * 
(2) The provisions 01 cla.uaes (eI). (b), (c), (cl) Mid. (h) o~ aub-IIectioIJ 
(1) shall apply to a corresponding new bank as they IfJ1Ply to a bapldng 
company . 
• * • '" '" 
32. (1) • • * * 
(2) The Central Government shall cause every auditor'. report aDd. 
report of the working of the Corporation to be laid 4cfr DOt leIre than 
thirty days ~ore each House of Parliament as soon as may be after 
each such report is received by th~ Central Government. 
• '" • • • 
10 .t 1~" 
t 
1001 IN9. 
/ 
I 

\ 
10f IND. 
67 
/ 
ExTRACTS lI'ROM .~E BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1970 
(5 OF 1970) 
• '" '" '" '" 
I. (1) '" '" '" '" 
(5) Every corresponding new bank shall carryon and transact the 
business of'banking as deftned in clause (b) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, and may engage in one or more f()rms of business 
specified in sub-section (1) of seetion 6 of that Act. 
• • • '" '" 
! ~J. '" • l • • 
(5) Every scheme made by the Cent Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it s made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a period of thirty days which 
may be com.prised in one session or i two successive session, and if., 
before the expiry of the session in w 'ch it is so laid or the session 
immediately following, both Houses. agree in making any modiftcation 
in the scheme or both Houses agree that the scheme should not be made, 
the scheme shall thereafter have efect only in such modified from or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; sf however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without pr+dice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that scherJ\,r.'*· . 
.. '" • • 
• '" • • 
(4) Every auditor of. a corresponding new bank shall make a report 
to the Central Govern~ent upon the" annual balance-sheet and accounts 
and in every such report shall state-
(4) whether, in his opinion, the balance-sheet is a full and fair 
balance-sheet containing all the necessary particulars and is properly 
drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the affairs Ilf the 
corresponding new bank, and in case he had called for any explana-
tion or infornation, whether it has been given and whether it is 
'I wl!ether or not the transactions of the corresponding new 
have come to his notice, have been within the powers . " 
, \, 
whether or not the returns received from the offices and 
'ancmts of the corresponding new bank have been found adequate 
for the purpose of his audit; 
(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance 
of profit or loss for the period covered by such account; and 
(e) any other matter which he considers should be bro~ght to 
the notice of the Central Government. 
'" '" • * * 
t (8) The Central Government shall cause every auditor's report and 
"report on the working and activ;ties of each corresponding new bank to 
~ laid for not less than thirty days before each House of Parliament as 
1 
Establiah_ 
milnt of 
correspon-
din, new 
banks .-
andbusi. 
ness 
thereof, 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-· 
mentto 
make 
schern!!. 
t:losure 
of ae· 
counts 
,lOd diS· 
posalor 
profits. 

CIOlW'eof 
areoUnta. 
Annual 
rePort 
to be 
furnished 
to the 
share-
holden: 
68 
800n as may be after each such report is received by Itl'll! Central Gov-
ernment. 
• • • • • 
ExTRACTS FROM THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976 
(21 .oF 1976) 
• • • • • 
It. (1) Every Regional Kural Bank shall cauaeits books to be olGfed 
and balanced as on the 31st day of December of each year and mall ap.-
point with the approval of the Central Government auditors for the audit 
of its accounts. 
(2) Every auditor of a Regional Rural Bank shall be a person who is 
qualified to act as an auditor of a company under section 226 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, and Mall receive such remuneration ali th~ Re-
gional Rural Bank may fix with the approval of the Central Government. 
• • * * 
(4) Every auditor of a ~l Rural Bank shall make a l'eport to 
that baak upon the annual balan~e-sheet and accounts and in every such 
report shall state,- . 'l 
• * • \ • • 
(e) any other n1atter which ,he considers should be brought to 
the notice of the Regional Rural BaYA:k~ 
20. Every Regional Rural Bank shall, within sixty' tiayi:.":irom the date 
of closure of its accounting year, send to ea~h of its shareh~ffit1"S a 're-
port as to its working and activities during the accounting year iirt\~7"'" 
diately preceding together with a copy of its balance-sheet, profit and 
loss account and the auditor's report in relation to the accounts of the 
said accounting year. 
* * * * 
.... t· 
1 of 1958. 

LOKSABRA
A
BILL-I•••
furthertoamendtheBankers'BooksEvidenceAct,1891,heReserve
BankofIndiaAct,1934,theBankingRegu~cttionAct,19~,theState
BankofIndiaAct,19551,theStateBankofIndia(Subsi<aryBanks)
Act,1959,theDepositInsuranceandCreditGuaranteeC:orporation
Act,1961,theBankingCompanies(AcquisitionandI'ransjerof
Undertakings)Act,1970andtheRegionalRuralBankAct,1976.
- (ShriHid.Patel,
MinisterFinance.)
