Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 184 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං N. K. Pඋൾආൺർඁൺඇൽඋൺඇ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bൾ it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 93 of the Constitution, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Deputy Speaker shall be chosen within one month from the date 
of election of the Speaker:
Provided further that in case the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker become vacant, 
the House shall choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, within one month 
from the date of such vacancy, as the case may be.”. 
Short title and commencement.
Amendment 
of article 93.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 93 of the Constitution specifically stated that “The House of the people shall 
as soon as may be choose two members of the House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker thereof ”. The legislative intention in article 93 is not complied with due to the lack 
of time stipulation. The words used in article 93 “as soon as” is not considered in the case 
of choosing the Deputy Speaker of the House of People. The post of Deputy Speaker of 
House of People is vacant for long time. It is highly necessary to fill up the vacancy of the 
Deputy Speaker for the compliance of Constitutional provisions. This House is bound by 
the mandate of Constitution. But the same is prolonged taking the advantage that there is no 
time stipulation. Hence it is necessary to amend the article 93 by inserting specific time limit 
for choosing the Deputy Speaker of the House of People. 
         Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං; N. K. PREMACHANDRAN
4 July, 2022.
2

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ Fඋඈආ Tඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ
* * * *
93. The House of the People shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the 
House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of 
Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall choose another member to be 
Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
* * * *
* * * *
3
The Speaker 
and Deputy 
Speaker of the 
House of the 
People.

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri N. K. Premachandran, M.P .) 