AS INTRODUCED IN Lok 5५888

Bill No. 184 of 2000

THE UNIFORM EDUCATION BILL, 2000
By
Suet, 5. Vivekananva Reppy, M.P.
A
BILL
[to provide for free and uniform education throughout the country. |
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Uniform Education Act, 2000. Short title,

4 extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

5 2. In this Act, uniess the context otherwise requires: — Definitions.

(0) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be; and

(ii) “education” means education upto higher secondary level.

3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide free and Free and
10 compulsory education to not more than two children of a family irrespective of their compulsory
caste, creed or colour: 34


Establishment
of Schools.

Uniform
system of
education in
all schools.

Free uniform
and books etc.
to students,

Scholarship to
poor students,

Recognition of
educational
certificates.

Assistance for
higher studies,

Power to make
rules.

2

4. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain one school for
every one thousand people.

5. There shall be uniform sysiem of education with Hindi and mother tongue as the
subjects in all schools whether owned by, o receiving aid out of funds of the appropriate
Government or owned or run by private organisations or individuals or societies\or by
minorities.

6. The appropriate Government shall provide breakfast, mid-day meal, uniform
and books free of cost to all students in ali schools,

7. The appropriate Government shall provide rupees one hundred per month
upto primary level and rupees two hundred per month upto higher secondary level as
scholarship to every student, the income of whose parents or guardian from all the
sources is less than rupees one thousand and five hundred per month,

8. The appropriate Government shall not recognize any certificate awarded by a
school not following uniform pattern of primary and/or higher secondary education under
the provisions of this Act.

9. The Government shall provide all financial and other assistance to the students
who have secured higher number of marks and desire to pursue higher technical
education.

10. The Central Government may, by notification im the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 45 of the Constitution provides that it shall be the duty of the State to
provide free and compulsory education to ail children until they attain fourteen years of
age. Although, the Government has taken many steps to achieve this end, yet, they are not
adequate. For the last fifty years of our independence, we have not been able to provide
education to all the children. Our educational system is costly and a burden to every
child. Poor parents are unable to send their children to schools, There have been many
cases where dropouts from schools are increasing due to financial as well as over burdening
problems and wrong education system. At present, we have schools run by the Government
and those by private organisations and minorities, All these schools follow
different pattern and as a 16501, there is no uniformity in the education imparted in these
schools and they are charging high fees for admission which is beyond the capacity of an
ordinary person whose income is less.

Uniformity in the system of school education will arouse consciousness of national
integration in the highly sensitive and impressionable minds of the children. The type of
education imparted to the children at the school level determines their growth in the final
analysis as future citizens of the country.

Uniform system of education would avoid any feeling of discrimination or denial
of equal opportunities in the matter of career advancement of the children.

Many parents, due to poverty, send their children to employment which adds to
child labour in the country. Therefore, it is necessary to provide them with free meals,
uniforms, books and scholarships so that such parents are motivated to send their children
to schools. This is the only alternative to provide education to those who are deprived of
education due (© poverty.

I is, therefore, proposed to provide for uniform and free education upto the higher
secondary level and also provide financial and other assistance to those children who
have secured good position at higher secondary level in the schools.

New Deut: Y. S. VIVEKANANDA REDDY
November 6, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education. Clause 4 provides
for appropriate Government shall establish and maintain schools for every one thousand
people. It is not known how many schools will be required for carrying out the provisions
of the Bill. Some expenditure will be involved in setting up of schools and provision of
free meals, uniform, etc. and scholarships to poor students (clauses 6 and 7). Clause 9
provides for financial and other assistance to the students at higher sezondary level. The
expenditure in respect of schools in Union Territories shall be met out of the Consolidated
Fund of India, Expenditure in respect of schools established in State shall be met out of
the respective Consolidated Funds of States although some assistance may be extended by
the Central Government.

It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is
likely to be involved. A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees thirty crore is also
likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

‘© Provide for free and uniform education throughout the country.

(Shri ¥.S. Vivekananda Reddy, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4903.S—28-11-2000,