10

४ As inrropucep पड़ Lok Sapna

22 ay

Bill No, 184 of 1991

THE BANKING REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991

A
BILL

further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Banking Regulation (Amendment)
Act, 1991.

2. In section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, in clause
(s), in sub-section (1) of section 29 as substituted by that clause,—

(a) in the opening portion, after the words, figures and letters
“each year ending with the 30th day of June,”, the words “or at the
expiration of a period of twelve months ending with such date as the
Ceniral Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
in this behalf,” shall be inserted;

(b) in the later portion, after the word “year”, at both the places
where it occurs, the words “or the per'od” shall be inserted:

(०) the following proviso shali be inserted at the end, namely;—

“Provided that with a view to facilitating the transition
from one period of accounting to another period of accounting
under this sub-section, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette. make such provisions as it
considers necessary or expedient for the preparation of, or for
other matters relating to, the balance-sheet or profit and loss
account in respect of the concerned year or period, as the
case may be.”.

Short
title.

Amend.
mont of
section
56 of

Act 10
of 1949,

199


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Banking Regulation Act, 1949, was amended by the Banking,
Public Financial Institutions and Negotiable Instruments Laws (Amend-
ment) Act, 1988, to empower the Central Government to change the
accounting year of the commercial banks. ‘The accounting year of the
commercial banks was accordingly changed in 1988 to coincide with the
financial year (April—March) which iy the uniform accounting year for
all assessees under the Income-tax Act, 1961. However, similar amend-
ment could not be made in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 for chang-
ing the accounting year in relation to the co-operative banks, With a
view to bringing uniformity. it is now proposed to amend clause (s)
of section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 to empower the Central
Government to change the accounting year of co-operative banks. It is
also proposed to provide necessary enabling provisions to facilitate
transition from one period of accounting to another period of accounting
48 were made for tha commercial banks in 1988.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Denn; MANMOHAN SINGH
The 12th November, 1991.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (s) of section 56 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Under the proposed amendment, the
Central Government is being empowered to change the accounting year
of the co-operative banks, by notification in the Official Gazette, so as
to coincide with the financial year (year ending 31st March) which is
now the uniform previous year for all the assessees and for all sources
of income under the Income-tax Law. The Central Government is also
being empowered to make certain provisions in relation to the balance-
sheet or profit and loss account with a view to facilitating the transition
from one period of accounting to another period of accounting.

2. The aforesaid matters are of administrative detail and cannot be
incorporated in the Bill, The delegation of legislative power is, there-
fore, of a normal character.


-

Act to
apply to
co-opera-
tive
encietios
subject to

cations,

Accounts
and
balance-
sheet.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE BANKING REGULATION Act, 1949
(10 oF 1949)
# * * रू *
PART V

APPLICATION OF THE Acr To Co-OPERATIVE BANKS

56. The provisions of this Act, as in force for the time being, shall
‘apply to, or in relation to, co-operative societies as they apply to, or in
relation to, banking companies subject to the following modifications,
namely: —

* * * * *

(s) for sections 29 and 30, the following section shall’ be. substi-
tuted, namely:— -

“29. (1) At the expiration of each year ending with the
30th day of June, every co-operative bank, in respect of all
ness transacted by it, shall prepare with reference to that
year a balance-sheet and profit and loss account as on the last
working day of the year in the Forms set out in the Third Sche
dule or as near thereto as circumstances admit.

(2) The balance-sheet and profit and loss account shall be
signed by the manager or the principal officer of the bank and
where there are more than three directors of the bank, by at
least three of those directors, or where there are not more than
three directors, by all the directors.

(3) The Central Government, after giving not” less than
three months’ notice of its intention so to do by a_ notification
in the Official Gazette. mav from time to time by a like noti-
fication amend the Po n the Third Schedule.”:

* * * * *

set out



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.

(Dr. Manmohan Singh, Minister of Finance)