1
THE  SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
ANDHRA PRADESH BILL, 2015
By
DR. P. RA VINDRA BABU, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh for the
purposes of promoting the welfare of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes of people, agricultural
labourers and unemployed citizens, development of infrastructure in the
State, development of backward districts, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Andhra
Pradesh Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 184  of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due  appropriation by law provide, as special financial
assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes of development,
as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Union Government, for the
purposes of—
(i) promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Other Backward Classes of people;
(ii) implementing welfare schemes aimed at improving the conditions of agri-
cultural labourers;
(iii) allocation of adequate funds for specific development projects;
(iv) development of necessary infrastructure; and
(v) development, exploitation and proper utilization of the resources in the
State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Andhra
Pradesh.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Andhra Pradesh is socially and economically backward. Problem of
poverty, unemployment and illiteracy are required to be addressed immediately. Besides
measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker sections and new development
schemes are required to be undertaken in a time bound manner to solve the problem of
backwardness in the State.
In the year 2014, Andhra Pradesh was bifurcated and a separate State, namely, Telangana
has been created. Most of the developed regions including post bifurcated State capital
Hyderabad now forms part of Telangana. Now, after bifurcation, a new capital has to be
developed including development of necessary infrastructure in the State of Andhra Pradesh
in a time-bound manner.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh for its all round development including welfare of
weaker sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast natural resources. Such
a step of providing financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh would go a long way
in building this nation more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P. RAVINDRA  BABU
June 30, 2015.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law
provide, as special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh to meet the costs of
such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the
Union Government.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh. As
the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Andhra Pradesh as special financial
assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare
schemes to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of the Central
Government are identified, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring
expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh for the
purposes of promoting the welfare of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
the Schduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes of people, agricultural
labourers and unemployed citizens, development of infrastructure in the
State, development of backward districts, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. P. Ravindra Babu, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1396LS(S3)—16-07-2015.