Bill No. 1M of 1980 
~, ' ..... ..111 ,...5 ........ ...! ...... B 
':t'HE VICTORIA MEMORIAL (4I4ENDMENT) ~tI.J:.-•. 1980 . '. ,"" ~.' : 
A 
J " 
further to amend the VictoriA Memorial Act, 1903. 
B. it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of~p.dia ali. ~ollows: -
1. 'ntis Act may be called the Victoria Memorial; (AmendP,lent). ,Act, 
1980. . 
10 ot 1903. S 2. In the Victoria Memorial Act, ~_ (hereinafter referred to as 
10 
IS 
the principal Act), in section 2,-
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
But;8tituted, namely: -" 
II (1) The Trustees of the Victoria Memor,ial (hereinafter " " .. . .," . ,. ..',;.. I 
called the Trustees) shall be the fol1ow~¥,~IUri~Y:~ ,. 
(a) the GoY~mor of, West. ~a1,ex qJficio Chairman; 
Jb).}he C~eI,J\iIt~ice ofl ~he. ,Wih ~ ,of West 
Bengal, ex &f!tCio; , 
(c) three persons to be nominated by the Central 
Government, one' of "'hom shSll 'be' a -representative ot com· 
m.rce and. iWldlistry, chosen ill . cansutta~"iitb the State 
GOwrnnietlt:of:-WestBe~1 'and' tWb':~~cbOSen from 
among persons . who, in the' opinf6n ot :tfie-ce!ih-itr ,Govern· 
IneI1t. have' expert lmoWleBge of the e:x:nibitS fri?the: (Victoria 
:Mtemorial or are mu~n;rtSts, bfstorlw or;arfhfst~rians; 
, . ! ~;, 
ihort 
title. 
.Amend-
ment 
of.e:ction 
2. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 5. 
• 2 
(d) a representative of the Central Government in the 
Ministry concerned. with matters relating to the Victoria 
Memorial, ex of1icio; 
(e) a representative of the Central Government in the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, concerned 5 
with matters relating to the Victoria Memorial, ex ojJi.cio; 
(f) the Mayor of the Corporatioo of Calcutta and where 
the Corporation of Calcutta is superseded, the Administra-
tor of that Corporation, ex officio; 
-, 
(g) an officer, not below the rank of the Accountant- 10 
General, nominated. by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India, ex officio; 
(h) the Secretary to the Government of West Bengal in 
. the Department of Education, ex officiO; 
(t) four persons (of whom one at least shall be from IS 
the general body of subscribers), to be nominated by the 
Trustees from among persOll.l, who, in the opinion of the ,~! 
Trustees, have expert knowledge of the exhibits in the . 
Victoria Memorial or are museologists, historians or art 
. historians, with the approval of the Central Government."; 20 
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3A) If any of the Trustees referred to in clauses (b), (d), 
(e), (f), (g) and (h) of sub-section (1) is unable to attend any 
meeting of the Trustees, he may, with the previous approval of 25 
the Chairman, authorise in writing a person to do so.", 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
(a) in suh-3ection (I), after the words "Central Government 
may", the words ", by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be 
inserted; 30 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- L 
"(da)Xt1i.e fees to be levied for admisiion to the Victoria 
Memorial;"; 35 
(ii) in clause (e), the word "and" occurring at the end 
shall be omitted; 
(iii) clause (f) shall be omitted; 
(c) after sub-section (2), the folloWing sub-section shall be 
iRserted, namely: - 40 
"(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this section shall be laid, as SOOD as may be after it is made, 
before.e~ House of Parliament, while it is in aeuion, for a total 
period of thirty ~ys which may be comprised in one HIIion or 
in two or more .uccessive sessiona,and if, before. the expiry of 45 
the session immediately folloW~g the session or. the succeutve 
I 

• 
leB8ions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modiftcatio. 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modifted form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; 80, however, that any 
5 such modJ1ication or annulment Ihall be without prejudiee to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule .... 
.. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be J'ue1'tion 
1DJerted, namely: _ of 
10 
U6. (1) The Trustees may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the OfBclal Gazette, make 
regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there-
under, for enabling the body to discharge its functions under this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
15 foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to which articles 
and things vested in the Trustees may be given on loan; 
(b) the recruitment and conditions of service of the 
20 employees of the Victori'a Memorial. 
(3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be, after it is made 
by the Trustees, be forwarded to the Central Government and that 
GOvernment shall cause a copy of the lame to be laid before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
25 days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedia-
tely following the session or thl' successive sessions aforesaid,' both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both 
Houses agree that the regulatbn should not be made, the regulation 
30 shall thereafter have effect only in such modifted form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; SQ, however, that any such modiftcaticm 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done 'Under that regulation.". 
newlec-
tion6 .. 
Power of 
Tnutees 
to make 
regula-
tionl. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Victoria Memorial Act, 1903 makes provisions for the erection, 
m~!fnance and. man~gement of the Victoria Memorial and. for, the 
appomtment of a permanent body of Trustees. Section 2 spedftes the 
compc;sition of the Trustees of the Memorial. It is proposed to 8meJid 
this section suitably for giving wider representation, as recommended by 
, the ~stees." 
.J:2: A1ipresent, the rules made under the Act 'provide for the l~vy ot 
:fees for admitting .persons to the Memorial. The Committee on 'Subc;rdi~ 
nate ~gisiati~n (Fifth Lok Sabha) in its Nineteenth Report, e~ressed 
the view that the imposition of f~c involving financial burden shOUld be 
specifically authorised by the Act. It is, therefore, proposed to amend 
section '5 of the Act, on the lines of the Salar Jung Museum Act, 1961, to 
etnpower the Central Government to make rules for the levy of f~e. 
Ooportunity is being taken to incorporate the provision for laying the 
rules made by the Central Government betore Parliament. 
3. ~eTrustees are empowered under the rules to create such posts 
as may be necessary for the care or maintenance of the Memorial and 
for regulating the service conditions of the employees of the Memorial. 
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation desired that, to avoid any 
atnbiguity, the limits of delegation in respect of such matters should be 
well defined in the Act. Accordingly. it is proposed to insert a new sec-
tion in the' Att for empowering the Trustees to make regulauQns for 
this purpose and for laying before Parliament the regulations 1I!8de by 
the Trustees. 
4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the abeve objects. 
NEW· Dm.w; S. B. C~VAN. 
T?E! 21¥h Octooer, 1980. 
4 

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 ot the Act 80 U to 
empower th; Central Government to 'make rules regarding th~ feee to be 
leWild for) acimillicm to the Victoria Memorial. 
2. Clause 4 of the Bili seekS to insert a new section 6 l to eriipOWer tti~ 
~tees 'Or th~ Vtetcirts'Memorhtl to make l'eglllatieaaj nQt inconsistent 
wiIlti"he Ait' aItd the' mes IllSde··there'UDder, r.egarwiiD.g. the ~ons 
and restrictions subject to which articles and things vetted,.#t· the 
Trustees may be given on loan and the ~ecruitment and conditions ot 
service of the employees of the Victoria Memorial:' 
3. The matters in respect of which such rules and regulations may 
bq. made'are, 'g~nerally' matters of procedUre artd' adrli:imSftatlive details. 
Moreover' therulei' and' regtilations made under the' A:et :·WW 'hilfe to 
~ 'laid before each House o{Parli!lmi!nt and th~y Witt~';ldPf~ the 
scrutiny of Parliament. The deleglltion of legiSlative ~(~Jtflere. 
fi:tte, or a I'l~h'mill' c'haractet. 
J .. 
... 

Trus_ 
tees, 
Rules. 
:". 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FIlOl4 TID VICTORtA llEMDRIAL Al:!t, 1_ 
(10 OF 1903) 
., • • • • 
Z. (1) The Trustees of the Victoria Memorial (heretaafter CIIllecl 
the Trustees) shall be the following, namely:-
(4) the Minister in charge of the Ministry ot the Ceotral 
.. Government concerned with matters relating to the Victoria 
Memorial, 
(b) the Governor of West Benga~ 
(0) the Chief Justice of Calcutta, 
(d) two persons to be nominated by the Central Government 
from . among persons who, in the opinion of that Government, have 
expert knowledge of the exhibits in the Victoria Memorial or are 
museologists, historians or art historians, 
(e) the Secretary to the Government of India in the MiniltrJ 
concerned with matters relating to the Victoria Memorial, 
(f) the President of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce, 
(g) the Mayor of the Corporation of Calcutta, and 
(h) such and so many persons as shall from time to time be 
nominated by the Trustees from among persons who, in the opinion 
of the Trustees, have expert knowledge of the exhibits in the 
Victoria Memorial or are museologists, historians or art historians, 
with the approval of the Central Government to represent the 
general body of subscribers. 
• • • • • 
5. (1) The Cp.ntral Government may make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide-
• • • • •• 
(e) for the form of accounts to be kept by the Trustees, and 
for the audit and publication of such accounts; and 
(f) for the application to the officers and servants employed by 
the Trustees of the rules which apply to the civil servants of the 
Government, or to any class of such civil aervantl. 
6 

LOt( SABHA 
r ., » 
It. 
BILL 
further to amend the Victoria Memorial Act, 1903. 
(Shri S. B. Chc&tJ4f&, 
Minister of EdUCfltiotl 
end SOcicIl Welfare.) 