1
THE FERTILIZER (PRICE CONTROL) BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
 to provide for the fixing of maximum retail price of all fertilizers by the Central
Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Fertilizer (Price Control) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 185 of  2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "dealer" means a person engaged in the business of selling fertilizers whether
in wholesale or retail or industrial use and includes a manufacturer, importer and a pool
handling agency carrying on such business and his agents;
(b) "fertilizer" means any substance used or intended to be used as a fertilizer of
the soil or crop and specified in Part A of Schedule 1 of the Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985
and includes a mixture of fertilizer and special mixture of Fertilizers;
(c) "importer" means a person who imports fertilizer in accordance with the export
and import policy of the Central Government, as amended from time to time;
(d) "manufacturer" means a person carrying on business of manufacturing of
fertilizers;
(e) "maximum retail price" means the ceiling price plus taxes and duties as applicable
at which the fertilizer shall be sold in the market;
(f) "pool handling agency" means an agency entrusted by the Central Government
with functions relating to handling and distribution of imported fertilizers; and
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within sixty days of the commencement of this Act,
constitute a Committee of Experts in such manner and on such terms and conditions as may
be prescribed with a view to examine and recommend the maximum retail price of the fertilizers.
(2) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the recommendations from the
Committee of Experts, fix the maximum retail price or rate at which any fertilizer may be sold
by a dealer, manufacturer, importer or a pool handling agency.
(3) The Central Government shall revise the maximum retail price of the fertilizers
once in a year based on the recommendations of the Committee of Experts.
4. No dealer, manufacturer, importer or pool handling agency shall sell or offer for sale
any fertilizer at a price exceeding the maximum price or rate fixed under sub-section (2) of
sections 3.
5. (1) The Central Government shall reimburse the excess cost of production over
the fixed selling price of the fertilizer as subsidy to the fertilizer manufacturing companies.
(2) The subsidy as prescribed under sub-section (1) shall be decided by the Central
Government in consultation with the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers and  Ministry of
Agriculture  of  all the State Governments.
6. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Fixation of
price of
fertilizer by
the Central
Government.
Prohibitions
on selling of
fertilizer at a
price
exceeding the
price
determined by
the  Central
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
subsidy.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Chemical Fertilizers play a significant role in making the agricultural sector of the
country, self reliant. As rightly stated by the working group of Planning Commission,
agricultural productivity is very importantly dependent on the usage of optimum primary,
secondary and micro nutrients and hence the role of  the Government becomes more
significant in making  available all types of nutrients at affordable prices to farmers at
appropriate time.
India followed a system of controlled prices for all fertilizers until 1992, when the
Government decontrolled Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers. Now, urea being the
only controlled fertilizer, is sold at statutory notified uniform sale price, and decontrolled
Phosphatic and Potassic fertilizers are sold at indicative Maximum Retail Prices (MRPs).
After the decontrol, the prices of the Phosphatic & Potassic fertilizers registered a sharp
increase in the market, which created an adverse impact on the demand and consumption of
the same. There was also a noted increase in the consumption of subsidized urea, causing an
imbalance in the usage of the nutrients of N, P & K (Nitrogen, Phosphate and Potash) and the
productivity of the soil. To remove the imbalance in consumption of fertilizers, the Government
from 2010 introduced Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy which has also not proved very
useful. Nutrient based subsidy policy has given the liberty to the manufacturers or importers
of chemical fertilizers to fix the maximum retail price based on their cost of production or
import. Since then, the fertilizer companies had been hiking the retail price of fertilizers at will,
causing extreme hardship to farmers. There is at present no institutional mechanism under
the NBS Policy to determine the reasonableness of maximum retail price fixed by the fertilizer
companies or any express provision for taking action against manufacturers or marketeers in
this behalf.
Pricing of fertilizers being an important area of decision making which can have
longstanding impacts on the sustainability of the agricultural sector in the country, it is
imperative to withdraw the Nutrient based subsidy policy and to restore the earlier system of
fixing the maximum retail price of fertilizers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
July 6, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Committee of Experts with a view to
examine and recommend to the Central Government about the fixation of the maximum retail
price of the fertilizers. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall reimburse the
excess of cost of production over selling price of fertilizers as subsidy to the fertilizer companies
and the rate of such subsidy shall be decided by the Central Government in consultation
with the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and Ministry of Agriculture of the State
Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure on it cannot be
estimated at this stage, but has to be worked out by Central Government while implementing
the provisions of the Act.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the fixing of maximum retail price of all fertilizers by the Central Government
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1477LS(S3)—16-07-2015.