THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
DR. A. SAMPATH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Merchant Shipping  (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 88A of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereinafterreferred to as the
principal Act),—
(a) the existing clause ( a), shall be renumbered as clause ( aa), and before the
clause (aa) so as renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(a) ‘Board’ means the National Welfare Board for Seafarers constituted
under section 218;”;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 185 of 2018
Amendment
of section
88A.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) after clause ( aa) so as renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘(ab) “Fund” means the Seafarers Welfare Fund constituted under section
218B;”; and
(c) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(d) “Seafarer” means any person who is employed or engaged or works
in any capacity on board a sea going ship and includes cadets, trainees, serang
(bosun), machinist, fitter, able body seamen (Helm’s Man, sukhani, quarter master)
ordinary seamen (seamen 1, seamen 2), oilers (motor man, donkey greaser, ERR1,
ERR 2) catering saloon staff (Ch/cook, 2nd cook, crew cook) employed or engaged
in any shipping companies for hire or reward to do any work relating to
transporting goods and passengers or both, but does not include—
(i) any person in Officer rank;
(ii) the employment or engagement on work on board in any capacity
of any person in a ship of war; or
(iii) any Government ship used for military or non-commercial
purposes”.
3. In section 218 of the principal Act—
(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(e) the administering of the Fund constituted under section 218B.”;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The Board shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister of Shipping, ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) ten members representing seafarers;
(c) one member each from Shipping Corporation of India and Ship
Owners Association (INSA); and
(d) two members from Ship Managers Association (MAASA).
(1B) The Central Government shall appoint the members referred to in
clauses (b), (c) and (d) of sub-section (1A) in such manner as may be prescribed.
(1C) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of
officers and staff as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(1D) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions
of service of Chairperson, members, officers and staff of the Board shall be
such as may be prescribed.”.
4. After section 218A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted—
“218B. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Seafarers Welfare Fund for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government, Shipping
Corporation of India and any other private shipping companies who hire and engage
Indian seafarers on vessels transporting goods and passengers in Indian and foreign
waters.
Amendment of
Section 218.
Constitution of
the Seafarers
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Insertion of
new sections
218C to 218D.
40

3
(3) The Fund shall be utilized for—
(a) payment of pension of the Seafarers;
(b) compensation to the Seafarers or his dependant family member on his
death or physical infirmity;
(c) such other purposes as may be determined by the Board for welfare of
seafarers, from time to time.
218C. The provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948,  Payment of Wages
Act, 1936, Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, Equal
Remuneration Act, 1976, Workmen Compensation Act, 1923, the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 with the Employees Provident Fund Act, 1952, and the Payment of Bonus
Act, 1965 as in force for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to, seafarers as they
apply to, or in relation to, workmen, within the meaning of those Acts and for the
purpose of any proceeding under those Acts.
218D. The provisions of the Seamen Provident Fund Act, 1966 shall not be
applicable to the Seafarers.”.
5. After section 460A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“460AA.  (1) The provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder shall
have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other
law or in the terms of any award, agreement, settlement or contract of service, whether
made before or after the coming into force of this Act:
Provided that where under any such law, award, agreement, settlement, or contract
or service, a seafarer is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more
favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act, seafarer
shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter,
notwithstanding that he is entitled to receive benefits in respect of other matters under
this Act.
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a seafarer from
entering into an agreement with his employer for granting him rights or privileges in
respect to any matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he would
be entitled under this Act.”
 Application of
certain Acts to
seafarers.
Provision of
Act No. 4 of
1966 not to
apply to
Seafarers.
Insertion of
new section
460AA.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The seafarers are the back bone of Indian economy and the service of a seafarer to the
nation not only brings goods and services from across the globe but also contribute a huge
sum to the foreign exchange reserve. Workers hired by the international ship owners are not
provided proper living standards and wages, as the monopoly union called National Maritime
Board has no any authenticity or approval from Government of India.
Also, the wage structure and living conditions of seafarers in India is being manipulated
by the National Union of Seafarers of India. The contribution put forward to the pension or
annuity fund to Seamen Provident Fund Organisation is also not implemented effectively.
The wages of a seafarer is merely rupees six thousand nine hundred and fifty on an Indian
registered flag vessel with a 5 per cent. to 7.5 per cent. increment each year.
Any foreign vessel wage agreement signed for the Indian seafarers with the employers
are bipartite in nature and many clauses included in this valuable document is favourable to
a single union and compelling the membership and violate Provident Fund and Gratuity law
of the land. It stipulates compulsory contribution to union run private trust. While looking in
to such violations and save the seafarers from the unscrupulous employers control it is high
time to protect the legislative rights of workers who spend most of time of their life at sea.
A seafarer has to work onboard a vessel for a nine to ten months period at a stretch.
There is no Act in place to regulate their employment conditions and wage fixation. The
merchant shipping Act does not emphasis on wage agreement or CBA approval by Government
body or any involvement of labour commissioner, welfare contribution, wage recovery, etc.
It provides for fines and punishment for violation of any law but not more than rupees one
hundred. Regulations are to be framed at the earliest to safe guarding the interests of seafarers.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 with a view to
constitute a Seafarer Welfare Fund for the welfare of Seafarers in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A. SAMPATH
July 17, 2018.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for officers and staff for helping the functioning of the
Board. Clause 4 provides for the constitution of Seafarers Welfare Fund for the welfare of
seamen. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring annual expenditure of rupees
one hundred Crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.  A non-recurring expenditure of
about rupees two hundred Crore is also likely to be involved.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT, 1958
[ACT NO. 44 OF 1958]
* * * * *
88A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance” means a declaration issued by
the Director-General of Shipping or by any officer, authority or organization authorized
by him in this behalf, in respect of a ship that it meets with the requirements and
standards set out in the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention;
(b) “Maritime Labour Certificate” means the certificate issued by the Director-
General of Shipping or by any officer, authority or organisation authorised by him in
this behalf, in accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention;
(c) "Maritime Labour Convention” means the International Convention of
Maritime Labour Organisation on Maritime Labour Standards signed in Geneva on the
23rd February, 2006;
(d) “Seafarer” means any person who is employed or engaged or works in any
capacity on board a sea going ship, but does not include—
(i) the employment or engagement or work on board in any capacity of any
person in a ship of war; or
(ii) any Government ship used for military or non-commercial purposes.
* * * * *
218. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an advisory board to be called the National Welfare Board for Seafarers (hereinafter referred
to as the Board) for the purpose of advising the Central Government on the measures to be
taken for promoting the welfare of seamen (whether ashore or on boardship) generally and in
particular the following:—
(a) the establishment of hostels or boarding and lodging houses for seamen;
(b) the establishment of clubs, canteens, libraries and other like amenities for the
benefit of seamen;
(c) the establishment of hospitals for seamen or the provision of medical
treatment, for seamen;
(d) the provision of educational and other facilities for seamen.
(2) * * * * *
* * * * *
Definitions.
Functions of
National
Welfare Board
for Seafarers.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the  Merchant Shipping Act, 1958
————
(Dr. A. Sampath, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1861LS(S3)—12-12-2018.