AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

43 FEB 201 ;

Bill No. 185 of 2000.
——_
‘THE MARRIAGE (RESTRICTION ON EXPENDITURE) BILL, 2000
By
Sur 0.8. Basavaras, MP.

A
BLL

[0 restrict expenditure on marriages. |

Be it enacted by Parliament in Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
h 09) This Act may be called the Marriage (Restriction on Expenditure) Act, 2000. Short title,

(2) It shall come into force at once, i pollen
G) Itshall apply to all citizens of India irrespective of their caste, colour or creed.
2. On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no person shall:— Restriction
(0) spend more than rupees fifty thousand on the occasion of a marriage: pT

(ii) arrange decoration, orchestra or display pomp and show on the occasion of
a marriage;


Over-riding
effect.

Power to make
rules,

2

(iii) accept any gift, cash or in kind, for hims:

elf or for any other person on the
occasion of the marriage:

(iv) invite more than twenty five persons in total on the occasion of the
marriage;

(v) spend lavishly on food items,

3. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law rule or regulation
inrelation to performance of marriage for the time being in force.

4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Marriages in our country are performed lavishly and lakhs of rupees worth cash and
kind exchanges hands between the parents of both bride and the bride-groom. A lot of
money is spent on illumination and tents which nearly cost from rupees sixty thousand to
Tupees one lakh. The feast, catering and entertainment requires much more money. This
lavish spending on marriages has become competitive and its effect on poor people is
causing great burden. In order to meet huge marriage expenses, a person having two or more
daughters is compelled to indulge in corrupt practices. This is one of the reasons for the
menace of all pervasive corruption in our country. Even with so much of spending on
marriages, there have been increasing cases of dowry deaths. It is high time that a legislation
is enacted to restrict expenditure on marriages which will have salutary effect in curbing
corruption and atrocities on women.

According to an estimate, our countrymen spend a whopping amount of rupees four
lakh ninty five thousand crore annually on weddings. Hence a check on lavish expenses:
during marriages is essential. The Bill accordingly seeks to achieve the above objective.

New De.ut; 60.5. BASAVARAJ
November 6, 2000


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to restrict expenditure on marriages.

(Shri 6.5. Basavaraj, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4867Is—28-11-2030.