1
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DESIGN (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to amend the National Institute of Design Act, 2014.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Institute of Design (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In the National Institute of Design Act, 2014 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in the long title, for the words "the institution known as the National Institute of
Design, Ahmedabad, to be an institution of national importance", the words "certain
institutions of design to be institutions of national importance" shall be substituted.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word "Institute", the word
"Institutes" shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of long title.
18 of 2014.
Amendment
of section 1.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 186 of 2018
5
10

2
4. For section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"2. Whereas the objects of the institutions mentioned in the Schedule, are such
as to make them institutions of national importance, it is hereby declared that each
such Institute is an institution of national importance.".
5. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(d) "Director", in relation to any Institute, means the Director of such
Institute as appointed under section 18;';
(ii) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(e) "Fund", in relation to any Institute, means the Fund of such Institute
as maintained under section 23;';
(iii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(f) "Governing Council", in relation to any Institute, means the Governing
Council of such Institute as constituted under section 11;';
(iv) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(g) "Institute" means any of the institutions mentioned in column (5) of
the Schedule;';
(v) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(h) "Institute campus" means the campus of an Institute as may be
established by such Institute at any place within India or outside India;';
(vi) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(k) "Registrar", in relation to any Institute, means the Registrar of such
Institute as appointed under section 20;';
(vii) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ka) "Schedule" means the Schedule annexed to this Act;';
(viii) for clause (l), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(l) "Senate", in relation to any Institute, means the Senate of such
Institute;';
(ix) for clause (m), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(m) "Society" means any of the societies registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860, and mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule;';
(x) for clause (n), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(n) "Statutes" and "Ordinances", in relation to any Institute, means the
Statutes and the Ordinances of such Institute made under this Act.'.
6. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"4. (1) Each Institute shall be a body corporate by the same name as mentioned in
column (5) of the Schedule.
(2) Each Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, with
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property,
Substitution
of new
section for
section 2.
21 of 1860.
Declaration of
certain
institutions as
institutions of
national
importance.
Amendment
of section 3.
Substitution of
new section
for section 4.
Incorporation
of Institute.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be
sued.
(3) The body corporate constituting each Institute shall consist of a Chairperson,
Director and other members of the Governing Council for the time being, of the Institute.
(4) Any Institute may establish an Institute campus at such place within India or
outside India, as it may deem fit:
Provided that each campus of the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad,
established before the commencement of this Act, at Bengaluru in the State of Karnataka
and at Gandhinagar in the State of Gujarat, shall be deemed to be the Institute campus
thereof.
Explanation.—The reference in this sub-section to the commencement of this
Act shall, in relation to the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, be deemed to be
the 16th day of September, 2014. ".
7. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) any reference to the Society mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule
in any law or in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference
to the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) thereof;";
(ii) in clause (e), the words "located at Bengaluru in the State of Karnataka and
at Gandhinagar in the State of Gujarat," shall be omitted;
(iii) the following Explanations shall be inserted, namely:—
"Explanation I.—The reference in this section to the commencement of
this Act shall, in relation to the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, be
deemed to be the 16
th day of September, 2014.
Explanation II.—The reference in this section to the commencement of
this Act shall be construed in relation to every Institute (other than the National
Institute of Design, Ahmedabad) as the reference to the date on which the
provisions of the National Institute of Design (Amendment) Act, 2018 comes
into force.".
8. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words "the Institute
shall", the words "each Institute shall" shall be substituted.
9. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "The Institute", the
words "Every Institute" shall be substituted.
10. In section 8 of the principal Act, for the words "teaching at the Institute", the
words "teaching at each of the Institutes" shall be substituted.
11. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "the Institute",
the words "each of the Institutes" shall be substituted.
12. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words "The following shall be the authorities
of the Institute", the words "Each Institute shall have the following authorities" shall be
substituted.
13. In section 11 of the principal Act, for the words "The Governing Council shall
consist of", the words "The Governing Council of every Institute shall consist of" shall be
substituted.
14. In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words "The Senate of the Institute", the
words "The Senate of each Institute" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 15.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
15. In section 16 of the principal Act, for the words "the Senate of the Institute", the
words "the Senate of an Institute" shall be substituted.
16. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "the Institute",
the words "each of the Institutes" shall be substituted.
17. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "Registrar of the
Institute", the words "Registrar of each Institute" shall be substituted.
18. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words "enabling the Institute", the words
"enabling an Institute" shall be substituted.
19. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "The Institute",
the words "Every Institute" shall be substituted.
20. In section 24 of the principal Act, for the words "the Institute", the words "any
Institute" shall be substituted.
21. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "The Institute",
the words "Every Institute" shall be substituted.
22. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "The Institute",
the words "Every Institute" shall be substituted.
23. In section 27 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words "the Institute", the words "an Institute" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (a), for the words "Senior Designer", at both the places where they
occur, the words "Principal Designer" shall be substituted.
24. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "the Institute",
the words "each Institute" shall be substituted.
25. In section 30 of the principal Act, for the words "Ordinances of the Institute", the
words "Ordinances of each Institute" shall be substituted.
26. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "between the
Institute", the words "between an Institute" shall be substituted.
27. In section 33 of the principal Act, for the words "the Institute", the words "any
Institute" shall be substituted.
28. In section 34 of the principal Act, for the words "the Institute receives", the words
"an Institute receives" shall be substituted.
29. In section 35 of the principal Act, for the words "The Institute", the words "Every
Institute" shall be substituted.
30. In section 36 of the principal Act, for the words "to the Institute", the words "to
any Institute" shall be substituted.
31. In section 37 of the principal Act, for the words "the Institute", the words "every
Institute" shall be substituted.
32. In section 39 of the principal Act, —
(i) in clause (a), for the words "Governing Council of the Institute", the words
"Governing Council of an Institute" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (c), the words "located at Bengaluru or Gandhinagar, as the case
may be" shall be omitted;
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 22.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment
of section 25.
Amendment
of section 26.
Amendment
of section 27.
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment
of section 30.
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment
of section 36.
Amendment
of section 37.
Amendment
of section 39.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(iii) the following Explanations shall be inserted, namely:—
"Explanation I.—The reference in this section to the commencement of
this Act shall, in relation to the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, be
deemed to be the 16th day of September, 2014.
Explanation II.—The reference in this section to the commencement of
this Act shall be construed in relation to every Institute (other than the National
Institute of Design, Ahmedabad) as the reference to the date on which the
provisions of the National Institute of Design (Amendment) Act, 2018 comes
into force.".
33. In section 40 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following Explanations
shall be inserted, namely:—
"Explanation I.—The reference in this section to the commencement of this Act
shall, in relation to the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, be deemed to be the
16th day of September, 2014.
Explanation II.—The reference in this section to the commencement of this Act
shall be construed in relation to every Institute (other than the National Institute of
Design, Ahmedabad) as the reference to the date on which the provisions of the
National Institute of Design (Amendment) Act, 2018 comes into force.".
34. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be inserted,
namely:—
——————
Amendment
of section 40.
Insertion of a
new Schedule.
“THE SCHEDULE
[See sections 2, 3(g), (ka), (m), 4 (1) and 5 (a)]
Sl. Name of the State Name of the Society Location Name of the institutions
No. under this Act
(1)  (2) (3) (4) (5)
1. Gujarat National Institute of Design,
Ahmedabad, a Society registered
under the Societies Registration Act,
1860.
2. Madhya Pradesh National Institute of Design, Bhopal,
a Society registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860.
3. Assam National Institute of Design, Jorhat, a
Society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860.
4. Haryana National Institute of Design,
Kurukshetra, a Society registered
under the Societies  Registration Act,
1860.
5. Andhra Pradesh National Institute of Design,
Amaravati, a Society registered under
the Societies  Registration Act, 1860.
Ahmedabad National Institute of
Design, Ahmedabad
Bhopal National Institute of
Design, Bhopal
Jorhat National Institute of
Design, Jorhat
Kurukshetra National Institute of
Design, Kurukshetra
Amaravati National Institute of
Design, Amaravati”.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Institute of Design Act, 2014 was enacted to declare the National Institute
of Design, Ahmedabad to be an institution of national importance for the promotion of
quality and excellence in education, research and training in all disciplines relating to design.
2. In pursuance of the National Design Policy and  to raise the design education to
global standard of excellence in all regions of India, the Government of India set up four new
National Institutes of Design at Amaravati in the State  of Andhra Pradesh, Bhopal in the
State  of  Madhya Pradesh,  Jorhat in the State  of  Assam and Kurukshetra in the State of
Haryana, as societies under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. Presently, the said Institutes
do not have the authority to grant degree, diploma and other academic distinctions. Therefore,
a need has been felt to give them statutory status so as to ensure the maintenance of similar
standards and quality of education in all areas or disciplines relating to design, as the
National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad.  It is proposed to declare the aforesaid Institutes
as institutions of national importance and to confer power on them to grant degree, diploma
and other academic distinctions.
3. It is, accordingly, proposed to amend the National Institute of Design Act, 2014,
inter alia, to provide for the following:—
(a) to amend section 2 of the said Act, so as to declare the National Institutes of
Design at Amaravati in the State of Andhra Pradesh, Bhopal in the State of  Madhya
Pradesh, Jorhat in the State  of  Assam and Kurukshetra in the State of Haryana, as
institutions of national importance;
(b) to substitute section 4 so as to provide for incorporation of each of the
aforesaid institutes;
(c) to make consequential amendments to various sections of the said Act;
(d) to amend section 27 of the said Act so as to designate the post of Principal
Designer instead of the Senior Designer, as equivalent to a Professor.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SURESH  PRABHU
The 16th November, 2018.
6

Notes on clauses
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to amend the long title of the Act so as to substitute the
words "the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad " with the words "certain institutions
of design" in view of proposed incorporation of new Institutions such as National Institutes
of Design at Amaravati in the State  of Andhra Pradesh, Bhopal in the State of Madhya
Pradesh,  Jorhat in the State of Assam and Kurukshetra in the State of Haryana.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 1 of the Act to provide for substitution
of the word "Institute" with the word "Institutes" which are consequential in nature.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to substitute section 2 of the Act to  provide for declaration
of the institutions mentioned in the Schedule, as institutions of national importance.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Act to amend the definitions of
Director, Fund, Governing Council, Institute, Institute campus, Registrar, Senate, Society,
Statutes and Ordinances and to insert a new definition of Schedule.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to substitute section 4 of the Act with a new section to
provide for the incorporation of each of the Institutes mentioned in the Schedule. It further
provides that each of the Institutes may establish Institute Campuses within or outside
India.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Act to provide that any
reference to the Society mentioned in the Schedule shall be deemed as a reference to the
corresponding Institute mentioned therein. It further provides that commencement of the
Act shall, in relation to National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, be deemed to be 16th day
of September, 2014 and in relation to the other Institutes, be deemed to be the date on which
the National Institute of Design (Amendment) Act, 2018 comes into force.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to amend section 6 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "the Institute"  with the words "each Institute."
Clause 9.— This clause seeks to amend section 7 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "The Institute" with the words "Every Institute".
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "teaching at the Institute" with the words "teaching at each of the Institutes".
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to amend section 9 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "the Institute" with the words "each of the Institutes".
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "The following shall be the authorities of the Institute" with  the words "Each
Institute shall have the following authorities".
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to amend section 11 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "The Governing Council shall consist of " with the words "The Governing Council of
every Institute shall consist of ".
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to amend section 15 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "The Senate of the Institute" with the words "The Senate of each Institute".
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "the Senate of the Institute" with the words "the Senate of an Institute".
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 18 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "the Institute" with the words "each of the  Institutes".
7

8
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 20 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "Registrar of the Institute" with the words "Registrar of each Institute".
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "enabling the Institute" with the words " enabling an Institute".
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to amend section 23 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "The Institute" with the words " Every Institute".
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend section 24 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "the Institute " with the words  " any Institute".
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to amend section 25 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "The Institute" with the words " Every  Institute".
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to amend section 26 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "The Institute" with the words " Every Institute".
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to amend section 27 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "the Institute" with the words " an Institute" and the words " Senior Designer" with
"Principal Designer ".
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "the Institute" with the words " each Institute".
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 30 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "Ordinances of the Institute" with the words "Ordinances of  each Institute".
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to amend section 32 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "between the Institute " with the words " between an Institute".
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "the Institute" with the words " any Institute".
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to amend section 34 of the Act so as to substitute the
words "the Institute receives" with the words " an Institute receives".
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "The Institute" with the words " Every Institute".
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to  amend section 36 of the Act so as to substitute the
words  "to the Institute" with the words " to any Institute".
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to amend section 37 of the Act so as to substitute the
words   "the Institute" with the words " every Institute".
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to make amendments to section 39 of the Act so as to
substitute the words " Governing Council of the Institute " with the words " Governing
Council of an Institute" and to omit the words " located at Bengaluru or Gandhinagar, as
the case may be".  It further seeks  to insert  two explanations  so as to provide that  for the
purposes of the said section, the commencement of the Act shall, in relation to the National
Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, be deemed to be the 16th day of September, 2014 and in
relation to every Institute (other than the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad), the date
on which the provisions of the National Institute of Design (Amendment) Act, 2018 comes
into force.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to insert  two explanations in section 40 of the Act so as
to  provide that  for the purposes of the said section, the commencement of the Act shall, in
relation to the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, be deemed to be the 16th day of
September, 2014 and in relation to every Institute (other than the National Institute of Design,
Ahmedabad), the date on which the provisions of the National Institute of Design
(Amendment) Act, 2018 comes into force.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to insert a Schedule after section 41 of the Act containing
the names and particulars of the National Institutes of Design.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the National Institute of Design Act,
2014 so as to declare the National Institutes of Design at Amaravati in the State of Andhra
Pradesh, Bhopal in the State of  Madhya Pradesh, Jorhat  in the State of Assam and
Kurukshetra in the State of Haryana, as institutions of national importance and clause 6
seeks to substitute new section for section 4, so as to provide for incorporation of each of
the said Institutes.
2. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of approximately 434 crore rupees
for the establishment of these Institutes.  Accordingly, a sum of 434 crore rupees was
sanctioned during the Twelfth Plan. The non-recurring expenditure is estimated to be 336.72
crore rupees and recurring expenditure is estimated to be 97.28 crore rupees. The expenditure
is met through budgetary provision of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion.
After the Institutes become fully operational and start generating revenues through fees,
consultancy income, etc., dependence on Government grants for recurring expenditure will
gradually reduce.
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clauses 24 of the Bill seeks to amend section 29 of the National Institute of Design Act,
2014, so as to confer power on the Institutes of Design at Amaravati in the State of Andhra
Pradesh, Bhopal in the State of  Madhya Pradesh, Jorhat in the State of Assam and Kurukshetra
in the State of Haryana to frame Statutes and clause 25 seeks to amend section 30 of the said
Act, so as to confer power these Institutes to frame Ordinances.
2. The matters in respect of which the Statutes or Ordinances may be made are matters
of procedure and administrative details, and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
10

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NA TIONAL INSTITUTE OF DESIGN ACT, 2014
(18 OF 2014)
An ACT to declare the institution known as the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad,
to be an institution of national importance for the promotion of quality and excellence in
education, research and training in all disciplines relating to Design and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
* * * * *
CHAPTER I
P
RELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Institute of Design Act, 2014.
* * * * *
2. Whereas the objects of the institution known as the National Institute of Design,
Ahmedabad, are such as to make it the institution of national importance, it is hereby declared
that the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad is an institution of national importance.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(d) "Director" means Director of the Institute, as appointed under section 18;
(e) "Fund" means the Fund of the Institute maintained under section 23;
(f) "Governing Council" means the Governing Council of the Institute, as
constituted under section 11;
(g) "Institute" means the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, incorporated
under section 4;
(h) "Institute campus" means the campus of the Institute located at Bengaluru in
the State of Karnataka and Gandhinagar in the State of Gujarat, or such other campus
as may be established by the Institute at any place within India or outside India;
* * * * *
(k) "Registrar" means Registrar of the Institute;
(l) "Senate" means the Senate of the Institute;
(m) "Society" means the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, registered as
a society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860;
(n) "Statutes" and "Ordinances" mean the Statutes and the Ordinances of the
Institute made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE INSTITUTE
4. (1) The National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, shall be a body corporate by the
name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold
and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that name, sue or be sued.
(2) The body corporate constituting the Institute shall consist of a Chairperson, a
Director and other members of the Governing Council for the time being of the Institute.
Short title and
commencement.
Declaration
of National
Institute of
Design,
Ahmedabad, as
an institution
of national
importance.
Definitions.
21 of 1860.
Incorporation
of the
Institute.
11

12
(3) The headquarters of the Institute shall be in the district of Ahmedabad in the State
of Gujarat.
(4) The Institute may establish an Institute campus at such other place within India or
outside India, as it may deem fit:
Provided that each campus of the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, established
before the commencement of this Act, at Bengaluru in the State of Karnataka and Gandhinagar
in the State of Gujarat, shall be deemed to be the Institute campus.
5. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(a) any reference to the Society in any law (other than this Act) or in any contract
or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Institute incorporated under
this Act;
* * * * *
(e) every person employed by the Society, immediately before such
commencement, shall hold his office or service in the Institute including the Institute
campuses, located at Bengaluru in the State of Karnataka and at Gandhinagar in the
State of Gujarat, by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same
terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave,
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same, if this Act
had not been enacted, and shall continue to be so, unless and until his employment is
terminated or until such tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions are duly altered by
the Statutes:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his
employment may be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the
contract with the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment
to him by the Institute of compensation equivalent to three months' remuneration in
the case of permanent employee and one month's remuneration in the case of other
employee.
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Institute shall exercise the following
powers and perform the following duties, namely:—
* * * * *
7. (1) The Institute shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever race, creed,
caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed as to religious belief or profession
in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers or workers or in any other connection
whatsoever.
* * * * *
8. All teaching at the Institute and the Institute campuses shall be conducted by or in
the name of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances made in this
behalf.
9. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute.
* * * * *
10. The following shall be the authorities of the Institute, namely:—
(a) the Governing Council,
(b) a Senate, and
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities
of the Institute.
Effect of
incorporation
of the
Institute.
Powers of
Institute.
Institute be
open to all
races, creeds
and classes.
Teaching at
Institute.
Visitor.
Authorities of
Institute.

13
11. The Governing Council shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent academician, scientist or technologist
or professional or industrialist, to be nominated by the Visitor;
(b) the Director, ex officio;
(c) the Financial Adviser in the Ministry or Department of the Government of
India dealing with the National Institute of Design, ex officio;
(d) the Joint Secretary, in the Ministry or Department in the Government of India
dealing with the National Institute of Design, ex officio;
(e) one representative of the Ministry or Department of the Government of India
not below the rank of Joint Secretary dealing with Higher Education, to be nominated
by the Secretary of that Ministry or Department, ex officio;
(f) one representative of the Ministry or Department of the Government of India
not below the rank of Joint Secretary dealing with Information Technology to be
nominated by the Secretary of that Ministry or Department, ex officio;
(g) one representative from the State in which the Institute campus is located, to
be nominated by that State Government;
(h) five professionals, one each from the fields of architecture, engineering, fine
arts, mass media and technology, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(i) an outstanding Designer, to be nominated by the Visitor in consultation with
the Central Government;
(j) a management expert, to be nominated by the Chairperson;
(k) a representative of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, to be nominated
by the Central Government;
(l) three persons to be nominated by the Senate from amongst persons
recommended by companies, firms or individuals who have provided financial assistance
or contribution to the Institute:
Provided that the threshold of financial assistance or contribution and other
requirements to qualify for such nomination shall be such as may be provided for in
the Statutes; and
(m) Dean of each Institute campus, ex officio.
* * * * *
15. The Senate of the Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) the Director, ex officio, who shall be the Chairman of the Senate;
(b) Dean of each Institute campus, ex officio;
(c) Senior Professors of the Institute and of the Institute campuses;
(d) three persons, not being employees of the Institute, to be nominated by the
Chairperson in consultation with the Director, from amongst educationists of repute,
one each from the fields of science, engineering and humanities and at least one of
them shall be a woman;
(e) one alumnus of the Institute to be nominated by the Chairperson in
consultation with the Director; and
(f) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes.
Governing
Council.
Senate.

14
16. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Senate
of the Institute shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the
maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination in the Institute and shall
exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed
upon it by the Statutes.
* * * * *
18. (1) The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government for
a tenure of five years in such manner and on such terms and conditions of service as may be
prescribed.
* * * * *
20. (1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions
as may be laid down by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, the common seal,
the funds of the Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Governing Council
shall commit to his charge.
* * * * *
22. For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its functions efficiently
under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in such
manner as it may think fit.
23. (1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions, bequests or transfers; and
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other
source.
* * * * *
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 23, the Central Government may
direct the Institute to—
(a) set up an Endowment Fund and any other Fund for specified purpose; and
(b) transfer money from its Fund to Endowment Fund or any other Fund.
25. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance sheet, in such form as may
be prescribed, in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- General of India.
* * * * *
26. (1) The Institute shall constitute, for the benefit of its employees, including the
Director, such pension, insurance and provident funds as it may deem fit, in such manner and
subject to such conditions as may be laid down in the Statutes.
* * * * *
27. All appointments of the staff of the Institute, except that of the Director, shall be
made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes by—
(a) the Governing Council, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in
the post of Senior Designer or Professor or above or if the appointment is made on the
non-academic staff in any cadre, the maximum of the pay-scale for which is the same or
higher than that of Senior Designer or Professor; and
* * * * *
Functions of
Senate.
Director.
Registrar.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Fund of
Institute.
Setting up of
Endowment
Fund.
Accounts and
audit.
Pension and
provident
fund.
Appointment
of staff.

15
29. (1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the Governing Council with
the previous approval of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be
before each House of Parliament.
* * * * *
30. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) admission of the students to the Institute including Institute campus;
(b) reservation in admission to various courses or programmes of the Institute
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes;
(c) courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of
the Institute;
(d) conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree, diploma
and certificate courses and to the examinations of the Institute and award of degrees,
diplomas and certificates;
(e) conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and
prizes;
(f) conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining body, examiners
and moderators;
(g) conduct of examinations;
(h) maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and
(i) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided
for by the Ordinances.
* * * * *
32. ( 1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any of its
employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute,
be referred to an Arbitral Tribunal consisting of one member appointed by the Institute, one
member nominated by the employee and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
M
ISCELLANEOUS
33. No act of the Institute or Governing Council or Senate or any other authority, set
up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof; or
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a
member thereof; or
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.
34. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whenever the Institute receives
funds from any Government, the University Grants Commission or any other agency
including industry sponsoring a research scheme or a consultancy assignment or a teaching
programme or a Chaired Professorship or a scholarship, etc., to be executed or endowed at
the Institute,—
(a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separately from the Fund
of the Institute and utilised only for that purpose; and
Statutes how
to be made.
Ordinances.
Arbitral
Tribunal.
Acts and
proceedings
not to be
invalidated by
vacancies, etc.
Sponsored
schemes.

16
(b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance with
the terms and conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisations:
Provided that any money remaining unutilised shall be transferred to the
Endowment Fund set up under section 24 of this Act.
35. The Institute shall have the power to grant degrees, diplomas, certificates and
other academic distinctions under this Act, which shall be equivalent to such corresponding
degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions granted by any University or
Institute established or incorporated under any other law for the time being in force.
36. The Central Government may give such directions as it may deem necessary to the
Institute for effective administration of this Act and the Institute shall comply with such
directions.
37. The provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 shall apply to the Institute, as
if it were a public authority as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Right to Information
Act, 2005.
* * * * *
39. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act—
(a) the Governing Council of the Institute functioning as such, immediately
before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to so function until a new
Governing Council is constituted for the Institute under this Act, but on the constitution
of a new Governing Council under this Act, the members of the Governing Council
holding office before such constitution shall cease to hold office;
* * * * *
(c) until the first Statutes and Ordinances are made under this Act, the rules and
regulations, instructions, guidelines and bye-laws of the Society, in force immediately
before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the Institute and
Institute campuses located at Bengaluru or Gandhinagar, as the case may be, in so far
as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
40. (1) * * * * *
(3) The power to make Statutes or Ordinances shall include the power to give
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act to
Statues or Ordinances or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any
Statute or Ordinance so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such
Statutes or Ordinances may be applicable.
* * * * *
Power of
Institute to
grant degrees,
etc.
Powers
of Central
Government to
issue directions.
Institute to be
public
authority
under Right to
Information
Act, 2005.
Transitional
provisions.
22 of 2005.
Statutes and
Ordinances to
be ;ublished in
the Official
Gazette and to
be laid before
Parliament.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Institute of Design Act, 2014.
————
(Shri Suresh Prabhu, Minister of Commerce & Industry and Civil Aviation)
MGIPMRND—2412LS(S3)—13-12-2018.