10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE CHIT FUNDS BILL, 1980 
L-To be/As introduced in 10k Sabha 7 
1 • Page (iii), 1 ine 1 5, -
!:.ll: "LEA. VY" ~ "LEVY" 
• 
2. Page 1, in. the marginal heading to cl~use 2,-
~ "DefinitionJ' ~ "Defini tionsl' 
3. Page 2, in the marginal citation ag~inst line 1,-
fQI.. "1948" ~ "194ry" 
4. Page 14, line 28,-
!o..r. "towrads" ~ "towards" 
5' • Page 18, 1 ine 10 , -
fQ1: "subscribes".r.§.aQ. "subscribers" 
,. Page 24, line 49,-
!ol:. "Bill" ~ "just" 
7. p~~c 27, line 10,-
after "foreman" insert "such" 
8. Page 29, in the m::trgin;:).l heading to clause 87,-
1QI: ''un ter" nLl!l "under l1 
9. Page 31, ~g!1inst S.No.11, under the head "Liabilities",-
fQ.r "profi ts" ~ ''profit'' 
1 0. Page 40,-
!QI. line 8 
read "Cl~use f-4 provides f'or the ref'erence of' 
any dispute touching tho" 
11. Page 40, line 28,-
for "p 9.rtie s of" ~ ''parties to" 

As INTRoDuCED IN ~ ~ ON 
THE CInT FUNDS BILL, 1980 
Clml'TER'I 
p, •. ....,.".. 
Cuuas 
1. Short title, extent and· collUDe_amat •. 
2. DeftnitiolUli: 
3" .. Aatr to.ovemide, other laws, memoranliu.m,art1det, .. etc. .. 
CHAPTER IT 
. .,."~, ( 
, " 
RalmftA'I'ION or CHITS, COMMENCEMENT AND CONDUCT or CHl'I' BUSIHaI 
of. Prohibition of chits not sanctioned or registered under the Act. 
5. Prohibition of invitation for subscriptions' eEept 'un"" certain 
conditio ... 
e. Form of chit agreement. 
7. Filing of chit agreement.' 
8. Minimum capital requirements for the commencement, etc., o! a 
chit, and creation of a reserve fund, by a company. 
9. Commencement of chit. 
10. Copies of chit agreement to be gi'Yen to subICllibeN.~ 
11. Prohibition of the use of the words "Chit", "~hit fund", ~hittV' 
or "kuri H • 
12. Prohibition of transacting business other than chit busmell by 
a compallf. 
13. Aggregate amount of chits. 
1.f. Utilisation ot funds. 
15. Alteration of ehit agreement. 
16. Date, time, ,and, place' of conducting ,clillls .. 
1'. Minutes of proceedings .. 
18. Copies oJ. minutes to be filed with Registrar. 
19. Restriction on opening o~ new place of business. 
CHAPTER· III 
RIGHTS AND DUTIJ!8 or· J'ORI:KAlf, 
~. Security to be given· by foreman.' 
21. Rt~· of· ·foreman.. ' 
22. Duties of foreman. 
23. Books, records, etc., to be kept by foreman. 
204. Balance-sheet. 
25. Liability of foreman to subscribers .. 
38. Withdrawal of foreman. 

CUUSBS 
(ii) 
CHAPTER IV 
RlGB'l'S AND DUTIES OF NON-PRIZED SUBSCRIBERS 
27. Non-prized subscribers to pay subscriptions and obtain receipts. 
2&. Removal of defaulting subscribers. 
29. Substitution of subscribers. 
30. Amounts due to defaulting subscribers. 
CHAPTER V 
RIGHTS AND DunES OF PRIZED SUBSCRIBERS 
31. Prized subscriber to furnish security. 
32. Prized subscriber to pay subscriptions regularly. 
33. Foreman to demand future subscriptions by written notice. 
CHAPTER VI 
TRANSFERS 
34. Reatrictions on transfer of rights of foreman. 
35. Transfer of non-prized subscriber's rights to be in writing. 
36. Recognition of transfer by foreman. 
37. Entry of transferee's name in the books. 
CHAPTER VII 
MEETINGS 01" GENERAL BODY OF SUBSCRIBERS 
38. :Meetings of general body of subscribers. 
CHAPTER VIII 
TERMINATION OF CHITS 
39. Provision for continuation of chits i.n certain cases. 
40. Termination of chits. 
41. Copy of assent or consent to be filed with Registrar. 
42. Refund of non-prized subscribers' subscriptions. 
43. Subscribers' dues to be first charge on chit assets. 
CHAPTER I¥ 
INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS 
4t. Foreman to allow certain subscribers to inspect chit recorda. 
45. Preservation of chit records by foreman. 
46. Inspection of chit books and records by Registrar. 
47. Power of Reserve Bank to inspect chit books and recorda. 
CHAPTER X 
WINDING UP OF CHITS 
48. Circumstances under which chita may be wouncl u.p. 
... Application for winding up. 
50. Bar to winding up proceedings. 

(tfi) 
CulJlllS • 
51. Commencement and effect of winding up order. 
52. Injunction order. 
53. Powers of Registrar. 
54. Vesting of chit assets in Registrar or other perIOD. 
55. Suits, etc., to be stayed on winding up order. 
56. Notfication of winding up order. 
57. C~'ation of winding up proceedings on insolvency of foreman, 
etc., or the winding up of the company and transfer of such pro-
~p. I 
58. Award of compensation to foreman. 
59. Riaht to appeal. 
60. Limitation. 
CHAPI'ER XI 
APPOINTMENT OF Ol-'FlCERS AND LEAVY 01' J'I:IIS 
61. Appointment of Registrar and other officers. 
62. Inspection of documents ill Registrar's office. 
63. Levy of fees. 
CHAPTERXll 
DISPUTES AND ARBITRAnON 
64. Disputes relating to chit business. 
65. Period of limitation. 
66. Settlement of disputes. 
67. Procedure ior settlement of disputes and powers of Regiatrat 01' 
nominee. 
68. Attachment before judgment and other interlocutory ordera. 
69. Decision of Registrar or nominee. 
70. Appeal against decision of Registrar or nominee. 
71. Money how recovered. 
72. Private transfer of property made after issue of certificate void 
against foreman. 
CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
73. Advisory role of Reserve Bank. 
74. Appeals. 
75. Powers of Registrar to give extension of time for filing document.. 
76. Penalties. 
77. Application of fine. 
78. Offences by companies. 
79. Cognizance of offences. 
80. Power to compound offences. 
81. Power to enter and search any place and to seize any documentl. 
a. Officel's to be public servants. 

CI.A~ 
83. Power to d~te. 
84. Act not to apply to certain chits. 
65. Certain banks not to conduct chit busin-. 
86. Power to .JtUJaPt. 
87. Protection of ac.tion aken lunder rille .Ac:l 
88. Power to make rules. 
o •• ,,a.peal 811d,.wdng. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

23 of 19~. 
8m No. 188 of 1980 .. 
THE CHIT FUNDS BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of chit funds and formatters connected 
t.h.e-rewtth.. -
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
Of India as follows:-
CHAPrER I 
P'RELlMINARY 
'i 1. (1) This Act may be called the Chit Funds Act, 1980. 
(2) It. extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu.land 
. Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govemment 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. and dUfetent dates 
TO may be appointed for different States. 
Short 
title u-
tent and 
Com-
mence-
ment 
Z. In this Act, \Ullesa the context otherwise, req\.liras,- DeftnitloD. 
88 of 18" 15 
(a) "approyed. bank" means the State Bank of India consti-
tuted under section 3 of. tile State Bank of India :Act, J.1I55, ~r a 
subsidiary bank constituted under section 3 of the State"amk of 
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, or a corresponding new bank 
. .«:anBtituted under section 3, of the Banking CompaDies '(AcquiBition 
.,.and Transfer ofUnder.1ia~gs) .Act, 1970,ior a Regioaal RlualBank 
:established . Jmder aection 3 of the &ilonal' Rural. Banks Act, i9T6, 
or a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the 
,Banking; Cmnpaaies J~Acquisttion '8lld -Tresferof 'Undertak1nga) 
~ of 19'70. 
21 of 1976. 
M.t 1980. 
20 
Act, 1980, ur a bankin& company as defined under clauee(c) of ..... 

• 
:l. 
tion 5 af the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, or a banking institution 
notified by the Central Government under section 51 of that Act ~ 
such other banking institution as the state Government may, m 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, approve for the purposes of 
thds Act; 5 
lOot lM8. 
(b) "chit" means a transaction whether called chit, chit fund, 
chitty, kuTi or by any other name by or under which a person 
enters into an agreement with a specified number of persons that 
everyone of them shall subscribe a certain sum of money (or a 
certain quantity of grain instead) by way of peri.odical instalments 10 
over a definite period and that each such subscriber shall, in his 
tum, as detennined by lot Qr by auction or by tender or in such 
other manner as may be specified in the chit agreement, be entitled 
to the prize amount. 
ExpLanation.-A transaction is not a chit within the meaning 15 
of this clause, if in such transaction,-
(i) some alone, but not all, of the subscribers get the 
prize amount without any liability to pay future subscriptions; 
or 
(ii) all the subscribers get the chit amount by turns with 20 
a liability to pay future subscriptions; 
(c) "chit agreement" means the document containing the arti-
cles of agreement between the ~orcman and the subscribers relating 
to the chit; 
(d) "chit amount" means the sum-total of the subscrioptions 2r) 
payable by all the subscribe. s i;ar any instalment of a chit without 
any deduction of discount or otherwise; 
(e) "chit business" means the business of conducting a chit; 
(f) "defaulting subscriber" means a subscriber who has dE;· 
faulted in the paym~nt of subscriptions due in accordance wioth the 3n 
terlDS of the chit agreement; 
(g) "discount" means the sum of money or the quantity of 
grain which a prized subscriber is, under the terms of the chit 
agreement, required to forego and which is set apart under the said 
agreement to meet the expenses of running the chit or for distrlbu- 35 
tion among the subscribers or for both; 
(h) "dividend" means the share of the subscriber in the amount 
of discount available under the chit agreement for rateable distri-
bution among the subscribers at each instalment of the chit· • 
(1) "draw" means the mfl.nner specified in the chit agreement 4[) 
for the purpose of ascertaining the prized subscriber at any in-
stalment of the chit; 
(;) "foreman" means the person who under the chit agree-
ment is responsible for the conduct at the chit and includes any 
person discharging the functions of the foreman under section 39; 45 
(k) "non-priZed subicriber" does not include a defaulting aub. 
Jlriber; 
• 

1011931 
J 
(0 "preacribed" means prescribed by rules made under tbW 
Act; 
(m) "prize amount" means the difference between the c:hit 
amount and the discount, and in the case of a fraction of a ticket 
S means the difference between the chit amount and the discount pro-
portionate to the fraction of the ticket, and when the prize amount 
is payable otherwise than in cash, the value of the prize amount shall 
be the value at the time when it becomes payable; 
(n) "prized subscriber" means a subscriber who has either re-
10 ceived or Is entitled to receive the prize amount; 
15 
(0) "Registrar" means the Registrar of Ch~ts appointed TInder 
.ection 61, and includes an Additional, a Joint, Deputy or an Auf&. 
tant Registrar appointed under that section; 
(p) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India con:;ti-
tuted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(q) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, me8JUI 
the administrator of that Union territory appointed by the President 
under article 239 of the Constitution; 
(r) "subscriber" includes a person who holds a fraction of a 
20 ticket and also a transferee of a ticket or fraction thereof by assign-
ment in writing or by operation of law; 
30 
(8) "ticket" means the share of a subscriber in a chit. 
3. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,-
(a) the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in the memorandum or articles of association or 
bye--Iaws or in any agreement or resolution whether the same be 
registered, executed or passed, as the case may be, before or after 
the commencement of this Act; and 
(b) any provision contained. in the memorandum, articles, bye-
laws, agreement or resolution. aforesaid, shall. to the extent to which 
it is repugnant to the provisions of this Act, become or be void, as 
the case may be. 
CHAPTER II 
35 REGISTRATION OF CHITS, COMMENCEMENT AND CONDtTcr OF CHIT BtTSINmS 
4. (1) No chit shall be commenced or conducted without obtaining the 
previous sanction of the State Government within whose jurisdiction the 
chit is to be commenced or conducted or of such officer as may be em-
powered by that Government in this behalf, and unless the chit is regil-
40 tered in that State in accordance with the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that a sanction obtained under this sub-section shall lapse if 
the chit is not registered within six months trom the date of such 
sanction or within such further period or periods not exceeding six 
months in the aggregate as the State Government may, on application 
45 made to it in this behalf, allow. 
(2) An application for the purpose of obtaining a sanction under sub-
5ection (1) shall be made by the foreman in such form and f.n such 
manner u may be prescribed. 
Act te 
override 
other 
laws.m .... 
randum, 
articlM, 
etc. 
Prohibi-
tion of 
chits not 
sanction-
ed or re-
gistered 
under the 
Act. 

Prob1bWon 
o{ invit.. 
.tion for 
subacJip.. 
tiOna. 
except 
under . 
certain 
condWona. 
:ron. of 
chit 
agreement. 
• 
(3)'''''rtie prevtous'sanction"refened'to in'sub-4eetfMP(J) _Y'be re-
fuaed, if the foreman,-
(ol had been' eOllvicted-of any offence under'thtI Aet 'or under 
any other AC!t regulating chit business; 'or 
(b), had, defaulteclin, the payment of fees or the tUiD& of any 5 
IWemeDt or ,reoerd, required, to be paid or· ,filed UDder tbiI.Act or had 
violated any of; the· proviaioRs of thia Act or the rules, made there-
under; or 
(e) had been eonvicted ot any offence involving, moral tlupitude 
and. sentenced to imprisonment for flny such offence unless a period 10 
of five years has elapsed sincf' his release: 
Provided that before'refusing, any such sanation, the foreman.shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(4) The order of the State Government. and; subject to the pruviBiOD8 
ot'sab-section' (5~, the order of the officer empowered under sub-section IS 
(1)-.. t.:d.ng' or refusing previous·sanction under. this section shall be final. 
(5) Any person aggrieved by the refusal to issue previous sanction 
by an oftleer empowered undet" sub-section (1) may appeal to the State 
60vernment within thirty days of the "ate of communication to him of 
such refusal and the decision of that Government on such appeal shan be 20 
final. 
5;Noper8Ol1 shall issue (lr cause to be issued any notice, circular, pros-
pectus,' proposal or other document inviting the public to subseribe for 
tickets in any chit unless such notice, circular, prospectus. pronosal or 
decumeabcontains a statement that the previous sanction required under 2 5 
see&iOD' 4t has ~ obtained and the particulars of such sanction. 
1.'-, (1) Every chit agreement shall be in duplicate and shall be signed 
by the subscribers or by any person authorised by them in writing and the 
foreman and attested by at least two witnesses and it shall contain the 
following particulars, namely~- 30 
(a)' full 'name' and reeidential adcbess of' every subseriber;. 
(b)! the,.number of tickets including the fraction of a ticket held 
bY' eaeh' subtIeriher; 
(e) the number 'Of' instalments; aDd the alDOUld paya'blefor eaah 
tictetat fIVer'! instalment; 35 
(d) the date of commencement and the duration of the chit; 
(.). tt.· 1D88IIlIr of 8BCel'taini~, the prized subscriber at each 
iDltalI L! t; 
(f) the maximum amount of discount whleh the prized mbIIed-
ber: has to forego at any instalment; 4D 
(g)ther.lDGde',odpropolJUon. in ,which the disoouJat isdiJtrtbu-
table by way of dividend, foreman's commission 01' remu.eratton or 
expenses for rwming the drlt, .g the caee may b8; . 

• 
Qi) the dAte,. time .~nd pJace at wlUch the ehit ie ,jIo':be ,ctrP,wn; 
'. '.. .. :' ..... ~ .. .. .. ... 
• , . ~ .,', ,'.' I ' 
(i) the instalment at which the foreman is to get the cl1tt alnautM; 
(j). the name .of th~ approved bank in 'which ehJt mODeys shall be 
deposited by the foreman under the provisions of." t'hMi Act;· . 
(k) where the foreman is an individual, the manner in which:a 
chit shan be continued when such individual dies or becomes of un-
sound mind or is otherwise incapacitated; 
(l) the consequences to whIch a non-prized· ,or prized subscriber 
or the foreman shall be Hable in case of violation' of Gy .i»f the 
10 pro\' ;sions of the chit agreement; :. . 
(m) the conditions tinder which a subscriber shall be . treated as 
a defaulting subscriber; 
(n) the nature and particulars of the security to be offered by 
the foreman; 
15 (0) the dates on which and time during which the foreman shall, 
20 
subject to the provisions contained in section 44, allow Inspeetlon of 
chit records to non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers; 
(P) the names of the nominees of each subscriber, that Is to lay, 
the names of the pm"selt,:.; t~J whom the bene1its accruing to the 1Ut. 
criber under the ('hit m(iY be paid in the case of the death of tile 
subscriber or when he is otherwise incapable of making an qree. 
~t; ~ 
(q) any other particulars that may, from time to time, be pres-
cribed. 
~s Expla1l.ation,-For the purposes or this sub-section, it shall be sum-
cient if the sig:1att1l'f> D: cCI<:h subscriber is obtained in separate copies of 
the agreement. 
(2) The duration of a chil shall not extend ~eyond a period of five 
years from the date of its commencement: 
30 Provided that the State Government may permit the·duration of a chit 
up to a period of ten years if it is satisfied that it is' neceuary 10 .110 4". 
having regard to,-
(a) the financial condition cif. the foreme; 
(b) his method~ of uperatiJn;· 
3S (c) the interests of prospective subscribers; 
(d) the requirements as ~o security; and 
... 
• I •.. 
(e) such other factors as the circumstances of the case may re.-
quire. 
(3) The amO,\Ult of discount referred to In clause (f) of sulHection 
40 (1) shall not exceed thirty per ct>nt. of the, chit amount. 
(4) Where the prized subscriber ~.t any instalment of, the, chit is re-
quired to be determined by auction ['nd tnore thtm one .'pentron oller the 
maximum discount, the prized subs-crjhl'" shall b~ determin~ by "lot. 

Minimum 
capital 
require-
ment, 
for the 
com-
mence-
ment, etc., 
of a chit, 
anel erea-
tiono! a 
reserve 
fund, 
by a com-
pany. 
~ 
1'. ( (I) . .,.." ellit .., ••• t Ikall be -tUad ill duplicate ., the be-
~~ wit,i..Ul.~ ~strar . 
. . (.J) T_ ~~IZ ~l retain one CO.py of the chit atreement aftG 
return thtt' •• plicate to the f.arernAA with an endorsement that the chit 
ag,reement has been registered: S 
Plrovided that the Reeis:trarm~y refuse to register the chit agreement 
en anyone or more of Ute following grounds, namely:-
'(e) that the security offered by the foreman under section 20 is 
'insGlleient; 
(b) that the foreman had been convicted of any offence uDd .. 10 
'thtl Act or under any other Act regulating chit business; 
(c) that the foreman had defaulted in the payment of fees or the 
ftlm, of any statement or record required to be paid or flIed under 
this Act or had violated any of the provisions of this Act or the niles 
made thereunder: 15 
_ Fl;ovided further that before refusing to register a chit under the first 
proviso, the foreman shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard, 
.•. (3):~",efY ~dorsement made under sub-section (2) shall be conclu-
jpve, ,evidence that the chit is duly registered under this Act. 20 
I. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 
1956, but subject to the provisions of this Act, a company shall !lOt com-
·ruence' or earry on chitbuliiness \Jnless it has a paid-up capital of not less 
than rupees one lakh, 
(2) Every company having a pai.d-up capital of less than rupees one 25 
'I !lkh and carrying on chit business on the commencement of this Act, 
shall, befJre the expiry of a period of three years from such commenee-
ment, increase its paid-up capital lo not less than rupees one lakh: 
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necessary 
In the public interest or for avoidi.ng any hardship, extend the said period 30 
at three yUfs iu, respect of any company by such further period or 
p,erjocli not ~caedinl. two yeats in the aggregate: 
Provided further that no such company shall commence any new emit 
the duration of which. would extend beyond the said period. of three yeare: 
or such extended period or periods under the first proviso unless it in- 35 
creases i.ts paid-up capital to not less than rupees one lakh. 
(3) Every company carrying on chit business shall create and main-
tain a reserve fund and, shaH;' out of the balance of profit of each year as 
diIclOHd.. iD Ita proAt 8J1d loss account and before any dividend is dec-
lared, transfer to such reserve fund, a sum equal to not less than twenty 40 
per cent. of such profit. 
(4) No com»any shall appropriate any sum or sums from the reserve 
fund e~cept with the prior approval· of the Registrar and, for the purpose 
of obtUliQl ncb approval, it . shall make all application in the pr8lCribed 
fG~,to the, Bepuar e.xplaiQiU, the. cirC\lmstances relating to such ap- 4S 
pr~ ' •.. 
. . .4 - ,., ",-_~ ."_.. •• • ~ ... _, '.'... 10 , .. ,~t •• • ",l·_t 
1 ef 1.11. 

, • 
',,(i) ·£ftl) fm.oeman shall, after all the tickett apec:iAed.,m.tba chlt 
AlDeemeat are· fully subscribed, ale a declaration to t.Mt e8ect With .. 
Registrar. 
mene ... 
rnent of 
chit. 
(2) ~ soon as may be dter a declaration :ia tiled uncler IUb.sectioll 
5 (1), th".Registrar shall, after satisfying himself taat aU the reqUir. 
ments relaij,na to 8an.ction, registration of chit aDd other matters have 
been. duly complied with, grant a certificate of commencemellt totli. 
foreman. . 
(3) No foreman shall commence any auction or the draw of J1ny chit 
I (lor appropriate any chit amount wUe811 a certificate of commeDeemern 
referred to in sub-section (2) ~..,; obtained by him. 
10. (1) A foreman shall, as soon 81 may be after he has obtained the 
certificate of commencement under sub-section (2) of section 9, but not 
later than the date of the first draw of the chit, furnish to EVery sub-
15 scriber, a copy of. the chit agreement certified to be a true copy. 
(2) A foreman shall, within fifteen days after the close of the month 
in which the draw for the first instalment of the chit is held, file with the 
Registrar, a certi.ficate to the effect that the provisions of sub-section (1) 
have been complied with. 
211 11. No person shall carryon chit business unless he uses as !,Jart of 
his name any of the words "chit", "chit fund", "chitty" or "kuri't an,d 
no person other than a person carryini an chit businqs shall use' as part 
of his name any such word. 
12. (1) Except with the general or special permission of the State 
2) Government, no company carrying on chit business shall conduct any 
other business. 
(2) Where at the commencement of this Act, any company is carryina 
on any business in addition to chit business, it shall wind. up sueh other 
business before the expiry of a period of three years from such commence-
30 ment: 
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it nece81817 
in the public interest or for avoiding any hardship, extend the said period 
of ~ years by such further period or periods not exceeding two years 
In the aggregate. 
13. (1) No foreman, other than a firm or otller 88IOciation of indivi-
duals or a company, shall commence or conduct chits, the acgregate chit 
amount of which at any time exceeds ten thousand rupees. 
(2) Where the foreman is a firm or other associatioll of inciivittuals, 
the aggregate chit amount of the chits conducted by the firm :>r other '\.... ., . 
40 association shall not at any time exceed,-
4S 
(a) where the numbec of partners of the arm or theindi\1i-
duala constituting the association is Dot leas tam tour, • IUIIl et 
forty thousand rupees; 
(b) in any other case, a sun:: calculated on the b~Sisof ten 
thousand rupees with respect to each slolch partner ·btUi~W 
Copies .r 
chit 
al1'ee-
ment t. 
be aiven 
to subs-
cribers. 
Prohibi-
tion 
of the 
iJse of the 
words 
"chit" 
"chit ' 
fund", 
"chtttv" 
or "#Cu,;", 
Prohibi-
tion Gl . 
traDMctlnl 
btJSlMMl 
other 
than chit 
t.UaRlleD 
by a COla-
pan),. 
Agre-
"ate 
amount 
ot cb1ts. 

n 
tj) Where the fortman is a company. the aggregate chit aIDOUDt of 
the chits cOlllhtct.ecl by itshaU not at any time exceed ten timet the at 
as&ets of the company. 
E:rptaMtion.-For the purposes of tills sub-section, ":net assets" Ihall 
mean the total assets of a eompany less the total outside liabilitiel, bad 
and doubtful debts as certified by the auditors for which no prcm.iOD baa 
been made and other intangible assets such as deferred revenue expendi-
ture as disclOsed by the last audited balance-sheet of the company. 
UtiU .. Uon U. (l) N<> person carrymg on chit business shall utilise the' moneys 
I')f fImda. collected in respect ot such business except for-
(a.) carr)'ing on chit business; or 
(b) giving loans and advances to non-prized subscribers on the 
security of subscriptillns pald by them; or 
(c) invest.ng in trustee securiiit!s wiClin the meaning of sec-
5 
Hon 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882; or t 5 2 of 1-. 
(d) making deposits with approved banks mentioned in the chit 
aareement. 
(02) Where any per'sun carrying un chit bUblness has l1tililed the 
moneys collected in respect of such business before the commencement 
of this Act, otherwise than for the purposes spec,iied in sub-sectton (1). ~(\ 
lie shall secure that so much o~ such moneys as nave not been realiled 
'before such commencement are rea:ised before the expiry of a period 
of three years from such commencement: 
Provided that the State Govcrn:nent may, if it considers it nace .. "Y 
in the public interest Ql' for avoiding any hardship, extend the said period 2~ 
of three years by such further period or periods not exceeding two years 
in the aggregate. 
,!::tion 15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the chit agreement, 
......... t. the subscribers to a chit may, by a special resolutlOn.-
(a) alter- or add to the chit agreement such provisions as may be go 
necessary in respect Qf all or any of the following matterB, namel!y:_ 
(i) the date on which, or the time at which, or the place 
where, the chit is to be conducted; 
(ii) , the reduction of the chit amount· , 
(iii) the continuance of the chit in accordance with the pre- 35 
visions of section 39; 
(iv) the suspension or the prolongation of the chit; 
(v) the termination of the chit; 
(b) omit 'the name of any approved bank mentioned in the chit 
Agreement or add the name of any approved bank; or 40 
(c) alter. any ?f the arti~les of the chit agreement that :may be 
found to be mCOllSlBtet:J.t with any oJ the provisions of this ACt orUle 
rules mad~,the~under. 
{2) 'Any &iteratIOn, ~dditiOn or omiSSion made undersub.seetton (1) 
~aUl bebe vabl~d as. if1i~kt ,is originally contained in th,. chit agreement aru:I 45 
• ' au led, ~~ . ' ,,~, ~anner., U:l alterath),n, addition or amlulon by a 
IP~A!!~~:"""" .'., .,'. . , , 

10 
15 
20 
• 
tj) A uue copy of every special resolution passed under sub-section 
(1) or.~ (2) shall be med by the foreman with the Registrar 
within twenty-one days from the date of such resolution. 
(4) The foreman Ihall-
«(I,) INpply to every subscriber, by registered post or otherwise, a 
copy of every special resolution paued under sub-section (1) or sub-
.ction (2) within seven days from the date of such resolu;;ionj and 
(b) file with the Registrar along with a copy of such resolution 
the acknowledgements given by the subscribers of the receipt by 
them of the copies of such resolution. 
Exp14n4tion.-For the purposes of this section and section 38, "special 
I'8IOwtion" means a resolution which is passed at 8 meeting of the general 
body of subscribers specially convened for the purpose, by 8 majority 01 
not less than two-thirds of the subscribers to the chit present at the meet-
ing in person or by proxy and representing not less than three-fourths of 
the amount or, as 'the case may be, the value of me grain, subscribed by 
all the non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers, if any. 
16. (1) Every draw in a chit shall be conducted on the date, at the time 
and place mentioned in the chit agreement and in accordance with the 
provisions contained therein. 
(2) The Registrar may, if he considers it necessary, cii.rect that the 
draw shall be conducted in his presence or in the presence of any person 
deputed by blm. . 0 ........ :...: .~: 
Date, time 
and plaCe 
af conducL 
ing chits. 
17. (1) The minutes of the proceedings of every draw shaU be prepar- Minutes 
25 ed and entered in a book to be kept for that purpose immediately after ~he Of proceeli-
closure of the draw and shall be signed by the foreman, the prized sub- ings. 
scribers, if present, or their authorised agents, and at least two other 
subscribers who are present, and where a direction has been made 
under sub-section (2) of section 16, also by the Registrar or the perIOD 
30 deputed by him under that sub-section. 
(2) The minutes referred to in sub-section (1) shaLl state clearly-
(a) the date and hour when proceedings began and ended and the 
place where the dr8IW was held; 
(b) the number of the instalment of the chit to which the pro-
3S ceedings relate; 
(c) the names of the subscribers present; 
(d) the person or persons who become entitled to the prize 
amount in the instalment; 
(e) the amount of discount; 
4(1 (f) full partiNlars regarding the disposal of the unpaid prize 
amount, if any, in respect of any previous instalment; and 
(go) any other particulars that may be prescribed. 
18. A true copy of the minutes of the proceedings of every draw certified 
as such by the foreman shall be filed by the foreman with the Registrar 
4S within fourteen days from the dab! of the draw to which it relates. 
Copies of 
minutes 
to be flIed 
with 
Be .... 

~tioD 
on openinl 
af new 
place af 
buI1D-. 
10 
11. (1) No per~ carrying on· chit business shall open a new plliee of 
bUsiness without ubtainin'g the prior· approval of the BegJa ..... Witiill 
whose territorial jurisdiction its registered officE' or, .sthe caR may be. 
the place or the principal place of business is situated. 
(2) Before granting approval .under sub-section. (1), the~trar S 
shaU consult the Registrar of the State within whose territQrialjurisdic-
tion the new place of business is proposed to be opened and shall also 
keep in view the linancial condition and methods of operation of ~e fore-
man, 'the extent to which public interest will be served by the opeftlng of 
the new place of business and such other matters as may be presctibed. 10 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "place of businesa" shall JMbade 
any branch office, sub-01fice. 01' any place of business where the chit busi-
ness may be conducted by such person. 
CHAPTER 111 
R1GHTS AND DUTIES OF FOREMAN IS 
SecurUy 18. (1) For the proper conduct of the chit, every foreman shall, befo.re 
to be liven filing a decl8l'JJtion under sec·tion 9,-
by 
foreman. (0) deposit in an approved bank mentioned in the chtt agreement, 
an amount equal to the chit amount in the name of the Registiar; or 
(0) transfer Government securities of the face value or muket 20 
value (whichever is less) of not less than QIle and a half times the 
chit amount in favour of the Registrar; or 
(c) transfer in favour of the Registrar such other securities, being 
securities in which a trustee may invest money under section 20 of 
the Indian Trugts Act, 1882, of such value, as may be prescribed 25 lolita, 
by the State Government from time to time: 
Provided that the value af the securities referred to in clause 1c) 
shall not, 111 any case, be less than one and a half times the valUe of 
the chit amount. 
(Z) Where a foreman conducts mOl'e than Ofte chit. he sball flllrnish 30 
8ecUrity in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) in respect of 
each chit. 
(3) The Registrar may, at any time during the currency of the chit, 
permit the subatitution of the ~ty: 
Provided that the face value or market value (whichever is leN) of the 35 
substituted secQrity shall nQt be less than the value of the security given 
by the foreman UDder sub-section (1). 
(4) The security given by the foreman UDder sub"'leCtian (J) or IIl1J 
security sub$tJtuted under sub-section (3), shall not be liabie to be 
attached in execution of a decree or otherwise until the chtt is'tlerminated 
and the clairM of all the subscribers are ful1y satisfied, 40 
(5) Where the chit is terminated anel tbe Be8iIUar Jaaa. .eatilfied thim-
self that the claims of all the subscribers have been. fullyaatUW.· he 
shall· order the release of the seeurlty fumf.shed by the foremua , 

u 
...... 'ub--~ (l), Or the security su~stituted under .u~seotiQa W, 
'. ~ qMe may be, and in cIoiag 10, he shall follow such procedure a. m8Y 
be plescribed. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other 
5 law for the time being in force, the security furnished under this section 
, ~l not be d~t with by the foreman during the currency of the chit to 
which it relates and any dealing by the foreman with respect thereto by 
way of transfer or other encumbrances shall be null and void. 
10 
21. (1) The foreman shall be entitJed,-
(a) in the absence of any provision in the chit agreement to the 
contrary, to obt~ the chit amount at the first instalment without 
deductio~ of the discount specified in the chit agret:Olent. subject to 
tbe condition that he shall subscribe to a ticket to the chit: 
Provided that in a. case where the foreman has 'Subscribed to more 
than one ticket, he shall not be eligible to obtain mure than one chit 
amount in a chit; • 
(b) to such amount not exceeding five per cent. of the chit 
amount as may be fixed in the chft agreement, by way of commis-
sion, remuneration or for meeting the expenses of running the chit; 
20 (c) to receive and realise all subscriptions from the subscribers 
and' to distribute the prize amounts tn the prized sublScribers; 
(d) to demand sufficient security from any prized subscriber for 
the due payment of future subscriptions payable by him. 
Explanation.-A security shall be deemed to be .mfticient for the 
25 purposes of this clause if its value exceeds by one-third, or if it con-
sists of immovable properties, the value of which cx~.~eds by one-half, 
of the amount duet'rom the prized subscriber; 
(e) to substitute subscribers fn place of defaulting subscribers; 
and 
30 U) to do all other acts that may he necessary for the due and pro-
per conduct CJf the chit. 
(2) Where any dispute arises with regard to the value of the property 
~ as security under elause (d) of sub-section (1). it !'hall be referred 
to the Registrar for arbitration under section 64 . 
RiJhtl of 
f~ 
. ( 
35 .zz. (1) The foreman shall, on the prized subscriber furnishing sufft- hUe. or 
c;ieJltsecurity for· the due paYP1ent of future subscriptions,be bound to foreme. 
pay 'him the prize amount: 
I' Provideci that the prized subscriber shall be entitled to the pay-
t ment of the prize amount without any security whatsoever if he agrees to 
40 the deduction therefrom of the amount of all future subscriptions and in 
such a case, the foreman shall pay the prize amount to the prized subs-
eriber within seven days after the date of the' draw or 'belore the date of 
the next succeeding instalment. whichever is earlier: 
Provided further that wlaere the prize amolllltt, haa been paid to the 
45 prized subscriber under the first proviso, the ~t d~ucted shall be 

Books, 
records, 
etc., to be 
kept by 
foreman. 
12 
deposited by the foreman in 1m approved bank mentioned in the· ehit 
aE!I'e8lnent and he :;hall not withdraw the amount so deposited excePt' for 
the payment of future subscriptkns . 
• 2) If. owina to the default of the prized subscriber, the prize amount 
due in respect of any draw remains unpaid until the next succeeding .s 
draw, the foreman shall deposit thE' prize amount forthwith in an apprO\1-
ed bank mentiuned in the chit agreement and intimate i'n writing the fact 
of such deposit and the reasons therefor to the prized subscriber and the 
Registrar. 
(3) Every payment of the prize amount or the amount of future sub- 10 
scriptions under sub-section (1), and the deposit of the prize amount 
under sub-section (2), shall be intimated to the subscribers at the next 
succeeding draw and the particulars of such payment or deposit shall be 
entered in the minutes of the proceedings of that draw. 
(4) The foreman shall not appropriate to himself any amount in excess ) S 
'If what he is entitled to under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 21: 
• Provided that where the foreman is himself a prized subscriber, he 
shall be entitled to appropriate to himself the prize amount subject to his 
complying with the provisions of section 31: 
Provided further that the {oreman may appropriate to himself the i'n- 20 
tercst. aCl.'Tuing on the amount deposited under the second proviso to sub-
section (1). 
(5) The foreman shall not admit any person as a IMlbscriber to a chit, 
if, by such admission, the total number of tickets mentioned in the chit 
~I{reement is increased. 3, 
(6) The foreman shall distribute among the subscribers, in accordance 
with the chit agreement, the dividend either in cash or by way of adjust-
l1ent towards the subscriptions payable for the next instalment, if any. 
23 The foreman shall maintain-
(a) a register containing- 30 
(i) the names and full particulars of the auhacrlbers in each 
chit together with the number of tickets held by each subscriber; 
(ii) the dates on which the subscribers signed the chit agree-
ment; and 
(iii) in the case of an assignment of a ticket by a subscriber, 35 
the name and full address of the a_gnee wtth the date of usign-
ment and the date on which the assignment had been recognlll8d 
by the foreman; .. 
(b) a book containing the mi"nutes of the 
draw; 
(c) a ledger containing-
proceedings of each 
(i) the amounts paid by Mlbscribers in each chit and the 
dates of such payments; 
(ti) the amounts paid to the prlzed subscribers and the da_ .. 
h ~ 
of suc payments; and 

• 
(iii) in the case of any deposit in au approved bank mention-
ed in the chit agreement, the date and the amount of such 
deposit; 
(d) a register in the prescribed form showing the amounts deposit-
S ad in approved banks as required under the provisions of this Act in 
respect of all chits conducted by the foreman at his office; and 
(e) such other registers and books in such form as may be pres-
cribed by the State Government within whose jurisdiction the chit is 
conducted. 
10 • Without prejudice to the provisions of the Companies Act, Balance-
1011816. 1956, every foreman shall prepare and file with the Registrar sheet. 
within such time as may be prescribed, a balance-sheet as on the last date 
01 each calendar' year, or, as the case may be, the financial year of the 
foreman, and a profit and 10$ account relating to the year of acrowit, in 
J S the Forms set out in Parts I and II of the Schedule. or as near thereto as 
circumstances admit, in respect of the chit business and audited by aJU.Cli-
tors qualified to act as auditors under the Companies Act, 1956, or by a 
chit auditor appointed under section 61; 
Provided that where a balance-sheet is nudited by an auditor qualified 
I of 1158. 20 to act as auditor under the Companies Act, 1956, a chit auditor appointed 
under section 61 shall have the right to audit th2 balance-sheet at any time 
if so authorised by the Regi9trar in this behalf. 
25. (1) Every foreman shall be liable to account to the subscribers f~ Liabillt,. the amounts due to them. ' . ot foremlUl 
~o 
(2) Where there .are more than one foreman in a chit, each one of them 
jointly and severally and, if the foreman is a firm or other association of 
indiViduals, each one of the partners or individuals thereof join'tty and 
severally and, if the foreman is a company. the company as such shall be 
liable to the subscribers in respect of the obligations ariSing out of the chit. 
26. (1) No foreman, or where there are more than one foreman in a 
chit, none of them shall withdraw frwn the chit until its termination un-
less such withdrawal is assented to in writing by all the non-prized and 
unpaid prized subscribers and a copy of such assent h~ been filed with 
the Registrar' under section 41. 
3S .(2) The withdrawal from a chit of anyone of the foremen shall not 
dect the security given by him under section 20. 
CHAPTER IV 
RIGHTS AND DUTIES 01' NON-PRIZED SUBSCRIBERS 
:1 
21. Every non .. prized subscriber sh~l pay his subscription on the 
~ 'pates ~d'time~~and at the places mentioned in the chit agreement and 
. shall, on such. paym~nt. be entitled i to. obtain a receipt from the fore-, '. ,,' . 
malA. 
I'; 
to subscrI-
bers. 
With-
drawal 
of fore-
man. 
Non-
prized 
subscribers 
topa,. 
sublcrip-
tiona 
and 
o~ 
~. 

llemoval 
of 
defaulUnI 
subs-
cribers. 
Substitu-
tion 
ofsu. 
criben. 
Amounts 
due to 
default-
ing sub_ 
scribers. 
• 14 
28. (1) A nOh-prized. wbscriber who defaults in paying, his subacrip. 
tion in accordance with the terms of the chit agreement shall be liable 
to have his name removed. £rom the list of subscribers and a written 
notice of such removal shall be given by the foreman to the defaultina 
subscriber within fourteen days of the date of such removal: S 
Provided that if the defaulter pays the de£aulted instalment with 
interest at such rate as may be prescribed within seven days of the date 
of receipt of sueh notice, his name shall be re-entered in the list of such 
subscribers. 
(2) Every such removal under sub-section (1) shall with the date 10 
thereof be entered in the relevant book maintained. by the foreman. 
(3) A true copy OL the entry refen-cd to in sub-section (2) shall be 
rued by the foreman with the Registrar within fourteen days from the 
date of removal. • ...... ll ...... ....w •••. i 
(4) Any defaulting subscriber aggrieved by the removal of hia name 15 
from the list of subscribers may, within seven days ot the date of receipt 
of the notice of removal refer the matter to the Registrar for arbitration 
under section 64. 
zt .. (1) A foreman may substitute in the list of subscribers any person 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the substituted subscriber) in ao 
place of the defaulting subscriber whose name has been removed under 
Bubo-section (1) of section 28. 
(2) Every substitution referred to in sub-section (1) shall, with the 
date thereof, be entered in the relevant book maintained by the foreman 
and a true copy of every such entry shall be filed by the foreman with as 
the Registrar within fourteen days from the date of substitution. 
30. (1) A foreman shall, out of the amounts payable by' and realized 
from the substituted subscriber towrads the instalments relatable to the 
period ~fore the date of the substitution (including the arrear. due 
frum the defaulting subscriber), deposit, before the date of the nut 30 
succeeding instalment, in a separate identifiable account in an approved 
bank mentioned in the ,chit agreement, an amount equal to the contri-
butions made by the defaulting subscriber less such ded.uctioDa .. may 
be provided for in the chit agreement, and shall inform the de1aultiDg 
subscriber as well as the Registrar of the fact of such depoait and ahall 35 
not, withdraw the amount so depo&ited except for payment to the 
defaulting subscriber. 
(2) The amount so deposited under sub-section (1) shall be paid to 
the defaulting subs<:riber as and when he claims the amount and the 
amount so deposited shall not be withdrawn by the foreman for any 40 
purpose other than for such payment. 
(3) The contributions of any defaulting subscriber who baa _t been 
substituted till the termination of the chit shall be paid to him within 
flfteen days from the date of termin~tion of the eh1t subject to 'web' 
dedUctions as may be provided for in the chit agreement. 4S 
CHAPTER V 
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PRIZED 8lJ'BSCJtIBJ:as 
31. Every prized subscriber shall, if he has not offered to deduct the 
amount of all future subscriptions from the prize amount due to him, 
furnish, and a foreman shall take, suffi.cient security for the due payment SO 
of all fuWre subscriptions and, if the fa,.eman is a prized subscriber, he 

15 
shall give security tor the due payment of all the future subscription&' to 
the satfBfa~tion of the Registrar. 
D. Every priZed subscriber shall pay his subscriptions regularly PrIzed 
on the dates and times and at the place mentioned in the chit agreement subscriber 
5 and, on his failure to do so, he shall be liable to make a cOlllOlidated to pay 
payment of all the future subscriptions forthwith. ~P-
10 
33. '(1) A foreman shall not be entitled to claim a consolidated pay-
ment from a defaulting prized subscriber under section 32 unless he 
makes a demand to that et!ect in writing. 
(2) Where a dispute is raised under this Act by a foreman for a con-
solidated payment of future subscriptions from a defaulting prized SUD-
scriber and if the subscriber pays to the foreman on or before the date 
to which the dispute is posted for hearing the arrears of subscriptions 
till that date together with the Interest thereon at the rate provided 
IS tor in the chit agreement and the cost of adjudication of the dispute, 
the Registrar or his nominee hearing the dispute shall, notwithstanding 
any contract to the contrary, make an order directing the subscriber to 
pay to the foreman the future subscriptions on or before the dates on 
which they fall due, and that, in case of any default of such payments 
liIO by the subscriber, the foreman shall be at liberty to realise, in execution 
of that order, all future rubscriptions and interest together with the costs, 
if any, less the amount, it any, already paid by the subscriber in respect 
thereof: ' . r' ,-.... ..,-. ': 
Provided that if any such dispute is on a promissory note, no order 
25 shall be passed under this sub-section unless such promissory note 
expressly states that the amount due under the promissory note is 
towards the payment of subscriptions to the chit 
(3) Any person who holds any Interest in the property fumislied as 
security or part thereof, shall bel entitled to make the payment under 
30 sub-section (Z) . ' ' ,- , " 
(4) All consolidated payments of future subscriptions realised by a 
foreman shall be deposited by him in an approved bank mentioned in 
the chit agreement before the date of the succeeding instalment and the 
amolmt so deposited shall not be withdrawn except for payment of 
35 future subscriptions. ' . 
(5) Where any property is obtained as security in lieu of the con-
solidated payment of future subscriptions, it shall remain as securlty 
for the due payment of future !mbscriptfons. 
CHAPTER VI 
TRAIm"!1I8 
r.,warly. 
Foreman 
to 
demuu1 
futurt .' IlUbIcrlp. , 
tioDI .' written 
notlc& ' .. ~ 
40 U. (1) No transfer of the rf~hts of a foreman to receive subscriptions Restric-
from the prized suhscribers shall be rn lde without the previous sanction :.z:.f:~ 1 
in writing of the Registrar. of rlehts 
of 
foreman. 

Transfer 
of non-
prized 
subscri-
bers. 
rights· 
to~in 
wrltiDj. 
Recoi-
nitiOD 
of 
transfer 
by 
toreman. 
Entry ot 
trans-
feree's 
name in 
the books. 
Meeting. 
ot 
general 
body of 
subs-
cribers. 
16 
(2) Any transfer of the rights of a foreman to receive subscripti.n. 
from the prized subscribers shall, if it is Ukely to defeat or delay tile 
interests of R nOR-prized or unpaid prized subscriber, be voidable· at the 
IDItaDce of such subscriber. 
(9) When under sub-section (2), a transfer is disputed by a liublctl· . S 
ber, the burden of proving that the foreman was in solvent circumstances 
at the time of the transfer and that the transfer does not defeat or delay 
the interests of such subscriber is on the transferee. 
3S. Every transfer by a non-prized subscriber of his rights in the 
chit shall be in writing duly attested by at least two witnesses and shall 10 
be filed with the foreman. 
18. Every transfer under section 35 shall, within a period of fourteen 
days from the date of receipt of the proposal for transfer by the fore~an, 
be recogQised by him un less the transferee is not solvent Or the transfer 
was effected with a view to defeating the provisions of any law includ~ 15 
ing this Act and the' decision of thE: foreman to recognise the transfe:t; Ir 
not shall forthwith be communicated to the parties concerned. 
37. Every transfer under section 34 or section 35 shall be entered by 
the foreman in the books of the chit forthwith and a true copy of such 
entry shall be filed by the foreman with the Registrar within fourteen 20 
days from the date of making such entry. 
CHAPTER vn 
MEETINGS OF GENERAL BODY OF SUBSCRIBERS 
38. (1) The foreman may, on his own motion, convene a special 
meeting of the general body of subscribers for considering any proposal 25 
to pass a special resolution. 
(2) The foreman shall convene such a meeting on the requlsitioR In 
writing·of not leGs than twenty-five per cent. of the number of non-prized 
and unpaid prized subscribers, and the meeting so convened shall be 
held within thirty days of the date of receipt of the requilition and if 30 
the foreman refuses or fails to can such a meeting within fourteen days 
of the date of receipt of such requisition, not less than twenty-five per 
cent. ot the number of non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers may 
give notice of the fact to the Registrar. 
(3) The Registrar shall. within twenty-one days of the receipt of the 35 
notice under sub-:;;ection (2), convene or direct the convening of a special 
meeting of the ~ene"~l body of the subscribers and on receipt of such 
a direction, it shall be the duty of the foreman to comply with such 
direction. . 
(4) The Regilrtrar or any officer deputed by him shall be present at 040 
every special meeting convened u1flder SUb-section (1) or sub-section (2), 
if the meeting is convened for considering ooy proposal to pass ~ special 
PIO]UtiOlQ. :ftor amending the chit agreement. 
(5) Notice of not less than fourteen days shall be given to all the 
subscribers of a meeting under this section specifying the object. date, .5 
hour and place of meeting and a copy of the special resolution shall allO 
bit sent along with the notic~ of the meetin,. 

1'7 
CHAPTER VIII 
Ti:aMINATION OF CHl'l'8 
• 
31. (1) Whell"e a foreman dies or becomes of unsound mind or is 
otherwise incapacitated, the chit may oontinue in accordance with the 
S provisions of the chit agreement. 
(2) Where a foreman is adjudicated an insolvent, or withdraws from 
the ehft under section 26, or fails to conduct the chit at any instalment 
or on any other date before the next succeeding instalment 8S may have 
been agreed upon by a special resolution passed at a meeting of the non-
10 prlJled and unpaid prized subscribers held in that behalf in accordance 
with the provisions of section 38, &tty one or more of such subscribers 
authorised by such resolution may, in the absence of any provision in 
the chit agreement for the future conduct of the chit, take the place of 
the foreman and continue the chit or make other arrangements for the 
15 further conduct of· the chit. 
20 
40. A chit shall be deemed to have terminated,-
(a) when the period specified theref-or in the chit agreement has 
expired provided the payment of dues to all the subscribers has been 
completed; or 
(b) when all the non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers consent 
in writing to the tennination of the chit and a copy of such consent 
is filed wi,th the Registrar as required under section 41; or 
(e) where a foreman dies or becomes of unsound mind or is 
otherwise ineapaeitated and the chit is not continued in accordance 
25 with the provisions of the chit agreement: 
Provided that, in a case where the foreman is a firm, if a partner 
thereof dies fYt: becomes of unsound mind or is otherwise incapacitated. 
the chit shall not be deemed to have terminated and thesurvivin~ 
pR:rtner or partners shall conduct the chit in the absence of any provi-
30 sion to the contrary in the chit agreement. 
41. A true copy of. every assent referred to in section 26 ~nd of every 
consent referred to in clause (b) of section 40 with their dates shall be 
filed by the foreman or by the surviving partner or partners, as the caose 
may be, with the Registrar within fourteen days Nom the date of such 
35 assent or consent. 
41. Except in the cases referred to in clauses (4) and (b) of 
lection 40,-
(a) every non.prized subllcriber shall, unless otherwise provided 
for in the chit agreement, be entitled to get back his subscriptions 
40 at the termination of the chit without any deduction f-or ~ividend, if 
any, received by him: 
Provided that, any person to whom the rights of a non.prized 
subscriber are transferred in accordance with the provisions of 
section 35,' sha1l,m addition to his own SUbscriptions. be entitled to 
4S get back the IIUbacriptlOns paid by sueh non-prized subscriber, subject 
to the conditions specified in this clause; 
(b) if a chit tennmates on '8 date earlier thatl the date orJginallv 
flxed in the chit agreement, the non-prized subscriber's claim shall 
be deemed to have arisen on the date on whieh he hu ,notice thereof. 
Provialoll 
for 
continua· 
tion of 
chita~ 
ce~ 
cases. 
Termina-
tion of 
chits, 
Copy of 
assent or 
consent 
to be 
filed with 
Registrar. 
Refund 
of non-
prized 
subscri-
bers' 
subserip-
tiona. 

Subscri. 
bers'dues 
to be flrst 
charge OD 
cbit aNeb. 
Foreman 
to allOW 
certain 
su~rs 
to 
inspect 
chit 
records. 
Preserva-
tlou ot 
chit 
records by 
for~ 
Inapection 
of chit 
boob 
.ad 
recorda 
by 
Registrar. 
Power 
of 
Reserve 
Bank to 
Inspect 
cb1t 
boob 
and 
nccdI. 
18 
rD. Any amount due to the subscriber from a foreman in relation to 
the chit business shall be a first charge on the chit 8S1ets. 
CHAPTER IX 
INSPECTION 01' DOCUMENT8 
ft. Every foreman shall, on payment of such fee not exceedingftve S 
rupees as may be speci1ied In the chit agreement, allow" .the non-prized 
subscribers and unpaid prized subscribers reasonable facilities on all the 
dates of draw or on such other datp.s and within such hours as may be pro-
vided for in the chit agreement, for the inspection of security bonds and 
documents, receipts and other records taken from the prized subscribe. or 10 
furnished by the foreman as a subscriber and all chit records, including 
books of accounts, pass books, balance-sheet and profit and loss accounts 
and such other records as may show the actual financial .posltion of the chit. 
ts. All the records pertaining to a chit shall be kept by the foreman 
for a period of eight years from the da~ of termination of the chit. 15 
46. (1) Without preiudice to the provisions of osections 209 and 209A 
of the Companies Act, 1956. the Registrar or an officer authorised by the 1 of 1956. 
State Government in this behalf may inspect chit books and all the 
records of a chit during 'working nours on any'workfngo day at tne pre-
mises of the foreman with or without giving notice and it "halt be the 20 
duty of every foreman to produce to the Registrat' or the officer so autho-
r1oSed, all such books and'records as are in his custody or power and to 
furnish him with any statement or 'information Telatin~ to the chits as 
he may require from the foreman within such time as he may specify. 
(2) The Re~strar or an officer authorised by the State Govemment 25 
in this behalf may, after givin~ seven davs' notice In wrftin~ to the fore-
man, dfrect him to produce before him for inspection Ruch chit books anel 
'records as he may require at the time and place mentioned in the notice. 
(3) If on an inspection made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2). 
any defects are found, the Registrar may brin~ such defeds to the notice 30 
of the foreman and may also make an order directing the foreman to 
take such action as may be specified in the order to remedy the defects 
within the time specifted tnerein. ' 
(4) Every foreman !;hall be bound to comply with the directions con-
tained in an order made under sub-section (3). " 35 
4'1. (1) Nothing in section 46 shall be deemed to affect the power of 
the Reserve Bank to inspect the books and records of an.., foreman under 
thE' provisions of section 45N' of the Reset'Ve Bank of India Aet,l9M. 2 Of. 11M. 
(2) The ReServe Bank may, jf it considers necessary, fiorwat"d a co-py 
of its report or of any part of its report on the fflB1)eCtion oft'fie bOok. 40 
and records of a fl3!'eman to the foreman for taking necesaary aetion. 
(3) Every foreman shall, on receipt of the report or 1)8rf; th~f 
under sub-section (2), be bound to comply with the dtrecttons, ff -any, 
lrlven by' the Reserve Bank in this behalf an,d mall, if so required,· _b- i. 
mit periodical reports in regard to the action taken by him. 45 
(4) The Reserve Bank may also forward a copy of the r~rt -on the 
inspection of the books and records of a foreman to the State Govem-
ment within whOle jut'iadiction the regletered oftlce of the company. if 

Sot 1908. 
s 
10 
20 
30 
• Ule toreman,u a toD:lpaD1,ot the plaCe or the principal place of buatn_ 
et the foreman in any' other case, • situateet for auch action as may be 
CODIidered neceaB8l'1. 
CHAPTER X 
WINDING 'UP OF CHITS 
. 48. A chit may be wound up by the Registrar within whose territorial 
. jurisdiction the chit has been registered, either on his own motion or 
on an application made by any non-prized or unpaid prized subscriber,-
(G)· if the chit has terminated under clause (c) of section 40; or 
(b) if the foreman commits any such act in respect of the secu-
rity specified in section 20 as is calculated to impair materially the 
nature of the security or the value thereof; or 
(c) if he fails to deposit any amoUDlt required to be deposited 
under any of the provisions of this Act; or 
(d) if it i. proved to the satis:fiaction of the Registrar tnat the 
foreman is unable to pay the amounts due to the subscribers; or 
(e) if the execution or other process iss1.\ed on an order passed 
by the Registrar in favour of any· 'subscriber m respect of amounts 
due to him from the foreman in relation to the chit business is re-
turned unsatisfied in whole or in part;' or 
,(f) if it is proved that there has been a fraud or collusion on the 
part of the Ioreman m the matter of taking secwities from any prized 
subscriber; or 
(g) if the foreman has approlfiated the prize amount in his 
capacity as a subscriber without furnishing suJficient security for 
w.ture subsariptioDSj or 
.(h), if the Registrar is satisfied that the aftairs of the chit are 
being conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the 
subscribers; or 
.,(i) if it is just and equitable that the chit should be wound up. 
E~"'nAt.ion.-For the purposes of clause (d), in determining whe-
ther the foreman is :unable to pay' the amounts due to the subscribers. 
the .H.egistrar shall take into account his contingent and future lia-
bilities in. respect of the chit. 
Circum~ 
stances 
under 
which 
chita may 
be 
wowui up. 
35 U. An application for the windina up of a chi~ ihall be made by a App1lca-
petition preseIl~ by' ally' non~prized or unpaid prized subscriber to tion for 
til~ .li.egistrar SlgIleu and verified. lD tile manner laid. doWD. by the Code windIn, 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and shall contain such p'articulars as may' be UP. 
preacribed: 
40 Provided that no application for the winding up of a chit under 
clause (d) or clause .(i) of section 48 shall lie unless such application 
'la presented,-
(G) by non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers representing not 
less than twenty-five p'er cent. of the amount or, as the case may be, 
the value of the grain subscribed by; all the non-prized aIld unpaid 
prlzed subscribers, if anYi or 
.(b) with the previous sa;nction of the State Government witbm 
whose jurisc:liction the chit is commenced or conducted. 
EzplG7'&CRioB.-For the purposes oii clause (G) of the proviso, a 
~u IUbacribu of a fractioD of a ticket shall be deemed 10 be a sublCrib.er 
0111): to U. gut of such fraction... ....' . _ 

... to 
winding 
up pro-
eeedinp. 
C0m-
mence-
mentand 
eftect of 
Winding 
uP order. 
Injunction 
order. 
Powers of 
Registrar. 
veatini 
of chit 
.-ets in 
Registrar 
or other 
person. 
Suits, 
etc., to 
be stayed 
on wind-
lnI up 
ordf'r. 
Notiflca-
UoA of 
windinl 
up order. 
Cessation 
of winding 
up pro-
ceedingson 
insolvency 
Qf fore-
man, etc .. 
or the 
winding 
up of the 
company 
and 
transfer of 
such pro-
ceed1Dp. 
it 
c. 58. Notwithstanding any thine contained in aecUoDs 48 ... ,.. .. 
petition for the winding up of a chit shall be entertained. b,the BeP-
trar,- •. 0{. • i 
(a) if proceedings relating to insolvency are pending against 
the foreman; or 5 
(b) where the foreman is a firm, if proceedings relating to in-
solvency are pending against all the partners or all the partners 
except one thereof, or proceedings for the dislOlution of the ftrm 
are pending; or 
(c) where the foreman is a company, if proceedings for the 10 
winding up 0:£ such company are pending. 
51. An order for the winding up of a chit shall operate in f .. vour of 
all the subscribers to whom amounts are due from the foreman and it 
shall be deemed to have commenced from the date of the presentation 
of the application for the winding up. IS 
5~ The Registrar may, on the application of the foreman or of any 
subscriber to whom amounts are due in respect of a chit, at any time 
after the presentation of the application for the winding up of the chit 
under this Act and before the making of an order for the appointment 
of an interim receiver or for the winding up of the chit, restrain any 20 
other proceedings instituted against the foreman for the realiJation of 
amounts due from him on such terms as the Registrar thinks fit. 
53. The Registrar may, after hearing an application under this Chap-
ter, dismiss it with or without cost:;, or adjourn the hearing conditionally 
or unconditionally or make an interim or any other order that he deems 25 
fit. 
54. On the making of an order for the winding up of a chit, all the 
chlt assets .sh~H vest in the Registrar or in any perSQn IQPointed by him 
for distribution amongst the subscribers to whom amounts are due in 
respect ot the chit. 30 
55. When a winding up order has been made or a receiver has been 
appointed, no suit or other legal proceedings shall be continued or com-
menced against the foreman by a subscriber for the realisation of amount. 
due to him in respect of the chit except with the leave of the Registrar 
winding up the chit and on such terms as he may impose. 35 
56. On the malting of a winding up order, the Registrar shall make an 
entry in his book relating to the chit and shall notify in the Official 
Gazette that the order has been made. 
57. Where during the pendency of the proceedings fJor the winding 
up of a chit, the fIOreman is adjudicated an insolvent, or where the 40 
foreman is a firm, all the partners or all the partners except one thereof 
are adjudicated insolvents, or where the foreman is a company, the 
company has been ordered to be wound up by the Court, tihe winding up 
proceedings under this Chapter shall cease and the distribution of the 
chit assets shall, subject to the provisions of aections 43 and 52, be made 45 
by the insolvency court or the court windina up the CO~p8n7, sa the 
case may be. 

• 
~'58.( '(1) fWhere an ap~licat1on for the winding up of a chit i's dismissed 
li:ui' the Regfstrar 1s "satfSftecI that the petLtion is frivolous or vexatious, 
he !tbay, on the applfeation ot the foreman award against the petitioner 
~~ch . amount, . ,not exceeding one thousand I'lJpees, as he deems reason-
5h~tcf as' com~nsa.tlon to, the' foreman for the expenses or injury caused 
fo 'nlm('by' thepresentat!on of the application and the proceedings ther.r 
dn,' arid such amount maybe realised as if the award were a decree of a 
Civil Court. 
'(2) On the making of an award under sub-section (1), no suit for 
IO compensation in respect of an application for any winding up o~ the chit 
shall be entertained. 
59. Tbeforeman or any' subscriber or any other person aggrieved by 
a decision or order of the Registrar in any proceedings for the winding 
tip' ~. a chit may, wfthin sixty days from the date of such decision or 
15 order, appeal to the State Government. 
SO. (1) 'Where an order retuslng to wind up a chit has beer. made 
ithder this' ACt, the chit shall be deemed to have been under suspension 
from the date of presentation of the application to the date of such orde,:, 
in Tespectofhon':'prlzed subscribers; and, notwithstanding anything con-
2{) tained in the chit agreement, no non-prized subscriber who was not a 
def~uJter on the date of the presentation of the petition for wind;ng up, 
shall ~ deemed to be a defaulter on the date of its dismissal. 
. (2) Where an order refusing to wind up a chit has been made under 
this Act, in computiqg the period of limitation prescribed for any suit 
25 or other legal proce~irtgs (other than a suit or application in respect 
ot which the leave of the court has been obtained) which might have 
been brot.1gnt or instituted, . but for the presentation of the applicatfon 
fIor the winding up of the chit, the period from the date of the presenta-
tiOJ1 of the .pplication to the date of the order re!using to wind up a chit 
30 shall be excluded. 
(3) 'N'ot!11hg' cOrltained 'in' this Chapter shall affect the rights of a sub-
scriber to proceed against the fureman personally for the balance, if any, 
of the&motlilt 'dUe 'to 'him 'after the d~larati6n 'ali the final dividend in 
the proceedinlS for the Winding up of 'the chit and in computing the 
35 .pery~. o~, limit~tion prescribed for any such proceedings, the period from 
'die date of the presentation of. the application for the winding up ()f t.he-
chit to the date of the declaration of the final dividend shall be excluded. 
CHAPTER XI 
APPoUITMENT OF OFFICERs AND LEVY OF FEEs 
40 61. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, appoint a Registrar of Chits and as many Additional, Joint. 
Deputy and Assistant Registrars as may be necessary for the purpose of 
dilewgiItC the tlutiet Imposed 'lipon the Registrar by or under this Act. 
(2) TIae RegiStrar may appoint as many inspectors of chits and chit 
45 aud~1'..I as may be aecessary for the pUl'pose of dischargin~ the dutie8 
tin'posed on the inspectors of chits or chit auditors by or under this Act. 
(9) All tmpectots 'of chits and chit auctitors shall discharge the duties 
u.posed upon them. ~ or under this Act under the general superintend. 
ence and' oon!llrot of 'Ilke ~s't.rar. 
Award of 
compensa-
tion to 
foreman. 
Ri,ht to 
appeal. 
Limita-
tion. 
Appoint-
ment of 
Registrar 
and other 
officerll, 

lnapection 
of docu-
ments in 
Regis. 
trar's 
oSee. 
LeVy of 
fees. 
Disputes 
relatiD& 
te ehit 
business. 
~ 
(4) If the Registrar is ot the opinion that the accounts of any chit are 
not properly maintained and that such acco:.Ults should be audited. " 
shall be lawful for him to have such accounts audited by a chit auditor. 
(5) It shall be the duty of the foreman of the chit whose account. 
are to be audited by a chit auditor under sub-section (4) to produce 5 
before the chit auditor, all accounts, books and other records relatina 
to the chit, to furnish him with such information as may be required and 
afford him all such assistance and facili'ties as may be necessary and 
reasonable in regard to the audit of the accounts of the chit. 
(6) The foreman shall pay to the ch.:t auditor such fees as may be 10 
prescribed for the audit of the accounts ot the chit under sub-section (4): 
Provided that different scales of fees may be prescribed for di1ferent 
chits depending on the quantum of the chit amount. 
62. The foreman of a chit or any subscriber in a chit or the heirs or 
legal representatives of any foreman or subscriber may, on payment of 15 
such fees as may be prescribed,-
(a) inspect the documents of the concerned chit kept by the 
Registrari or 
(b) obtain a certified copy O'I' an extract of any such document 
or record. ~o 
63. (1) There shall be paid to the Registrar such fees as the St$~ 
Government may, from time to time, prescribe for,-
(a) the issue of previous sanction under section 'i 
(b) the filing of the chit agreement with the Registrar and the 
registration of the chit under section 7; 25 
(c) the filing of a declaration with the Registrar and the grant 
of, a certificate of commencement under section 9; 
(d) the filhlg of copies of documents under any of the provisions 
of this Act; 
(e) the audit of the accounts of the foreman under section 81; 30 
(f) the inspection of documents under section 82; 
(g) the obtaining of certified copIes or extracts of document. 
and records under section 62; and 
(h) such other matters as may appear necessary to the State 
Government. 
35 
(2) A table of fees prescribed under sub-section (1) shall be exhibi-
ted on a notice board in the office of the Registrar. 
CHAPTER XU 
DISP~!1'ES AND ARBITRATION 
. 64. (!) ~otwithstanding anything conta:ned in any other law for the 40 
tIme bemg In force, any dispute touching the management of a chit 
busi.ness shall be referred by any of the parties to the dispute, to the 
RegIstrar for arbitration if each party thereto is one or the other of the 
following, namely:_ 
(a~ a foreman: a prized subscriber or a nOD-prized subscriber, 45 
includmg a defaultIng subsCriber, past .8ub9criber or a penon claim-
ing through a subscriber, or a deceased lubeariber to • chit; 

B6 of 1161. 
s 
10 
(&) a lUl'ety oj a subscriber, past subscriber. ora deceaaedtsuh-
ICriber. 
E,;plClnation.-For thepurpo~s of this sub-section, a dispute touch-
ma the management of a chit business shall include--
(i) a claim by or against a foreman for any debt or demand 
due to him kom a subscriber. or due from him to a subscriber, past .. 
• ubscriber or the nOffilnee, heir or legal representative of a deceased 
subscriber whether such debt or demand is admitted or not; 
(ii) a claim by a surety for any sum or demand due to him 
from the principal borrower in respect of a loan by a foreman and 
recovered from the surety owing to the default of the principal 
borrower. whether such sum or demand is admitted or not; and 
(iii) a refusal or failure by a subscriber, past subscriber or 
the nominee, heir or legal representative of a deceased subscriber 
to deliver possession to a foreman of land or any other asset re-
sumed by him for breach of conditions of the ass"ignment. 
(2) Where any question arises as to whether any matter referred to 
for the award of the Registrar is a dispute or not for the purposes of sub-
section (1), the same shall be decided by the Registrar whose decision 
20 thereon shalil be final. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3) of section 66, no 
Civll Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other proceed-
ings in respect of any dispute referred to in sub-section (1). 
65. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 
25 1963, but subject to the specific provisions contained in this Act, the 
period ot limitation in the case of a dispute referred to the Registrar 
under section 64, shall-
(4) if the dispute relates to the recovery of any sum, including 
interest thereon, due to a foreman from a deceased subscriber, be 
30 three years, computed from the date on which such subscriber dies 
or ceases to be a subscriber; or 
(b) if the dispute is between a foreman and a subscriber or a 
past subscriber, or the nominee, heir or legal representative of a 
deceased subscriber, and the dispute relates to any act or omission 
3S on the part ot either party to the dispute, be three years from the 
date on which the act or omission with reference to which the dis-
pute arose, took place. 
(2) The period of limitation in the case of any dispute other than 
those referred to in sub-section (1) which are required to be referred to 
4 the Registrar under section 64 shaY be regulated by lhe provisions o~ 
o the Limitation Act, 1963, as if the dispute were a suit, and the Registrar, 
Period ol 
limita-
u... 
36 of 1963. a Civil Court. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
the Registrar may admit a dispute after the expiry of the period ot 
4S limitation specified therein, if the applicant osatisfies the Registrar that 
he had sufficient ca'USe for not refE'rring the dispute within such peried. 

Settle-
ment of 
disputes. 
Procedure 
for settle-
ment of 
dlaputes 
and 
power. 
of Be·· 
Jistrar or 
nomi-
nee. 
U 
H. (1) If the Registrar is sati¢,n that aDY mat!a'.refe~'" to him 
or brought to his notice is a dispute within the meaning of ..:t4oa 64, 
he shall, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, settle the cUapute 
himself, or refer it for di5posal.:to a person. awointed. by him .. (~ 
in this Chapter referred to as ~e nQlXlinee). 
(2) Where any dispute is referred under sub-sec:~on (1) ~r settle-
ment to the nominee, the Registrar may, at anyti~,e tor .~~ be 
recorded in writing, withdraw such dispute from the nominee and may 
settll' the dispute himself, or refer it again for settlement to any' other 
nominee appointed by him. 10 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 64, the Registrar 
may, if he thinks fit, flUspend the proceedings in regard to my disPute, 
if the question at issue between a foremaIl and a subleriber o1behfeen 
different subscribers, is one involving complicated. questions of law and 
Ifact, until the question has been decided in a regular suit instituted Iby 
anyone of the parties to the dispute and if any such suit is not instituted I S 
within two months from the order of the Registrar suspending the pro-
ceedinp, the Registrar shall take action under sub-seetion (1). 
67. (1) The Registrar or the nominee hearing a dispute under section 
66, shall, in addItion to the powers conferred on him, under tha~ sec:tlon, 
have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court while tryiDj ~ JI~~. 20 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect oil the follow~. 
matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of pe~l.ls. and 
examining them on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies. th'!'re.of from BU.. 
court or office; . 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 30 
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(2) Except with the permission of the ReDistrar or the nominee no eo· , , 
party shall be represented at the hearing of a dispute by a legal practi-
tioner. . 
(3) (a) If the Registrar or the nominee. is satisfied that ~. p8l'80n, 
whether he is a subscriber or no.t, has acquU'edany interest 1D, the 
property of a person who is a party to a dispute, he may .ordw that, the 
person who has acqUired the interest in the property may be joined 
3S 
5 of 1908. 
as a party to the dh.pute, and any decision ~t may be given by the 40 
Registrar or the nom~nee on the dispute shall be binding on the' pany.' 
so joined, in the same manner as if be were an original party.·tO tk8' 
dispute. . ,. 
(b) Where a dispute has been referred in the na~e of a wronlr~n, 
or where a~ the ne<:essary parties have not been included,. the ft;tk8*~. 4S 
or the nommee may, if he is SBtiSfted that it was due to a ,,~~u~~~:ipls7 .. 
take, order any other person to be substituted or .added as pa~i~s' to ~e 
~te at any stage of hearing of t'he'dispute ou' suCh 'terms aalb'; tliiDb" 
Bill. 

(c) The Regis.trar or .the nominee may, at any stage of the proceedmgd, 
either upon or without -the application of either part,:and on such terms 
a. may appear to the Registrar or the JlOminee to be just, order that the 
•• me of.uy party improperly joiDed be struck off. 
5 (d) Any person wh,.. \s a party to the dispute and entitled to more 
than one relief in respect of the same cause of action may claim all or 
~, s~l"e~,.,b~t,.;.f,lu;, OlJli~"to. c~ any s~ r~, he shall ~ot 
bt;"l~~' ~o .. cl4iIll,,~~t·re~ e~t. with the le,ve of the Regist;rar 
~Jbe.po:xni4~e. . 
10 68. (1) Where a dispute has been referred under section 64 and the 
15 
Rp~~ Ot tbIa n~,~:~~ ~te, is . .sa~eci on enquiry or 
otp.~.,1ll~~,a p~ty to,,,,~cl1 4i~1;f:;, wi.th,i~tl~ to.defest,or .obstruct 
the execution of any award or the carrying out of any order that may 
be made,-
(4) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property; 
or 
(b) .is. a~o~t ,to rempv.e tl\e" whQIe or any part of the property 
from. th~ iur.i$clj~~ipQ.,..of th~ R~s.trar, 
he JMY, unl~ aq~:~~B~ur.it.y is ,iurJJ,ished, dtf~t conditional attach-
20 lDAJJlt ~ t4~ "aw,iJrrwl"\Y", ~::~~ att.MJJme.t,lt shall, hav~ the .. eft'ec{ 
as .if .it is m~.4e by . a c~t: Ciwi~ C01!ll1-
(2) Where the Registrar or the nominee directs the attachment of 
any property under sub-section (1), he shall issue a notice callin, upon 
the person whose property is so attached to furnish such security as he 
25 thinks adequate within a specified period, and if the person fails to 
provide such security, the Registrar or the nominee may confirm the 
order, and may, after the deci$ion in. tbedispute, direct the disposal of 
the property so attached towards the claiIA. if awarded. 
(3) ·Any attachment made wwler ·this section shall not deat the 
30 rights, subsisting prior to the attachment of the property, of persons who 
are not parties to the dispute, or bar any person holding a deoreeagaitWt 
the.,per~ wQOl!eproperty, is.so attached frqm applying far the sale o£ 
the property under the attachment of such decree .. 
(4), Th~ ~~ur.Dr ~e .. pominee may, in .order to prevent the ends 
35 of justice being defeated, make such interloc.4tory or.q.er$ pending the 
award in a dispute referred to in sUb-section (1) as may appear to be 
just and convenient. 
69. -When a dispute is referred to ·arbitration und .. this Chapter, the 
ReM~ or the(p.~~, may;, after. giyiI\i.a re$Sonable oPportunity to 
~tl,l,.~e,. to thedi.wu~to be .. beard. lJl8~ean /l-ward on thedifglute, OD 
. ~);~s inCUl11"~;~ .. ~~,il~e~ .tothe.,disp\lte in COJiU\e~~~o~ with 
the proceedings and the fees and expenses payable to the ~ar or 
the nominee, and such an award shall not be invalid merely on the ground 
thai it was made after the' expiry . .of the period, if any, fixed . for deoiciing 
the cUapute by the Registr.ar, arid ean; subject.to appeal under aeotiOD.~ 
4$,_ .a'fand'1riDdiDlon 'tite~. 6e·~te. 
Attach-
ment 
before 
judg-
ment and 
other in-
terlocu-
tory 
orden. 
Decision 
of Re-
gistrar or 
nomi-
nee. 

Appeal 
aeainst 
deciaion 
of Re-
ptrar or 
nomi-
nee. 
Money 
how re-
covered. 
Private 
transfer 
of pro-
perty 
made 
after 
issue of 
certificate 
VGid 
against 
fore-
maD. 
Advisory 
role of 
Reserve 
B'Ulk. 
Appeals. 
70. Any party aggrieved by .any order passed by the Registrar or the 
nominee or the award of the Registrar or the nominee under section. 69, 
may, within two months from the date of the order or award, appeal to 
the State Government. 
71. Every order passed by the Registrar or the nominee under sec- 5 
tion 68 or section 69 and every order passed by the State Government 
in appeal und~ section 70 for payment of any money shall, if not carried 
out,- .j» • ,~ldt '141 
(a) on a certificate issued by the Registrar, be deemed to be a 
decree of a Civil Court, and shall be executed in the same manner as 10 
3 tiecree of such Court, or 
(b) be executed in accordance with the provisions of any law 
for the time being in force for the recovery of amounts as arrears of 
land revenue: 
Provided that no application for execution under clause (b) shall 15 be made after the expiry of three years from the date fixed in the 
order, and if no such date is fixed, from the date of the order. 
72. Any private transfer or delivery of., or encumbrance or charge 
on, property made or created after the issue of the certificate by the 
Registrar under section 71 shall be null and void against the fQreman on 20 
whose application the said certificate was iasued. 
CHAPTER XIIi 
MISCELLANEOUS 
73. The Reserve Bank may tender to any State Government such 
advice on questions of policy with respect to this Act as it thinks fit 2S 
either on its own motion or on a request made by the State Government. 
74. (1) Any foreman aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar,-
(a) refusing to register the chit agreement under section 7; 
(b) refusing to grant a certificate of commencement under sub-
section (2) of section 9; 
(c) refusing to accept any security under sub-section (1) of 
section 20 or under section 31; or 
30 
(d) refusing to release the security charged under aection 31, 
may, within thirty days of the communication to him of such decision, 
appeal to the State Government or to such officer or authority as may 35 
be empowered by notification in the Official Gazette by the State Gov-
ernment in that behalf. 
(2) Any foreman or other person aggrieved by the order o£ the Be-
ltistrar under sub-sectlon (I) of section. 34 may, within thirty day. of 
the communication to him. of such decilion, appeal to the State Qo~ 40 

ment or to such officer or authority as may be empowerea Dy notifteatt"h. 
in the Official Gazette by the State Government in that behalf. 
(3) The State Government or such officer or authority aforesaid 
may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of making his represen-
5 tation, pass such order on the appeal as it or he thinks fit and such 
order shall be final. 
75. The Registrar may, in his discreti·()n and upon an application 
in writing by a foreman made within the period specified for the filing 
of documents, under sub-section (3) of section 28, sub-section (2) of 
10 section 29, section 37 or section 41, allow the foreman further time not 
exceeding fifteen days to file coples of such documents. 
76. (1) Whoever contravenes or abets the contravention of any of 
the provisions of sections 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 22, 24, 30, 
31, sub-section (4) of section 33, sections 46, 47 or sub-section (5) of 
15 section 61 shall, on conviction, be Tlunishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees or with both. 
(2) Any foreman,-
(a) who fails to file any document required to be filed under 
20 this Act withIn the period specified therefor or within such further 
time as may be allowed; or 
(b) who fails to comply with the requirements of the chit 
8areement regarding the date, time and place at which the chit is 
to be drawn or who fails to comply with the requirements of nny 
fl5 direction Jdven under sub-section (3) of section 38; or 
(c) who contravenes or fails to comply with any other require-
ment under this Act, 
shall on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to three 
thoUlalld rupees. 
30 (3) Whoever wilfully makes a statement in any document required 
to be filed under this Act which is false in anv' material particular 
shall. on conviction. be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to ft.ve thou-
aand rupees or with both. 
35 77. A court imposing any flne under this Act may direct that the 
whole or any part thereof shall be applied in, or towards payment of, 
the cost of the proceedings. 
78. (1) Where an offence under this Act ha!> been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was ('ommitted wag 
40 in charge of, and was responsible to, the comnany for th~ conduct of 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of. the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded aga;nst 
and . punished accordingly: 
Provided thl'lt nothing contained in thic; "1uh-Rection ",hall render anv 
45 such nel'S01'\ liable to any punishment providerl in thic; Act. if he nrov",s 
that the offence was committed without hi's knowledge or that he ex-
c:!rcised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
Powers 
of 
Registrar 
to give 
extension 
. of time 
for fllin, 
docu-
ments. 
Penaltie •. 
Applica-
tion 
of fine. 
Offences 
by com-
pani~s. 

Cb~nce 
of 
offences. 
Power to 
eomp::.und 
offences. 
Power to 
enter and 
search 
any place 
and t::l 
seize l>ny 
documents. 
Offir.el"3, 
lobe 
publh; 
aervants. 
Power to 
delegate. 
11 
'(2) NotWitb'sblrldfilg anyth!t\g' eonlaihed ' in ' sU~sect1~, (I),' 9!1iete 
an offence under 'this Aet' 'has oe-m cobiIIiftted by a "eomJ*ri,y dnd: it ''fa 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
nivance of, o()l' is attributable to,,, any neglect on the p~ of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, ~uch cUrec- 5 
tor, manager, secretary or other oftlCer shall also be deemed to qe 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
pumshed accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes ot 'this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a fi'tm 10 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the finn. 
79. (1) All offences under section 11 shall be cognizable. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judi-
cial Magistrate of the first class shall try an oitence puriishable unaer 15 
this Act. 
SO. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any ofJicer 
empowered by the State Government in this behalf may, either before 
or after the institution of criminal proCeedings tinder this Act, accept 
m,m the person who has cotntni~ or is reliotiably ~d to have 20 
committed an offence under this Act, by 'wily of compositfon of. such 
offence, a sum of. money not exceeding such amount'as may be prescribed. 
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), 
the offender, if in custody, shall' be dischallged and. no further, praceed- , 
tngs shall be taken against him in respect of such offence. 2S 
81. (1) If the Registrar or any other ofticer'authorlied'by'hb:n inthis 
behRlf, 'has reason to' sUsp~t 'that imy'~· ~cts, or 'hi 'respbt\i!Bte 
for the conduct of, a chit in any place in contravention of'ttle Jii'6~B 
of this Act, he may, f.or reasons to be reeorded'in writing ami at any 
reasonable time, enter into and search such place, and may seize luch 30 
books, registers,aecounts or documents as 'may be necessary. 
(2) The Re~strar or ofB(ier aUtHot1tied by' 1fli'n in! this lbfffidlf, 'tti(y 
apply for assistance to an officer in charge ofa '~IlCe' station' anti lti1te 
police officers to accompany and assist him in discharging his duties ~Jlder 
sub-section (1). ' ' , ,",-' 15 
(3) All searches under sub-section (1) shan be 'made In 'aceMaatlee 
with the provisions of the Code of Crimin,l Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1974. 
82. The Registrar and aU officers appointed bv the State Gove~ept 
to perform any functionc; under this Act shall bE" deemed f,o b~ ?ublic 
servanlc; within the meaning of section 21 o'f the Indian Penal Code. 40 45 of 1860. 
83, The State Government may, by notificatiOn in the oMcial Gazette. 
direct that any power (other than the power to hear appeals or to make 
rules) exercisable by it under this Actor the rules made thereunder 
may be exercised also byanv officer ot the State Government 8\1bJaot to 
!IIuch terIM and conditions, if any,.s may be .pecified~. 45 

2 of 1934, 
," 
5 
29 • 
I; J 14. NothIng in this 'Act shall apply in respect of,- . ' • t ," _ ... 
(4) a~y chit started before the commencement of this Act; or 
. (b) any cait the amount of which, or where two or more cbits 
Were staned er conducted simultaneoUSly by the same foreman, the 
aggregate amOUJlt of which does not exceed one hundred iz'upees. 
U. (l)' Notwithstanding anything contained in this Aet, no bank shan 
commence or earry on chit business after the commencement of tb!s Act. 
(2) Where a chit had been started by any bank' before such com-
mencement, such chit may be continued after such commencement until 
10 it is completed, and the provisions of the chit agreement and such laws, 
Harty, as were applicable to it immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall apply to such chit 
Explanation.-For the purposes of. this s~tion "bank" means an ap-
proved bank or a ccroperative bank as defined in clause (bii) , of section 
15 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
st. The State Government may, in con!!ultation with the Reserve 
Bank, by notificatiOn in the Offtcial Gazette, and subject to such C()nc:U-
• tion!! as may be ,specified in the notification, exempt any person or class 
of persons or any chit or class of chits from all or any of the provisions 
2:> of this Act~ 
87. No suit, presecution or other legal proceeding &hall lie against the 
state Government, the Registrar or other officers of the state Govern-
~ent or of the Reaerve Bank or any of its officers taXercising any powers 
or discharging any functions under this Act in respect of anything whh;h 
25 is in good faith dene or intended to be done in pursuance~f this Act Dr 
the rules made thereunder. 
88. (1) The State Government may, in consultation with the Reserve 
. Bank, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for giving eft'ect 
to the provisions of this Act. ' 
30. (2) In particular, aJld without prejudioe to the eenerality of ~e 
foregoing power, such rules may provHe for all or any of the fo~w­
lng matters, namely:-
(4) the form and manner in which an application for obtaining 
the previous sanction may be made under sub-section (2) of section 4; 
35 (b) the additional particulars ~hat a chit aereementmay contain 
under clause (q) of sub .. section (1) of section 6; 
40 
45 
(c) the particulars that may be included in the minutes of the 
proceed.ings of a draw under section 17; 
(d) the method of valuation by the Registrar in a grain chit 
for the purpose of furnishing security under section 20; 
(e) the procedure that may be followed b:v the Registrar iT. 
releasing the security furnished by the fnreman under section 21; 
(f) the registers and books and the fonn in which such registers 
and bo~ks may be maintained by the foreman lmder section 23; 
(g) the time within which the balance-sheet and the profit and 
loss account in respect of a chit business ~hall be filed under section 
24; . .. ... 
Act Dot to 
apply to 
certain 
chltl. 
Cert.a.in 
banka 
not to 
conduct. 
chit 
bUsiness. 
Protection 
of actton 
tak!n 
unter the 
Act. 
Pow~, Ie 
make, 
rull'!,s. 

(h) the rate at which intereat sball be pv.bJ.t ~,tbJe,detlPlted 
instalments by a defaulted subscriber under section 28; 
(i) the particulars that may be included in ail application for 
the winding up of chits unde.r section 49; 
-. (j) the procedure ·to be' followed fQt the wiAcJiy ,upQf chits s 
~,Chapter X; 
(k) the foees payable under section 63; 
(1) the auditing of balance-sheets and the profit and 1_ ac-
couts of chit business and the issue of ~udit cediflcaU!&j 
" (m) the forql and manner in which a dispute shall,.be ~'ferred 10 
to t~e Registrar under section 64; 
(,,) the ~dure to be followed by the Regiatr<8A"-. 'Of,h., ap-
mU18ie for ~ttling the disputes refeITed to him. under se¢ion ,64; 
(0) the matters referred to in clause <I) of sub-aection ,(I) ot 
section 67' 15 , t 
(p) the conditions subject to which and the amou~t op. the 
payment of which composition of offences may be made ,under sec-
tion 80; 
(q) the form and manner in which an appeal may be preferred 
under this Act and the fees payable foOr such appeal; 20 
(r) the iasue and senrice of noti~s or other .p.tOCUs under t4is 
~tj , 
(8) the procedure for, and the manner' of receiving, any ~ 
payable under this Act; 
" (t)any other matter wbioch is required to be or may be .pres- 2S 
eribed - ",' . A-1 '. ,-:,-\ '\'f+li .. ,p~ 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where 
it consists of two Houses, or, where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that HO'USe. ' 30 
( ) . AndhrR U. 1 The Al)dhra Pradesh Chit Funds Act, 1971, ~, ,Bjerala Pradelb 
~t~ Act, 1975, the Maharashtra Chit Funds Act, 1~7~ t~ l'NP.il:' Act 9 ('f 
Nndu Chit Funds Act, 1961, as in force in the State of T~,~.,d .. 1971. 
i!1 the Union territories of Chanoigarh and Delhi, the UttarP~desh! Kerala 
Chit Fund!! Act, 19'75, the Goa, Daman and Diu Chit Funds Act 1973 85 Act 2a ,. '" '. of 1976 
and the Pondieherry Chit Funds Act, 1966, are he~eby repealed aM ''tJ:le M har~sh-
provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Art, 1897, shall apply to tr: At:: LV 
fi\i.ch repeal as if each such Act, so repealed were a Central Act. of 1.974. 
Tamil 
(2) Notwithstanding such reperu,tbe Acts mentioned in sub-section ~::~4 of 
(1) shall continue to apply to chits in operation on the eommaaement 40 lINI1. 
of this Act, in the same manner as they applied to s~b oWts before Uttar 
such commencement Pradoesh 
. Act 08 of 
1870. 
Goa, 
Daman 
and Diu 
Act 18 of 
1973. 
Pondl-
chen7 
Act 18 of 
1966. 
10 of 1897. 

-------------.---.----~,----------
I. Capital: 
Authorised 
Iasued . 
Paid-up 
2. Reserve Fund 
3. Deposits 
Liabilities 
4. Borrowings • . . • 
5. Foreman's liability in tickets prized • 
6. Prize amount payable. . . 
,. Defaulted subscribers' amount payable 
8. Advance subscription received . . 
9· Liability to non-prized subscribers (Arrears 
ftom non-prized siibicrlbers to be indicated) 
10. Amount payable in terminated chits . 
RI. 
RI. 
Rs. 
II. Auction profits payable to non-prized subscri-
bers. . 
Ill. Other liabilities . 
IS. Profit and loss account 
TOTAL: 
Total ellit amounts of the chitsin Corce, i.e., 
running chits. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 24) 
PART I.-FoRM: OF BALANCE-SHDT 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
~. 
Rs. 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
'~ ., .. 
----------------
I. Cash 
2. Balances with banks : 
<a> Current account 
(b) Deposit account 
3. Investments: 
RI. 
Rs. 
(a> In chits . . . • . RI. 
~
) In Go'-emment securities . • RI. 
c) Others. . . . . . Rs. 
4. hare amount due from prized subscribers: 
(a> Secured. RI. 
(b) UJlIeCUred . • •. RI. 
5. Arrears due from prized subscribers: 
<a) Secured. . . . . 
(M Unsecured . . . . 
6. Amount due in terminated chits: 
<a) Secured. . . . 
(b) Unsecured . . . 
7. Cliit prize amount paid earlier 
8. Loan. and adYances w subscribers 
9. I.itigation apenses 
10. Premises . . 
I I. Purniture and fixture 
12. Stamps ~ atock 
13. Other assets. . 
14. Profitand loss account 
RI. 
Rs. 
RI. 
RI. 
TarA!. : 
Allets 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
Rs. 
RI. 
RI. 
Rs. 
RI. 
RI. 
Ra. 
RI. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Particub.rs .to hi: 'PCcificd in reIpeCt of amountuhoWII apinst 4, 5 and 6. 
'I I 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
(i) AmOlDlts due from directors or officers of the company or any of them 
either jointly or leVerally with any other penon. 
(ii) Amounts due by companies or firms in which the directOrs of the company are 
interested .1 directon, p.trtner. or in the case or Private companies, U man- 35 
hers. - ~ '1:=1':-:- -/ -- • 
IN ... 

Expendi~re 
• To Interest paid on depolits, borTowings, 
• etc.~ 
II. To salaries, allowaDceI, boouaand provi-
dent fund 
,. To directors, sittins feel • • • 4. To rent, taxes, insurance, lighting 
5. To law charges. • 
. 6. To postages, telepama and ltamps 
7. Toauditon'feft • 
8. To filing fees 
9. 1'0 depreciatjOll and repain . • 
10. To ItatiOllUy, printillg_d advenilelllent 
1.1. To other apau:Uture 
u. To balance of pl'ofit 
TorAL : 
PART It-FORM OF PROFIT AND LOSS &CCOtnn' -
-------
Rs. 
RI. 
Rs . 
RI. 
R,. 
Rs. 
R,. 
RI. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
RI. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
---------- ---- ~---------------
I. By foreman's commission 
2. By bonus 
3. By interest . 
4. By indivisible iDcome in auction profit 
5. Byrcnt 
6. By net profit OIl sale ofinvcstmentl 
7. By other receipts 
8. 8yloss 
TotAL : 
Income 
Rs. 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
RI. 
RI . 
Rs. 
----~---~-------
R •. 
--- ---------- --- - --- --------- -------------
S 
10 
IS 
\» 
~ 

m'A'l'EMtNT OF OBJtCTS AND R!ASONS 
A 'conventional chit' is an old indigenous financial institution involv-
ing regular periodical subscriptions by a group of persons. It is, in law, 
a contract between the subscribers and· the foreman which provide. that 
the subscribers shall SUbscribe a certain sum by periodical inStalments 
tor a definite period. Each subscriber shall, in his turn, as determined 
by lot or by auction or in such other agreed manner, be entitled to the 
prize amount. There will be as many periodi<:al instalments as there are 
members. As there is a mutuality of interest among tee, small Dumber 
o~ subscribers to each chit fund, it constitutes a convenient instrument 
combining savings and borrowings. 
2. In the wider context of examining in depth the activities of the 
non-banking financial intermediaries (which term also includes institu· 
tions conducting chit funds or kwries), the Banking Commission (1972) 
had recommended intter alia, that it is essential to have a uniform chit 
fund legislation applicable to the whole country and as such either an all~ 
India Chit Funds Act may be enacted or a Model law may be prepared 
for adoption by all the States. The Commission also observed that it 
would be desirable to provide in the legislation that only public limited 
companies can run chit funds. 
3. The recommendations of the Banking Commissi'on were examined 
by Government. The Reserve Bank, at the instance of the Government, 
drafted a model Bill to regulate the conduct of chit fund,s for adoption 
by all the State Governments. The Reserve Bank also sent the draft 
Bill to the 'Study Group on non-Banking Companies constituted by it in 
June, 1974, under the Chairmanship of late Shri James S. Raj, the then 
Chairman of the Unit Trust of India. The Study Group was unanimous-
ly of the view that the Bill should be enacted as a Central legislatioD, 
as such a step, besides ensuring uniformity in the provisions 
applicable to chit fund institutions throughout the country, would 
also prevent such institutions from taking advantage either of the absence 
of any law governing chit funds in any State or exploit the benefit of 
any lacuna or relaxation in any State law by extending their activitiel 
in such States. The Group further recommended that the administration 
of the law should be lef.t to the State Government concerned which in tUrn 
could seek the advice and assistance of the Reserve Bank on policy mat-
ters. Further, there should be, according to the Group. no abjection to 
chits being conducted by private limited companies also and on a limited 
scale even by unincorporated bodies such as, individuals, sole proprietor-
ships and partnership firms. 
4. The Bill has been finalised after taking into account the views of 
all the State Governments to whom a draft Bill was sent for com-
ments. The scheme of the Bill and the provisions made therein largely 
follow the pattern of chit fund legislations in force in some of the States 
altd includes certain new provisions, such as, minimum capital require-
33 

meJ;lts for companies conducting chit business, prohibiting chit fund com-
plmies from doing any other business, placing a ceiling on the aggregate 
chit amounts of chits that are being conducted by chit fund institutions, 
providing ror a self-contained machinery for the settlement of dispute. 
bl~tween a foreman and the subscribers by means of arbitration, etc, The 
repeal of the eXisting State legislations on the subject has also been 
p'mvided. for in the Bill. 
'5: the '''notes on clauses" appended to the Bill explain in detail the 
proViSiens of' the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; R. VENKATARAMAN.' 
~r&th. Neotm"r, 1980. 

Note, on clclt.Lse. 
Cl4U1e 2.-Thfs clause defines the various expressions commonly U8ecI 
in:t.,BUl. 
Su.P-clAu~ (a), defines "approved banks" as referritlg to coIPaer$l 
~;~,,1JCh other blQlking institutions at the State GoveI'DUWllt,~, 
in consultation with the Reserve Bank, approve for tbe pu..rpoaes of. the 
Bill. 
Su.b.~)~ (b) defines the term "chit". This definition is on the,same 
lines as the definition of the expression "collventiOllal chit" in the P,rized 
Chits and Money Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978 (43 of 1978). 
Sub-clause (g) defines "discount" as the sum of money which a pJ"imd 
subscriber is required to forego under the terms of the cJUt agreement. 
Sub-clause (h) defines "dividend" to mean the share of the subscriber 
in the amount of discount available under the chit agreement for rateable 
distribution amona the subscribers at each instalment of the chit. 
Clause S.-This clause provides that the provisions of the Bill.lhlJll 
have e~ect notwithstandi~g anything to the contrary contafrled in the 
provisions of any other law in force or in the memorandu1l1 and.artiel~ of 
association, or bye-laws, etc., and if any such provision is repugnant to 
the provisions of. the Bill, it shall, to the extent of the repugnancy blteome 
or be void. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides that no chit shall be commenced or 
conc;iucted wiUlout obtaining the previous sanction of the State Govern-
~t within whose juri$diction the chit is to be conducted andunlus tINt 
chit is registered under the provisions of the Bill. It has also been pro.viclW 
that such sanction shall lapse if the chlt is not registered before the expiry 
of six months from the date of such sanction or within such further 
period of six months as the State Government may allow. 
Sub-clause (3) of this clause specifies the cases in which previous 
sanction may be refused. 
C14use 5.-This clause prohibits the invitation for subscriptions to a 
chit by issuing a notice, cfrcular, prospectus or document unless such 
notice, circular, prospectus or document contains a statement that the 
pr.evious sanction referred to in clause 4 has been obtained and also the 
particulars of such san,ction. 
Clause 6.-While the various particulars which are required to be 
specified in every chit agreement and the other formalities to be complied 
with have been specifted in sub-clause (1) of this clause, it has been pro-
vided in sub-clause (~) that the duration of a chit shall not extend beyond 
a perlodof five years from the date of its commencement. However, the 
State Government concerned has been empowered to permit the dur.ation 
of a chit up to a period of ten years on the existence of certain conditions 
flveclfted in that sub·f'lause. 
35 

Sub-clause (3) provides that the amount of discount in any chit shall 
not ex'ceed thirty per cent. of the chit amount (that is, the sum-total of 
subscriptions payable by all the subscribers for any instalment of a chit 
without any deduction for discount or otherwise). 
Clause 7.-Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides for the chit agreement 
being filed in duplicate by the forem.an with the Registrar . 
.J '1 '. , ' . , 
Su})..clause (2) empowers the Registrar to retain one copy of theeldt 
agreement and return the duplicate to the foreman with an endorsement 
that the chit agreement has been registered by him; and Such an endorse-
ment shall be conclusive evidence that the chit is duly registered "under 
the proViSions of the Bill. . , 
" 
Clause 8.-Sub-clause (1) of this c:ause provides that a company shall 
not coDciuct any 'chit or carry on any chit business unless its paid-up eapital 
fsnot less than rupees one lakh. 
Sub-clause (2) requires the existing companies having a share capital 
of leas than rupees one lakh to increase its paid-up capital to not lesa tha~ 
rupees one lakh within a period of three years from the commencemen; 
of the proposed legi~lation. The State Government has. however, been 
empowered to extend the period of Ulree years in respect of ~y cOmpany 
for such further period not exceeding two years in the aggregate. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that every company carrying on chit business 
shall create a reserve fund and transfer to such reserve fund a ,sum not 
less than twenty per cent. of the balance of profit for each year as disclosed 
in its profit and loss account before declaring any dividend on its shares. 
Clause 9.-This clause providlO's that every foreman shall. after all the 
tickets specified in the chit agreement are fully subscribed, file a declara-
tion to that effect with the Registrar. 
Su~lause (2) empowers the Registrar to issue a certificate ofeom-
mencement after the filing of such declaration and no foreman can com-
mence any auction Or draw unless such certificate is granted. 
Clause lO.-This clause reqUires every foreman to furnish a copy 01 
the chit agreement to every subscriber after the foreman has obtained 
the certificate of commencement under clause 9 and before the first draw. 
Clause n.-This clause prohibits the use of the word "chit", "chit 
Jund" J Hchitty" or "kuri" by any person other than a person carrying on 
chit business and makes it obligatory on ~ person carrying on chit busi-
ness to use ,as part of· his name anyone of such words. 
Clause 12.':"-Sub-c1ause (1) provides that no company carrying on chit 
business shall conduct any other business except with the general . or 
special ,pe~ion of the State Government. 
Sub-clause (2) provides for Ute winding up of such other busineu 
before the expiry of a period of three y~ars from the .cOJnqletlceJllent, ,of 
the proposed legislation. or such extended period not exceeding two years. 
Clause 13.-Under th:s clause, no foreman other than a firm or other 
association of individuals or a company can commence o~ conduct chits, 
the aggregate amount of which at any time exceeds ten thousand rupees. 
Where the foreman is a firm o.r other association of individuals, 

: 37 
ItAeI"'UlJepte. ·.-ehit .· .. amewrt ... .aball .. DOt ·u.oeedl~ .,Wl "thou-
··.1Ed.1or ;everyopartner or ,individual, .as ,the'use .may ,. Be"SQbjeci-. .t. a 
It IIaKiuNm ·of rupees forty taoulalld. Where the fore.ma.·is ,a,eDPIPII'lY, 
the aggregate chit amount of the chits conducted by it, shall no~latr~Y 
time"exce.ed ten times the net assets of the .company (that is _tJ:ae total 
. assets of the company less its total liabilities, bad and doubtful .debta as 
.. also other iptangible assets as disclosed by its last audited b~ance-sheet). 
'Clause 14.-This clause prohibits a person carryi.ng on chit business 
from uti:ising the moneys collected in respect of such business except for 
"itbe -porpo~s' mentioned therein, namely, for carrying en cbit'bUsiness, 
. ghring' loans' and, advances to 'non-prb:ed 'Subscribers, etc .. mrthe leeuity 
of thp. subscriptions paid by them, investment in trustee senrities, etc. 
Clau.<:e 1S.-This clause lays down the procedure to be follow~ for 
making any alteration in the chit agreement. 
. ,,clauset 16· to ·l8.·~hese -clauses 'provide for the coruiuet ·.Gf[th~w, 
maintenance of minutes of the proceedings of every draw and,t.ae-.riWng 
.of ,minutes Qf such proceedings with the Registrar. 
'Clause 19.-This clause prohibits the opening of new places' of' busJness 
w~thout obtaining the approvDI of the' Registrar. 
CLauses' 20 to 22 . .....:These clauses specify the rights and duties of"lIle 
foreman of a chit. 
Glause 20 .specifiesthe various_securities to be given by a foreman 
for the proper conduct of the. chit. They· areas follo.ws:-
{a) deposit in. an ·,app~ed· bank of an amount, equal '-'to \ the chit 
. 'amount-in; ·the name· of the Registrar; 
(b) transfer Government securities orother .. sec.urities referred to 
in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, in favour of the Registrar. 
''The value of the Government !'lecurities should be not less thaD'one>4hd-
a-half times the value of the chit amount and the value of other secrurities 
wQUlldbe:~cjfied by the State Government by ru!es·whioah ,shaIJ...not be 
less-than tOne~and-a-half times the value _of the chit amount. .The.secu.Pty 
. given, ,maybe. sUbstituted by aI'other security .of the _same value_ aodl,the 
.,s.ecurity so. furnished or. substituted would not .be released to t.be.foreman 
until the chit is terminated and the clrumscof aU the .s.ubscrlbers.are-.tully 
satisfied. 
c ,A foreman's rights include the ri.ght to. take the chit,amountlat the Llrst 
.,.\nIta.1ment-Wtilbout.:deeucUon ofdiscounty.to receive and . ..ealile.lalL,aubs-
'cmptlQlls.fromthe subscribers and ·to distribute the prize.amo~ tolthe 
. ""iaed,-6lu.bleribers. The duties include the ,disbursement .. .Qf .tbe.-.prize 
HHRaUftts.,tothe pt'iozed-.sl.!bscribers on their fum.ishin.~· suftldent: ,Iecllrfty 
for the due payment of future subscriptions, deposit the undisbursed prize 
amount in approved banks before the next succeeding draw,etc. 
I ~t· 23,~"Phfs elRse 'enumerates . the . varioUS! lIoK5 '.ancf··TeMrds to 
";"be" maintained ·by a ·for8RWl. 

( Clause 24.-This clause enjoins every foreman to prepare and ftle with 
the Registrar within such time as may be prescribed by rules a balance-
sheet and profit and loss account in the 'fonns set out in the Schedule to 
the Bill. 
Clauses 25 and ~6.-While c1ause 25 lays down 'that the foreman 
shall be liable to account to the subscribers for the amounts due to 
them, clause 26 prohibits a foreman from withdrawing from the chit 
until its termination unless such withdrawal is assented to in writin, 
by all the non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers. 
Clause 27.-This clause provides for payment of subscriptions by 
every non-prized subscriber on the date, time and place mentioned in 
the chit agreement. 
Clause 28.-This clause provides for the removal of a non-prized 
subSCriber if he defuults in the payment of the subscriptions. 
Clauses 29 and 30.-These clauses provide for the substitution of 8 
new subscriber in place of a defaulting subscriber and the amounts 
payable to the defaulting subscriber. 
Clauses 31 to 33.-These clauses provide for the rights and duties 
of prized subscribers. The prized subscriber has to furnish security for 
payment of the prize amount and he has to pay the future subscriptions 
regularly. If he defaults in the payment of subscriptions, the foreman 
is entitled to a consolidated payment of all future subscriptions by fol-
lowing the procedure specified in clause 33. 
Cla'U.'le 34.- This clause prohihits the transfer of the rights of the fore-
man to receive subscriptions from the prized subscribers without the pre-
vious sanction in writing of the Registrar. 
Clause! 35 to 37.-These clauses provide for the procedure to be follow-
ed for the transfer of rights of non-prized subscribers. Such transfer shall 
be in writing and shall be filed with the foreman who shall recognise it 
if the transferee :s solvent. 
Clause 38.-This clause lays down the procedure for convening a special 
meeting of the general body of the subscribers for passing a special resolu-
tion. 
Clause 39.-This clause provides for the manner in which a chit has 
to be conducted if the foreman dies or becomes of unsound mind or is 
declared an insolvent, etc. It provides for the conduct of the chit by any 
one or more subscribers authorised by a special resolution in accordance 
with the provisions of the chit agreement. 
alauses 40 4nd 41.-These clauses lay down the circumstances in which 
a chit shall be deemed to· have terminated. The expiration of the period 
specified in the chit agreement, death or unsound mind of the foreman and 
the consent of all the subscribers to terminate the chit are some of the 
circumstances under which a chit shall be terminated. 'nle consent of 
the subscribers 1s required to be filed with the Registrar under clause 41. 
Clause 42.-This clause specifies the circumstances in which a non-
prized subSCriber is entitled to the refund of the subSCriptions paid by him. 
Clause 43.-Under this clause, the amount due to the subscriber from 
a foreman in relation to the chit business shall be a first charge on the 
chit assets. 

·, ' .• 
j~ • 
,t.'; 
CZcIuae 44.-This clause entitles a non-prized or unpaid prized .w. 
briber to inspect the books and records of the foreman on payment of the 
prescribed fee not exceeding five rupees. 
Clause 45.-This clause requires every foreman to preserve all recorda 
pertaining to a chit for a period of eight years from the date of termiDa-
tir)n of the chit. 
Clause 46.-This clause, inter alia, empowers the Registrar or an officer 
authorised by the State Government to inspect the chit books or recorqa 
maintained by a foreman and also authorises the Registrar to direct the 
iorem .. :n to remedy any defects noticed within the specmed time. 
Clause 47.-This clause saves the power of the Reserve Bank under sec-
tion 45N of the Reserve Bank of India Act to inspect the books and re-
cords of any foreman. It also, inter alia, empowers the Reserve B.mk 
to give appropriate directions to the foreman on the basis of the inspec-
tion report. 
Clau;;es 48 to 59.--These cl<.luSCS provde for the winding up of chits 
and other connected matters. 
Clause 48 specifies the circumstances in which a chit may be wound 
up and clause 49 lays down the manner in which an application for the 
purpose may be presented by any non-prized or W1paid prized subscriber. 
Clause 50 prohibits the entertainment of the winding up petition of a chit 
by the Hegistrar if insolvency proceedings, or, as the case may be, proceed-
ing, for dissolution or wionding up, are pending against the foreman. 
Clause 53 empowers the Registrar to pass appropriate orders in the 
proceedings for the winding up of a chit and clause 54 provides for the 
vesting of all chit assets in the Registrar or a person appointed by him. 
Clause 56 requires the Registrar to make an entry in his book on the 
passing of an order of winding up of a chit and to notify in the Official 
Gazette that the winding up order has been made. 
Clause 58 empowers the Registrar to award cornpensation to the fore-
man where he is satisfied that the pet~tion for winding up is frivolous 
or vexatious. 
Clause 59 empowers any party aggrieved by the decision or order of the 
Registrar to prefer an appeal to the State Government within sixty days 
from the date of receipt of the order. 
Clause 60.-This clause provides for computation of the limitation 
periods where an order refusing to wind up a chit :i.s made. 
Clause 61.-This clause empowers the State Government to appoint a 
Registrar of Chits and other officers for discharging the functions con-
ferred on the Registrar by or under the provisions of the Bill 
Cl4USe 62.-This clause provides for the inspection of the documents 
kept by the Registrar and obtain certified copies thereof. 
Clause &S.-This clause empowers the State Government to specify by 
rules the fees payable under the provisions of the Bill 

4' 
. ~4Mit& 72.'-These-:elaWJM p~kJe'fora'Self~"maohtll..y 
fdf-~ aettl$Dellt of, disputes c 81'ising'betweeft,tbe: fot!eman' aNt·ltb._~:.. 
cribers, etc., to a chi t. The:ion tention is to provide· for a machitle!'Y' fo!t , 
the settlement of disputes which is cheap and expeditious. Tbe 
ptovisions made in these clauses are on the lines of the machinery 
proVided in the State co-operatiye laws for the settlement Df 'disputes' 
between a society and its members by arbitration. 
Clawes 64.to 72.-These clauses provide for a self-contained machinery 
lIUU'&aaement,ofa chit busineSs to the award of the Registrar. 
Clause 65 provides for special periods of limitation in respect of disputes 
and. empowers the Registrar to condone delay in referring the disp\ite 
within. the. prescribed period. 
ClaUse 66 enables the Registrar to se~He the dispute himself or to refer 
it 'fOr disposal to his nominee. This clause also empowers the Regis'~rar 
to suspend the proceedings in regard to any dispute if the question at 
issue between the parties is one involving complicated questions of law 
and fact to be decided in a regular suit instituted by anyone of the parties 
to the dispute. But if no suit is instituted within a period of two months 
:frQm the order suspending the proceedings, the Registrar shall ~~tle the 
diSpUte himself.' 
CUi .. 67 seeks to confer on the Registrar certain powers of a civil 
CO\1PtI 
Clause·68 empowers the Registrar or his nominee to order conditional 
attachment of the property of a party to the dispute and any attachment 
so made shall have' the same effect as an attachment made by a competent 
civtl court: 
Clause 69 enables the Registrar to make an award after giving a 
reuonablefopportunity to the parties of the dispute of being heard. He 1s 
also; empowered to give his award on the expenses incurred by the pries 
or fees and expenses payable to the Registrar or his nominee. It has also 
been provided that the award of the Registrar or his nominee shall be 
final and binding on the parties to the dispute subject to an appeai being 
made··to the'State Government under clause 70. 
Clause 70 provides for the appeal to the State Government against an 
award of the Registrar or his nominee. 
Clause 71.-This clause provides that where any ordel paSl8d by 'the,· . 
Registrar or his nominee is for payment of money, such order, on the issue 
O!f l cert1ftt!ate by the Registrar, be deemed to be a decree of a civil court 
and executable as such br where no such certificate is given, the money.' 
spe,clDeIl-therein will be recoverable ,as arrears of land revenue. 
ClllUse 73.:--!fbis clause confers an advisory role on the Reserve Bank . 
of tendering advice to the State Governments on its own motion or on '8 
reqlJeSt.made by,a.State ·Government on questjqns of policy,regqlating,~ 
business of chits.-
Clause 76.-Thi's. clause ,provides for the penalties for coniravention.-.of 
certain provisions of the BilL 

4t 
Clause 79.-This clause provides that offences under clause 11 shall ,~ 
cognizable and no court inferior tel! that of 8 Metropolitan Magistrate or 
• Judicial Magistrate of the First class shall try an oftence punishable 
under this Act. 
CLause 80.-This clause authorises any officer empowered by the State 
GoHrnmant to eon$OUDd:ran-..oftenee pUlliabablet: UDder . thiS, Mt~·· on 
PIftJl8M:.ofsuch _./Of·money,u maybe speciladcby''tbe atat..Gflvamof· 
meat :in. the·~ rules. 
Clauae 81...-This clause empowers the Registrar.or.aIl¥ offic6rauthoriieG.· 
by; him to enter- and. search an,' .. plaae. and to..seDe.any doaum.eDia,wllelr"· 
he has·reasOll to. suspect that any perSOBI conducts .. achit in contaw ... , 
tion of the provisions of the Bill. 
Cla:u.se 83.-This clause empowers the State Govermnent· to. delu~te 
any powers exercisable by it (except the power to hear. appeaJ".~1 to'l 
make rules) to. any officer of the State Government I subject tosucA 
terms and eonditions as may be specified therein. 
ClOuse 84.~ This clause makes the provisions of' the Bill inapplicable 
to any chit started befwe the commencement of the proposed legislation 
or to any chit 'the aggregate-amOWlt of which does not exceed 'One hundred 
rupees; 
Clause 85.-This clause prohibits commercial and co-operative banks 
from commencing Or conducting chit bUiiness· after the commeacament 
of the poop~ed legislation and also provides that any chitstartea,~ any 
bank before .. such commencement may be continued till its .com~tion 
subject to the provisions of the chit agreement and the State laws .appli-
able t.o it. 
CLaU'BI!!-86!-This clause- empowers the State Government, in consulta-
tion with the Reserve Bank, to exempt any person or class Qf persons or 
azwy[cbiilOr;cluil'.of.chita from all or any o£the:provisiou,of· the pmpOllMir 
legis1atiaD.;, .~I 
Clause 88>-This clause empowers the State Government to make rules. 
to give effect to the provisions of the Bill. 
ctause 89.-This clause repeals certain State enactments regulatfng.ch1l. 
business and provides for the continued applicaUon of those enactments to 
the chits in force on the commencement of the proposed legislation. 

FtNANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
Clause 61 (1) of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Registrat 
of Chits and as many Additicmal, Joint, Deputy or Asaiatant Registrara as 
may be necessary by the State Government. Sub-clause (2) of this clause 
provides for the appointment of inspectors of chits and chit auditors. In 
respect of the Union territories of the And am an and Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Delhi and Lakshadweep, any 
expenditure on this accmmt will be met from out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
2. Out of these five Union territories, budget for the Union territory of 
Delhi alone provides at present separate expenditure for the enforcement 
of the Tami1 Nadu Chit Funds Act, 1961 as extended to Delhi. This is 
of the order of Rs. 1.75 lakhs annually. After the proposed Legislation 
comes into force in that Union territory, it is estimated that there may 
not be any significant addition to the recurring expenditure for the pur-
pose of discharging the duties imposed by this Act in relation to the 
Union territory of Delhi. For the remaining four Union territories, the 
recurring expenditure is estimated c:.s follows:-
1. The Andarnan and Nicobar Islands 
2. Chandigarh 
3. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
4. Lakshadweep 
TOTAL: 
&. 
50,000 
65,000 
21,000 
25,000 
1,61,000 
Thus, the recurring expenditure that is likely to be involved if the Bill 
is enacted and brought into operation in all the Union territories is 
estimated to be of the order of rupees 3.36 lakhs per annum. No 
non-recurring expenditure is expected. 
The provisions of this Bill do not involve any other expenditure of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature. 
42 

• 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 88 of the Bill confers on the State Govem-
ments the power to make rules to give effect to the provisions of the 
Bill. Sub-clause (2) of that clause specifie9 the matters in respect of 
which rules may be made under this clause. These include, among other 
things, the fonn and manner in which an application may be made for 
obtaining the previous sanction of the State Government for the com-
mencement of a chit, the particulars that a chit agreement shall <:ontain, 
the procedure to be followed by the Registrar for the rE-lease of the 
leCurity furnished by the foreman for the proper conduct of the chits, 
the fees payable under the provisions of the Bill and the procedure to 
be f.ollowed for the winding up of <:hits and for the settlement of disputes. 
2. The matters with respect to which rules may be made are ~natters 
of procedure or detail. The delegation of legi9lative power is thus nor-
mal in character. 
43 

.. 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of chit funds and for matters connected 
therewith . 
(Shri R. Venkataraman, 
Minister of Finant:e.) 