THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY , HEALTH AND WORKING
CONDITIONS CODE, 2019
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
REGISTRATION
3. Registration of certain establishments.
4. Appeal.
5. Notice by employer of commencement and cessation of operation.
CHAPTER III
D
UTIES  OF EMPLOYER  AND EMPLOYEES , ETC.
6. Duties of employer.
7. Duties and responsibilities of owner, agent and manager in relation to mine.
8. Duties of manufacturers, designer, importers or suppliers.
9. Duties of architects, project engineers and designers.
10. Notice of certain accident.
11. Notice of certain dangerous occurrences.
12. Notice of certain diseases.
13. Duties of employees.
14. Rights of employee.
15. Duty not to interfere with or misuse things.
CHAPTER IV
O
CCUPATIONAL SAFETY  AND HEALTH
16. National Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board.
17. State Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board.
18. Occupational safety and health standards.
19. Research related activities.
20. Safety and occupational health surveys.
21. Statistics.
22. Safety Committee and safety officers.
Bill No. 186 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

(ii)
CLAUSES
CHAPTER V
HEALTH AND WORKING  CONDITIONS
23. Responsibility of employer for maintaining health and working conditions.
CHAPTER VI
WELFARE PROVISIONS
24. Welfare facilities in the establishment, etc.
CHAPTER VII
HOURS OF WORK AND ANNUAL  LEA VE  WITH W AGES
25. Weekly and daily working hours, leave, etc.
26. Weekly and compensatory holidays.
27. Extra wages for overtime.
28. Night shifts.
29. Prohibition of overlapping shifts.
30. Restriction on double employment in factory and mine.
31. Notice of periods of work.
32. Annual leave with wages, etc.
CHAPTER VIII
M
AINTENANCE  OF REGISTERS , RECORDS   AND RETURNS
33. Maintenance of registers and records and filing of returns.
CHAPTER IX
INSPECTOR -CUM-FACILITATORS AND  OTHER  AUTHORITY
34. Appointment of Inspector-cum-Facilitators.
35. Powers of Inspector-cum-Facilitators.
36. Powers and duties of District Magistrate.
37. Third party audit and certification.
38. Special powers of Inspector-cum-Facilitator in respect of factory, mines and dock
work and building and other construction work.
39. Secrecy of information by Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-
Facilitator, etc.
40. Facilities to be afforded to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
41. Powers of special officer to enter, measure, etc., in relation to mine.
42. Medical Officer.

CLAUSES
CHAPTER X
SPECIAL  PROVISION  RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT   OF WOMEN
43. Employment of women in night.
44. Prohibition of employment of women in dangerous operation.
CHAPTER XI
SPECIAL  PROVISIONS  FOR CONTRACT  LABOUR  AND INTER-STATE MIGRANT  WORKER, ETC.
PART I
CONTRACT  LABOUR  AND INTER -STA TE MIGRANT  WORKER
45. Applicability of this Part.
46. Appointment of licensing officers.
47. Licensing of contractors.
48. Grant of licence.
49. No fees or commission or any cost to workers.
50. Information regarding work order to be given to the appropriate Government.
51. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licence.
52. Appeal.
53. Liability of principal employer for welfare facilities.
54. Effect of employing contract labour from a non-licenced contractor.
55. Responsibility for payment of wages.
56. Experience certificate.
57. Prohibition of employment of contract labour.
58. Power to exempt in special cases.
59. Facilities to Inter-State Migrant workers.
60. Displacement allowance.
61. Journey allowance, etc.
62. Past liabilities.
PART II
A
UDIO-VISUAL  WORKERS
63. Prohibition of employment of audio-visual worker without agreement.
PART III
MINES
64. Managers.
65. Code not to apply in certain cases.
66. Exemption from provision regarding employment.
67. Employment of persons below eighteen years of age.
68. Decision of question whether a mine is covered under this Code.
(iii)

CLAUSES
PART IV
BEEDI AND CIGAR  WORKERS
69. Licence to industrial premises and person.
70. Appeals.
71. Permission to work by employees outside industrial premises.
72. Part not to apply to self-employed persons in private dwelling houses.
PART V
B
UILDING  AND OTHER  CONSTRUCTION  WORKERS
73. Prohibition of employment of certain persons in certain building or other
construction work.
PART VI
FACTORIES
74. Approval and licensing of factories.
75. Liability of owner of premises in certain circumstances.
76. Power to apply the Code to certain premises.
77. Dangerous operations.
78. Constitution of site appraisal committee.
79. Compulsory disclosure of information by occupier.
80. Specific responsibility of occupier in relation to hazardous processes.
81. National Board to Inquire into certain situations.
82. Emergency standards.
83. Permissible limits of exposure of chemicals and toxic substances.
84. Right of workers to warn about imminent danger.
85. Appeal against the order of Inspector-cum-Facilitator in case of factory.
86. Power to make exempting rules and order.
CHAPTER XII
O
FFENCES  AND PENALTIES
87. General penalty for offences.
88. Punishment for causing obstruction to Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or
Inspector-cum-Facilitator, etc.
89. Penalty for  non-maintenance of register, records and non-filing of returns, etc.
90. Punishment for contravention of certain provisions.
91. Punishment for falsification of records, etc.
92. Penalty for omission to furnish plans, etc.
93. Punishment for disclosure of information.
(iv)

94. Penalty for wrongfully disclosing results of analysis.
95. Penalty for contravention of provisions of duties relating to hazardous processes.
96. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of duties relating to safety provisions
resulting in an accident.
97. Special provision for  contravention of order under section 38.
98. Failure to appoint manager in  mine.
99. Offences by employees.
100. Prosecution of owner, agent or manager of a mine.
101. Exemption of owner, agent or manager of a mine or occupier of a factory from
liability in certain cases.
102. Offences by companies, etc.
103. Limitation of prosecution and cognizance of offence.
104. Power of officers of appropriate Government to impose penalty in certain cases.
105. Jurisdiction of a court for entertaining proceedings, etc., for offence.
106. Power of court to make orders.
107. Compounding of offences.
CHAPTER XIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
108. Delegation of powers.
109. Onus as to age.
110. Onus of proving limits of what is practicable, etc.
111. Common licence for contractor, factories and to industrial premises and person.
112. Effect of law and agreements inconsistent with this Code.
113. Power of  appropriate Government to direct inquiry in certain cases.
114. Publication of reports.
115. Powers of Central Government to give directions.
116. General restriction on disclosure of information.
117. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.
118. Protection of action taken in good faith.
119. Power to exempt in special cases.
120. Power to exempt during public emergency.
121. Power to exempt public institution.
122. Persons required to give notice, etc., legally bound to do so.
123. Power of Central Government to amend Schedule.
124. Power to remove difficulties.
125. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.
126. Power of Central Government to make rules.
127. Power of State Government to make rules.
128. Power of Central Government to make regulations in relation to mines and dock
work.
129. Prior publication of rules, etc.
CLAUSES
(v)

CLAUSES
 130. Power to make regulation without previous publication.
131. Bye-laws.
132. Laying of regulations, rules and bye-laws, etc., before Parliament.
133. Laying of rules made by State Government.
134. Repeal and savings.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
(vi)

1
THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY , HEALTH AND WORKING
CONDITIONS CODE, 2019
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the laws regulating the occupational safety, health and
working conditions of the persons employed in an establishment and the matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Occupational Safety, Health and Working
Conditions Code, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India:
Provided that the provisions of this Code in so far as they relate to the beedi and
cigar and plantation shall not be applicable in the State of Jammu and Kashmir:
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and
application.
Bill No. 186 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Provided further that the provisions of this Code in so far as they relate to the
mines shall extend to whole of India, including the territorial waters, continental shelf,
exclusive economic zone and other maritime zones of India as defined under the
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime
Zones Act, 1976.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of
this Code and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Code
shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
(4) It shall not apply to the offices of the Central Government, offices of the State
Government and any ship of war of any nationality.
2. (1) In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “adolescent” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( i)
of section 2 of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation)
Act, 1986;
(b) “adult” means a person who has completed his eighteenth years of age;
(c) “agent” when used in relation to a mine, means every person, whether
appointed as such or not, who, acting or purporting to act on behalf of the owner,
takes part in the management, control, supervision or direction of such mine or of
any part thereof;
(d) “appropriate Government” means—
(i) in relation to an establishment carried on by or under the authority
of the Central Government or the establishment of,  railways, mines, oil
field, major ports, air transport service, telecommunication, banking and
insurance company or a corporation or other authority established by a
Central Act or a central public sector undertaking or subsidiary companies
set up by the central public sector undertakings or autonomous bodies
owned or controlled by the Central Government, including establishment of
contractors for the purposes of such establishment, corporation or other
authority, central public sector undertakings, subsidiary companies or
autonomous bodies, as the case may be, the Central Government; and
(ii) in relation to any factory, motor transport undertaking, plantation,
newspaper establishment and establishment relating to beedi and cigar
including the establishments not specified in clause ( i), the State
Government of a State in which it or, as the case may be, they are situated;
(e) “audio-visual production” means audio-visual produced in wholly or
partly in India including animation, cartoon depiction and audio-visual
advertisement including digital production or any of the activities in respect of
making thereof;
(f) “audio-visual worker” means a person, who is employed, directly or
through any contractor, in or in connection with the audio-visual production to
work as an artiste including actor, musician, singer, anchor, news reader or dancer
or to do any work, skilled, unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical, artistic or
otherwise, and his remuneration with respect to such employment in or in
connection with the production of audio-visual does not exceed, where
remuneration is by way of monthly wages or where such remuneration is by way
of lump sum, in each case, the amount notified in this regard by the Central
Government;
(g) “building or other construction work” means the construction, alteration,
repair, maintenance or demolition in relation to buildings, streets, roads, railways,
80 of 1976.
Definitions.
61 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
tramways, airfields, irrigation, drainage, embankment and navigation works, flood
control works (including storm water drainage works), generation, transmission
and distribution of power, water works (including channels for distribution of
water), oil and gas installations, electric lines, internet towers, wireless, radio,
television, telephone, telegraph and overseas communications, dams, canals,
reservoirs, watercourses, tunnels, bridges, viaducts, aqua-ducts, pipelines,
towers, cooling towers, transmission towers and such other work as may be
specified in this behalf by the Central Government, by notification, but does not
include any building or other construction work of any factory or mine or any
building or other construction work employing less than ten workers or any
building or other construction work related to residential property not employing
the workers more than such number as may be notified by the Central Government
from time to time;
(h) “building worker” means a person who is employed to do any skilled,
semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, technical or clerical work for hire or reward,
whether the terms of such employment are express or implied, in connection with
any building or other construction work, but does not include any such
person who is employed mainly in a managerial or supervisory or administrative
capacity;
(i) “cargo” includes anything carried or to be carried in a ship or other
vessel, or vehicle;
(j) “Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator” means a Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator
appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 34;
(k) “competent authority” means any authority notified by the appropriate
Government to perform all or any of the functions of the competent authority
under this Code and for such areas as may be specified in the notification;
(l) “competent person”, means a person or an institution recognised as
such by the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator for the purposes of carrying out
tests, examinations and inspections required to be done in an establishment having
regard to—
(i) the qualifications and experience of the person and facilities
available at his disposal; or
(ii) the qualifications and experience of the persons employed in such
institution and facilities available therein:
Provided that in case of mines the competent person includes such
other person who is authorised by the manager referred to in section 64 to
supervise or perform any work, or to supervise the operation of machinery,
plant or equipment and is responsible for such duties assigned to him and
also includes a shot firer or blaster;
(m) “contract labour” means a worker who shall be deemed to be employed
in or in connection with the work of an establishment when he is hired in or in
connection with such work by or through a contractor, with or without the
knowledge of the principal employer and includes inter-State migrant worker but
does not include a worker (other than part time employee) who is regularly
employed by the contractor for any activity of his establishment and his
employment is governed by mutually accepted standards of the conditions of
employment (including engagement on permanent basis), and gets periodical
increment in the pay, social security coverage and other welfare benefits in
accordance with the law for the time being in force in such employment;
(n) “contractor”, in relation to an establishment, means a person, who—
(i) undertakes to produce a given result for the establishment, other
than a mere supply of goods or articles of manufacture to such establishment,
through contract labour; or
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
(ii) supplies contract labour for any work of the establishment as
mere human resource and includes a sub-contractor;
(o) “controlled industry” means any industry the control of which has been
transferred to the Union by any Central Act in the public interest;
(p) “day” means a period of twenty-four hours beginning at mid-night;
(q) “District Magistrate”, in relation to any mine, means the District
Magistrate or the Deputy Commissioner, as the case may be, who is vested with
the executive powers of maintaining law and order in the revenue district in which
the mine is situated:
Provided that in case of a mine, which is situated partly in one district and
partly in another, the District Magistrate for the purpose shall be the District
Magistrate authorised in this behalf by the Central Government;
(r) “dock work” means any work in or within the vicinity of any port in
connection with, or required, for, or incidental to, the loading,
unloading, movement or storage of cargoes into or from ship or other vessel,
port, dock, storage place or landing place, and includes—
(i) work in connection with the preparation of ships or other vessels
for receipt or discharge of cargoes or leaving port; and
(ii) all repairing and maintenance processes connected with any hold,
tank structure or lifting machinery or any other storage area on board the
ship or in the docks;
(iii) chipping, painting or cleaning of any hold, tank, structure or
lifting machinery or any other storage area in board the ship or in the docks;
(s) “employee” means,—
(i) in respect of an establishment, a person (other than an apprentice
engaged under the Apprentices Act, 1961) employed on wages by an
establishment to do any skilled, semi-skilled, unskilled, manual, operational,
supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical or clerical work for hire
or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied; and
(ii ) a person declared to be an employee by the appropriate
Government,
but does not include any member of the Armed Forces of the Union:
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this clause, in case of
a mine a person is said to be “employed” in a mine who works as the manager or
who works under appointment by the owner, agent or manager of the mine or with
the knowledge of the manager, whether for wages or not—
(a) in any mining operation (including the concomitant operations of
handling and transport of minerals up to the point of dispatch and of
gathering sand and transport thereof to the mine);
(b) in operations or services relating to the development of the mine
including construction of plant therein but excluding construction of
buildings, roads, wells and any building work not directly connected with
any existing or future mining operations;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
52 of 1961.

5
(c) in operating, servicing, maintaining or repairing any part of any
machinery used in or about the mine;
(d) in operations, within the premises of the mine, of loading for
dispatch of minerals;
(e) in any office of mine;
(f) in any welfare, health, sanitary or conservancy services required to
be provided under this Code relating to mine, or watch and ward, within the
premises of the mine excluding residential area; or
(g) in any kind of work whatsoever which is preparatory or incidental
to, or connected with, mining operations;
(t) “employer” means a person who employs, whether directly or through
any person, or on his behalf, or on behalf of any person, one or more employees
in his establishment and where the establishment is carried on by any department
of the Central Government or State Government, the authority specified, by the
head of such department, in this behalf or where no authority, is so specified, the
head of the department and in relation to an establishment carried on by a local
authority, the Chief Executive of that authority, and includes,—
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the occupier of
the factory;
(ii) in relation to mine, the owner of the mine or agent or manager
referred to in section 64;
(iii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the
authority which has ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment
and where said affairs are entrusted to a manager or managing director,
such manager or managing director; and
(iv) contractor; and
(v) legal representative of a deceased employer;
(u) “establishment” means—
(i) a place where any industry, trade, business, manufacture or
occupation is carried on in which ten or more workers are employed; or
(ii) a factory, motor transport undertaking, newspaper establishment,
audio-video production, building and other construction work or plantation,
in which ten or more workers are employed; or
(iii) a mine or dock work;
(v) “factory” means any premises including the precincts thereof—
(i) whereon ten or more workers are working, or were working on any
day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a
manufacturing process is being carried on with the aid of power, or is
ordinarily so carried on; or
(ii) whereon twenty or more workers are working, or were working on
any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a
manufacturing process is being carried on without the aid of power, or is
ordinarily so carried on,
but does not include a mine, or a mobile unit belonging to the armed forces
of the Union, railways running shed or a hotel, restaurant or eating place.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
Explanation  I.—For computing the number of workers for the
purposes of this clause all the workers in (different groups and relays) a
day shall be taken into account;
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this clause, the mere fact that
an Electronic Data Processing Unit or a Computer Unit is installed in any
premises or part thereof, shall not be construed as factory if no
manufacturing process is being carried on in such premises or part thereof;
(w) “family”, when used in rel ation to a worker, means—
(i) spouse,
(ii) children including adopted children of the worker who are dependent
upon him and have not completed the age of eighteen years, and
(iii) parents, grand-parents and widow sister, dependent upon such
worker.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, such dependents shall
not be included who are, for the time being, getting such income from such
sources, as may be prescribed by appropriate Government;
(x) “godown” means any warehouse or other place, by whatever name called,
used for the storage of any article or substance required for any manufacturing
process which means any process for, or incidental to, making, finishing or packing
or otherwise treating any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, transport,
delivery or disposal as finished products;
(y) “hazardous process” means any process or activity in relation to an
industry specified in the First Schedule where, unless special care is taken, raw
materials used therein or the intermediate or finished products, bye-products,
hazardous substances, wastes or effluents thereof would—
(i) cause material impairment to the health of the persons engaged in
or connected therewith, or
(ii) result in the pollution of the general environment;
(z) “hazardous substance” means any substance or such quantity of the
substance as may be prescribed by appropriate Government or preparation of
which by reason of its chemical or physio-chemical properties or handling is
liable to cause physical or health hazards to human being or may cause harm to
other living creatures, plants, micro-organisms, property or the environment;
(za) “industrial premises” means any place or premises (not being a private
dwelling house), including the precincts thereof, in which or in any part of which
any industry, trade, business, occupation or manufacturing is being ordinarily
carried on with or without the aid of power and includes a godown attached
thereto;
(zb) “industry” means any systematic activity carried on by co-operation
between an employer and worker (whether such worker is employed by such
employer directly or by or through any agency, including a contractor) for the
production, supply or distribution of goods or services with a view to satisfy
human wants or wishes (not being wants or wishes which are merely spiritual or
religious in nature), whether or not,—
(i) any capital has been invested for the purpose of carrying on such
activity; or
(ii) such activity is carried on with a motive to make any gain or
profit;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
but does not include—
(a) any activity of the Government relatable to the sovereign functions of
the Government including all the activities carried on by the departments of the
Central Government dealing with defence research, atomic energy and space;
and
(b) any domestic service;
(zc ) “Inspector-cum-facilitator” means an Inspector-cum-facilitator
appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 34;
(zd) “inter-State migrant worker” means any person who is recruited by—
(i) an employer in one State for employment in his establishment
situated in another State; or
(ii ) through a contractor in one State for employment in an
establishment in another State,
under an agreement or other arrangement for such employment and draws wages
not exceeding the amount notified by the Central Government from time to time;
(ze) “machinery” means any article or combination of articles assembled,
arranged or connected and which is used or intended to be used for converting
any form of energy to performing work, or which is used or intended to be used,
whether incidental thereto or not, for developing, receiving, storing, containing,
confining, transforming, transmitting, transferring or controlling any form of
energy;
(zf) “manufacturing process” means any process for—
(i) making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, packing, oiling,
washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing, or otherwise treating or
adapting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, transport,
delivery or disposal; or
(ii) pumping oil, water, sewage or any other substance; or
(iii) generating, transforming or transmitting power; or
(iv) composing, printing, printing by letter press, lithography, offset,
photogravure screen printing, 3 or 4 Dimensional printing, prototyping,
flexography or other types of printing process or book binding; or
(v) constructing, reconstructing, repairing, refitting, finishing, or
breaking up ships or vessels; or
(vi) preserving or storing any article in cold storage; or
(vii) such other processes as the Central Government may notify;
(zg) “medical officer” means the medical officer appointed under
sub-section ( 1) of section 42;
(zh) “mine” means any excavation where any operation for the purpose of
searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on and includes—
(i) all borings, bore holes, oil wells and accessory crude conditioning
plants, including the pipe conveying mineral oil within the oilfields;
(ii) all shafts, in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine, whether in the
course of being sunk or not;
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being driven;
(iv) all open cast workings;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for the bringing into or
removal from a mine of minerals or other articles or for the removal of refuse
therefrom;
(vi) all adits, levels, planes, machinery, works, railways, tramways and
sidings in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine;
(vii) all protective works being carried out in or adjacent to a mine;
(viii) all workshops and stores situated within the precincts of a mine
and under the same management and used primarily for the purposes
connected with that mine or a number of mines under the same management;
(ix) all power stations, transformer sub-stations, converter stations,
rectifier stations and accumulator storage stations for supplying electricity
solely or mainly for the purpose of working the mine or a number of mines
under the same management;
(x) any premises for the time being used for depositing sand or other
material for use in a mine or for depositing refuse from a mine or in which
any operations in connection with such sand refuse or other material is
being carried on, being premises exclusively occupied by the owner of the
mine;
(xi) any premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine or which
any process ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of
minerals or coke is being carried on;
(xii) a mine owned by the Government;
(zi) “minerals” means all substances which can be obtained from the earth
by mining, digging, drilling, dredging, hydraulicing, quarrying, or by any other
operation and includes mineral oils (such as natural gas and petroleum);
(zj) “motor transport undertaking” means a motor transport undertaking
employing motor transport worker and engaged in carrying passengers or goods
or both by road for hire or reward, and includes a private carrier;
(zk) “motor transport worker” means a person who is employed in a motor
transport undertaking directly or through an agency, whether for wages or not, to
work in a professional capacity on a transport vehicle or to attend the duties in
connection with the arrival, departure, loading or unloading of such transport
vehicle and includes a driver, conductor, cleaner, station staff, line checking staff,
booking clerk, cash clerk, depot clerk, time-keeper, watchman or attendant, but
does not include any such person—
(i) who is employed in a factory;
(ii) to whom the provisions of any law for the time being in force
regulating the conditions of service of persons employed in shops or
commercial establishments apply;
(zl) “newspaper” means any printed periodical work containing public news
or comments on public news and includes such other class of printed periodical
work as may, from time to time, be notified in this behalf by the Central Government;
(zm) “newspaper establishment” means an establishment under the control
of any person or body of persons, whether incorporated or not, for the production
or publication of one or more newspapers or for conducting any news agency or
syndicate and includes the following newspaper establishments which shall be
deemed to be one establishment, namely:—
(a) two or more newspaper establishments under common control;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(b) two or more newspaper establishments owned by an individual
and his or her spouse unless it is shown that such spouse is a sole proprietor
or partner or a shareholder of a corporate body on the basis of his or her
own individual funds;
(c) two or more newspaper establishments publishing newspapers
bearing the same or similar title and in the same language in any place in
India or bearing the same or similar title but in different languages in the
same State or Union territory.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of sub-clause ( a) two or more
establishments shall be deemed to be under common control where—
(A) (i) the newspaper establishments are owned by a common
individual or individuals;
(ii) the newspaper establishments are owned by firms, if such
firms have a substantial number of common partners;
(iii ) the newspaper establishments are owned by bodies
corporate, if one body corporate is a subsidiary of the other body
corporate, or both are subsidiaries of a common holding company or
a substantial number of their equity shares are owned by the same
person or group of persons, whether incorporated or not;
(iv) one establishment is owned by a body corporate and the
other is owned by a firm, if a substantial number of partners of the firm
together hold a substantial number of equity shares of the body
corporate;
(v) one is owned by a body corporate and the other is owned by
a firm having bodies corporate as its partners if a substantial number
of equity shares of such bodies corporate are owned, directly or
indirectly, by the same person or group of persons, whether
incorporated or not; or
(B) where there is functional integrality between concerned
newspaper establishments.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) different departments, branches and centres of
newspaper establishments shall be treated as parts thereof;
(ii) a printing press shall be deemed to be a newspaper
establishment if the principal business thereof is to print
newspaper.
(zn) “notification” means a notification published in the Gazette of India or
the Official Gazette of a State, as the case may be, and the expression “notify”
with its grammatical variation and cognate expressions shall be construed
accordingly;
(zo) “occupier” of a factory means the person who has ultimate control
over the affairs of the factory:
 Provided that—
(i) in the case of a firm or other association of individuals, any
one of the individual partners or members thereof;
(ii) in the case of a company, any one of the directors, except
any independent director within the meaning of sub-section ( 6) of
section 149 of the Companies Act, 2013;
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(iii) in the case of a factory owned or controlled by the Central
Government or any State Government, or any local authority, the
person or persons appointed to manage the affairs of the factory by
the Central Government, the State Government or the local authority
or such other authority as may be prescribed by the Central
Government,
shall be deemed to be the occupier:
Provided further that in the case of a ship which is being repaired, or
on which maintenance work is being carried out, in a dry dock which is
available for hire, the owner of the dock shall be deemed to be the occupier
for all purposes except the matters as may be prescribed by the Central
Government which are directly related to the condition of ship for which the
owner of ship shall be deemed to be the occupier;
(zp) “office of the mine” means an office at the surface of the mine
concerned;
(zq) “open cast working” means a quarry, that is to say, an excavation
where any operation for the purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has
been or is being carried on, not being a shaft or an excavation which extends
below superjacent ground;
(zr) “ordinarily employed” with reference to any establishment or part
thereof, means the average number of persons employed per day in the
establishment or part thereof during the preceding calendar year obtained by
dividing the number of man days worked by the number of working days excluding
rest days and other non-working days;
(zs) “owner”, in relation to a mine, means any person who is the immediate
proprietor or lessee or occupier of the mine or of any part thereof and in case of
a mine the business whereof is being carried on by a liquidator or receiver, such
liquidator or receiver; but does not include a person who merely receives a royalty,
rent or fine from the mine, or is merely the proprietor of the mine, subject to any
lease grant or licence for the working thereof, or is merely the owner of the soil
and not interested in the minerals of the mine; but any contractor or sub-lessee
for the working of a mine or any part thereof shall be subject to this Code in like
manner as if he were an owner but not so as to exempt the former from any
liability;
(zt) “plantation” means—
(a) any land used or intended to be used for—
(i) growing tea, coffee, rubber, cinchona or cardamom which
admeasures five hectares or more;
(ii) growing any other plant, which admeasures five hectares or
more and in which persons are employed or were employed on any
day of the preceding twelve months, if, after obtaining the approval
of the Central Government, the State Government, by notification, so
directs.
Explanation .—Where any piece of land used for growing any
plant referred to in this sub-clause admeasures less than five hectares
and is contiguous to any other piece of land not being so used, but
capable of being so used, and both such pieces of land are under the
management of the same employer, then, for the purposes of this
sub-clause, the piece of land first mentioned shall be deemed to be a
plantation, if the total area of both such pieces of land admeasures
five hectares or more; and
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

11
(b) any land which the State Government may, by notification,
declares and which is used or intended to be used for growing any
plant referred to in sub-clause ( a), notwithstanding that it admeasures
less than five hectares:
Provided that no such declaration shall be made in respect of
such land which admeasures less than five hectares immediately before
the commencement of this Code; and
(c) offices, hospitals, dispensaries, schools and any other
premises used for any purpose connected with any plantation within
the meaning of sub-clause ( a) and sub-clause ( b); but does not include
factory on the premises;
(zu) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate
Government, the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may
be, under this Code;
(zv) “principal employer”, where the contract labour is employed or engaged,
means—
(i) in relation to any office or department of the Government or a local
authority, the head of that office or department or such other officer as the
Government or the local authority, may specify in this behalf;
(ii) in a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory and where a
person has been named as the manager of the factory, the person so named;
(iii) in a mine, the owner or agent of the mine;
(iv) in relation to any other establishment, any person responsible for
the supervision and control of the establishment;
(zw) “producer”, in relation to audio-visual production means the person
by whom the arrangements necessary for producing such audio-visual (including
the raising of finances and engaging audio-visual workers for producing
audio-visual) are undertaken;
(zx) “qualified medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who
possesses any recognised medical qualification as defined in clause ( i) of  section 2
of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and who is enrolled on a Indian Medical
register as defined in clause ( e) and on a State Medical register as defined in
clause ( k) of the said section;
(zy) “relay” means a set of two or more persons carrying out the same kind
of work during different periods of the day and each such period is called a
“shift”;
(zz) “sales promotion employees” means any person by whatever name
called employed or engaged in any establishment for hire or reward to do any
work relating to promotion of sales or business, or both, but does not include any
such person who,—
(i) being employed or engaged in a supervisory capacity, draws wages
exceeding fifteen thousand rupees per mensem or an amount as may be
notified by the Central Government from time to time; or
(ii) is employed or engaged mainly in a managerial or administrative
capacity;
(zza) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Code;
(zzb) “serious bodily injury” means any injury which involves, or in all
probability will involve, the permanent loss of any part or section of a body or the
102 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
use of any part or section of a body, or the permanent loss of or injury to the sight
or hearing or any permanent physical incapacity or the fracture of any bone or
one or more joints or bones of any phalanges of hand or foot;
(zzc ) “standards”, “regulations”, “rules”, “bye-laws” and “orders”
respectively means standards, regulations, rules, bye-laws and orders made under
this Code;
(zzd) “week” means a period of seven days beginning at midnight on
Saturday night or such other night as may be approved in writing for a particular
area by the Chief  Inspector-cum-Facilitator;
(zze) “worker” means any person employed in any industry to do any manual,
unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and includes
working journalists and sales promotion employees, but does not include any
such person—
(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act, 1950, or
the Navy Act, 1957; or
(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other
employee of a prison; or
(iii ) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative
capacity; or
(iv) who is employed in a supervisory capacity drawing wage of
exceeding fifteen thousand rupees per month or an amount as may be
notified by the Central Government from time to time;
(zzf) “Working Journalist” means a person whose principal avocation is
that of a journalist and who is employed as such, either whole-time or part-time,
in, or in relation to, one or more newspaper establishment, or other establishment
relating to any electronic media such as newspaper or radio or like other media
and includes an editor, a leader-writer, news editor, sub-editor, feature-writer,
copy-tester, reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, news-photographer and proof-
reader, but does not include any such person who is employed mainly in a
managerial, supervisory or administrative capacity;
(2) For the purposes of this Code, a person working or employed in or in connection
with mine is said to be working or employed—
(a) “above ground” if he is working in an open cast working or in any other
manner not specified in clause ( b); and
(b) “below ground” if he is working or employed—
(i) in a shaft which has been or is in the course being sunk; or
(ii) in any excavation which extends below superjacent ground.
CHAPTER II
R
EGISTRATION
3. (1) Every employer shall,—
(a) in relation to an establishment to which this Code applies on its
commencement, within a period of sixty days from such commencement; and
(b) in relation to any other establishment to which this Code may be
applicable at any time after such commencement, within a period of forty-five
days from the date on which this Code becomes applicable to such establishment,
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
Registration
of certain
establishments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
make an application to the registering officer appointed by the appropriate Government
(hereinafter referred to as the registering officer) for the registration of such
establishment:
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application for
registration after the expiry of such period on payment of such late fees as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) Every application under sub-section ( 1) shall be submitted to the registering
officer in such manner, in such form, contain such particulars and shall be accompanied
by such fees as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(3) After the receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), the registering officer
shall register the establishment and issue a certificate of registration to the employer
thereof in such form and within such time and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that if the registering officer fails to register an application so made or
entertained within the prescribed period, then, such establishment shall be deemed to
have been registered under this sub-section immediately on the expiration of such
period.
(4) Any change in the ownership or management or in any particulars referred to
in sub-section ( 2) which occurs after the registration of an establishment under this
Code, shall be intimated by the employer to the registering officer within thirty days of
such change in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(5) The employer of an establishment shall, within thirty days of the closing of
establishment—
(a) inform the closing of such establishment; and
(b) certify payment of all dues to the workers employed in such
establishment,
to the registering officer in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government
and the registering officer shall, on receiving such information and certificates remove
such establishment from the register of establishments maintained by him and cancel
the registration certificate within thirty days.
(6) If an employer of an establishment—
(a) violates any provision of this Code applicable to such establishment; or
(b) has misrepresented or misrepresents any fact relating to registration to
the registering officer,
the registering officer may after providing employer an opportunity of being heard,
revoke the registration of the establishment.
(7) No employer of an establishment—
(a) who has not registered the establishment under this section; or
(b) the registration of such establishment has been cancelled under
sub-section ( 5) or revoked under sub-section ( 6) and no appeal has been preferred
against such cancellation or revocation under section 4 or where such appeal has
been preferred, such appeal has been dismissed,
shall employ any employee in the establishment.
4. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 3 may, within thirty
days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to an
appellate officer who shall be a person notified in this behalf by the appropriate
Government:
Appeal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
 Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal in time.
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the appellate officer shall, after
giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal within a
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such appeal.
5. (1) No employer of an establishment being factory or mine or relating to contract
labour or building or construction work shall use such establishment to commence the
operation of any industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation thereon without
sending notice of such purpose in such form and manner and to such authority and
within such time as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government and shall also
intimate the cessation of such operation in the prescribed manner to the said authority.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide electronic receipt of notice or
intimation referred to in sub-section ( 1).
CHAPTER III
D
UTIES  OF EMPLOYER  AND EMPLOYEES , ETC.
 6. (1) Every employer shall,—
(a) ensure that workplace is free from hazards which cause or are likely to
cause injury or occupational disease to the employees;
(b) comply with the Occupational Safety and Health standards made under
this Code and of the regulations, rules, bye-laws and orders made thereunder;
(c) provide such annual health examination or test free of costs to such
employees of such age or such class of employees or establishments or such
class of establishments, as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government;
(d) provide and maintain, as far as is reasonably practicable, a working
environment that is safe and without risk to the health of the employees;
(e) ensure the disposal of hazardous and toxic waste including disposal of
e-waste;
(f) issue a letter of appointment to every employee on his appointment in
the establishment, with such information as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government and where an employee has not been issued such appointment letter
on or before the commencement of this Code, he shall, within three months of
such commencement, be issued such appointment letter;
(g) ensure that no charge is levied on any employee, in respect of anything
done or provided for maintenance of safety and health at workplace including
conduct of medical examination and investigation for the purpose of detecting
occupational diseases;
(h) ensure and be responsible for the safety and health of persons who are
in the work premises of the factory, mine, dock work, building or other construction
work or plantation, with or without the knowledge of such employer, as the case
may be.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
duties of an employer shall particularly in respect of factory, mines, dock, building and
other construction work or plantation include—
(a) the provision and maintenance of plant and systems of work in the
workplace that are safe and without risk to health;
Notice by
employer of
commencement
and cessation
of operation.
Duties of
employer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(b) the arrangements in the workplace for ensuring safety and absence of
risk to health in connection with the use, handling, storage and transport of
articles and substances;
(c) the provision of such information, instruction, training and supervision
as are necessary to ensure the health and safety of all employees at work;
(d) the maintenance of all places of work in the workplace in a condition that
is safe and without risk to health and the provision and maintenance of such
means of access to, and egress from, such places as are safe and without such
risk;
(e) the provision, maintenance or monitoring of such working environment
in the workplace for the employees that is safe, without risk to health as regards
facilities and arrangements for their welfare at work.
7. (1) The owner and agent of every mine shall jointly and severally be responsible
for making financial and other provisions and for taking such other steps as may be
necessary for compliance with the provisions of this Code and the regulations, rules,
bye-laws and orders made thereunder.
(2) In the event of any contravention by any person whosoever of any of the
provisions of this Code or of the rules, regulations, bye-laws or orders made thereunder,
relating to mine, except those which specifically require any person to do any act or
thing or prohibit any person from doing an act or thing, besides the person who
contravenes, then, each of the following persons shall also be deemed to be guilty of
such contravention unless he proves that he had used due diligence to secure
compliance with the provisions and had taken reasonable means to prevent such
contravention, namely:—
(a) the official or officials appointed to perform duties of supervision in
respect of the provisions contravened;
(b) the manager of the mine;
(c) the owner and agent of the mine;
(d) the person appointed, if any, to carry out the responsibility under
section 24.
(3) It shall not be a defence in any proceedings brought against the owner or
agent of a mine under this section that the manager and other officials have been
appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Code or that a person to carry the
responsibility under section 24 has been appointed.
8. (1) Every person who designs, manufactures, imports or supplies any article
for use in any establishment shall—
(a) ensure so far as is reasonably practicable, that the article is so designed
and constructed in the establishment as to be safe and without risk to the health
of the workers when properly used;
(b) carry out or arrange for the carrying out of such tests and examination in
the establishment as may be considered necessary for the effective implementation
of the provisions of clause ( a);
(c) take out steps as may be necessary to ensure that adequate information
will be available—
(i) in connection with the use of the article in any establishment;
(ii) about the use for which such article is designed and tested; and
Duties and
responsibilities
of owner,
agent and
manager in
relation to
mine.
Duties of
manufacturers,
designer,
importers or
suppliers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(iii) about any conditions necessary to ensure that the article, when
put to such use, shall be safe, and without risk to the health of the workers:
Provided that where an article is designed or manufactured outside
India, then it shall be obligatory on the part of the importer to see—
(A) that the article conforms to the same standards of such article
manufactured in India; or
(B) that, if the standards adopted in the country outside India
for the manufacture of such article is above the standards adopted in
India, then the article conforms to such standards in such country; or
(C) that, if there is no standard of such article in India, then, the
article conforms to the standard adopted in the country from where it
is imported at its national level.
(2) The designer, manufacturer, importer or supplier shall also comply with such
duties as the Central Government may, in consultation with the National Occupational
Safety and Health Advisory Board, by regulations specify.
(3) Every person, who undertakes to design or manufacture any article and
substance for use in any factory, may carry out or arrange for the carrying out of
necessary research with a view to the discovery and, so far as is reasonably, practicable,
the elimination or minimisation of any risks to the health or safety of the workers to
which the design or manufacture of article and substance may give rise to such risk.
(4) Nothing contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be construed to require
a person to repeat the testing, examination or research which has been carried out
otherwise than by him or at his instance in so far as it is reasonable for him to rely on
the results thereof for the purposes of the said sub-sections.
(5) Any duty imposed on any person by sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall extend
only to things done in the course of business carried on by him and to matters within his
control.
(6) Every person,—
(a) who erects or instal any article for use in a factory, shall ensure, so far as
practicable, that such article so erected or installed does not make it unsafe or a
risk to health when that article is used by the persons in such factory;
(b) who manufactures, imports or supplies any substance for use in any
factory shall—
(i) ensure, so far as practicable, that such substance is safe and has
no risks involved to health of persons working in such factory;
(ii) carry out or arrange for carrying out of such tests and examination
in relation to such substance as may be necessary;
(iii) take such steps as are necessary to secure that the information
about the results of tests carried out in connection with the use of the
substance as referred to in sub-clause ( ii) is available in a factory along
with conditions necessary to ensure its safe use and no risks to health;
 (c) undertake the manufacture of any substance for use in any factory to
carry out or arrange for the carrying out of any necessary research with a view to
discover and, so far as practicable, to ensure the elimination or minimisation of
any risks to health or safety to which the substance may give rise out of such
manufacture or research;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(7) For the purposes of this section, an article and substance is not to be regarded
as properly used, if they are used without regard to any information or advice relating
to their use which has been made available by the person who has designed,
manufactured, imported or supplied the article and substance.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section—
(a) “article” shall include plant and machinery;
(b) “substance” means any natural or artificial substance whether in a solid
or liquid form or in the form of a gas or vapour; and
 (c) “substance for use in any factory” means any substance whether or not
intended for use by persons working in a factory.
9. (1) It shall be the duty of the architect, project engineer or designer responsible for
any building or other construction work or the design of any project or part thereof relating
to such building or other construction work to ensure that, at the planning stage, due
consideration is given to the safety and health aspects of the building workers and employees
who are employed in the erection, operation and execution of such projects and structures,
as the case may be.
(2) Adequate care shall be taken by the architect, project engineer and other
professionals involved in the project referred to in sub-section (1), not to include anything
in the design which would involve the use of dangerous structures or other processes or
materials, hazardous to health or safety of building workers and employees during the
course of erection, operation and execution, as the case may be.
(3) It shall also be the duty of the professionals, involved in designing the buildings
structures or other construction projects, to take into account the safety aspects associated
with the maintenance and upkeep of the structures and buildings where maintenance and
upkeep may involve special hazards.
10. (1) Where at any place in an establishment, an accident occurs which causes
death, or which causes any bodily injury by reason of which the person injured is prevented
from working for a period of forty-eight hours or more immediately following the accident or
which is of such nature as may be prescribed by the appropriate  Government, then,—
(a) employer or owner or agent or manager referred to in section 64 of such
establishment if it is mine; or
(b) employer or manager in relation to such establishment if it is factory or
relates to dock work; or
(c) the employer of such establishment if it is plantation, building or other
construction work or in relation to any other establishment,
shall send notice thereof to such authorities, in such manner and within such time, as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) Where a notice given under sub-section (1) relates to an accident causing death in
an establishment, the authority to whom the notice is sent shall make an inquiry into the
occurrence within two months of the receipt of the notice or if there is no such authority, the
Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator shall cause the Inspector-cum-Facilitator to make an inquiry
within the said period.
11. Where in an establishment there is any dangerous occurrence of such nature,
(whether causing any bodily injury or disability, or not) the employer shall send notice
thereof to such authorities, and in such form and within such time, as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government.
Duties of
architects,
project
engineers and
designers.
Notice of
certain
accident.
Notice of
certain
dangerous
occurrences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
12. (1) Where any worker in an establishment contracts any disease specified in the
Third Schedule, the employer of the establishment shall send notice thereof to such
authorities, and in such form and within such time, as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
(2) If any qualified medical practitioner attends on a person, who is or has been
employed in an establishment, and who is, or is believed by the qualified medical practitioner,
to be suffering from any disease specified in the Third Schedule, the medical practitioner
shall without delay send a report in writing to the office of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator
in such form and manner and within such time as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
(3) If any qualified medical practitioner fails to comply with the provisions of
sub-section (2), he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
13. Every employee at work place shall—
(a) take reasonable care for the health and safety of himself and of other persons
who may be affected by his acts or omissions at the workplace;
(b) comply with the safety and health requirements specified in the standards;
(c) co-operate with the employer in meeting the statutory obligations of the
employer under the Code;
(d) report any situation which is unsafe or unhealthy, that comes to his attention,
as soon as practicable, to his employer or to the health and safety representative and
in case of mine to the owner or agent or manager referred to in section 64, safety
officers or an official for his workplace or section thereof, as the case may be, who
shall report it to the employer;
(e) not wilfully interfere with, or misuse, or neglect any appliance, convenience
or other thing provided at workplace for the purpose of securing the health, safety and
welfare of workers;
(f) not do, wilfully and without reasonable cause, anything, likely to endanger
himself or others; and
(g) perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
14. (1) Every employee in an establishment shall have the right to obtain the information
from the employer relating to employee’s health and safety at work and represent to the
employer directly or through a member of the Safety Committee, if constituted by the employer
for such purpose, regarding inadequate provision for protection of his safety or health in
connection with the work activity in the workplace, and if not satisfied, to the Inspector-
cum-Facilitator.
(2) Where the employee referred to in sub-section (1) in any workplace have reasonable
apprehension that there is a likelihood of imminent serious bodily injury or death or imminent
danger to health, they may bring the same to the notice of their employer directly or through
a member of the Safety Committee referred to in sub-section (1) and simultaneously bring
the same to the notice of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
(3) The employer or any employee referred to in sub-section (1) shall take immediate
remedial action if he is satisfied about the existence of such imminent danger and send a
report forthwith of the action taken to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
(4) If the employer referred to in sub-section (3) is not satisfied about the existence of
any imminent danger as apprehended by his employees, he shall, nevertheless, refer the
matter forthwith to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator whose decision on the question of the
existence of such imminent danger shall be final.
Notice of
certain
diseases.
Duties of
employees.
Rights of
employee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
15. No person shall intentionally or recklessly interfere with, damage or misuse
anything which is provided in the interest of health, safety or welfare under this Code.
CHAPTER IV
OCCUPA TIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH
16. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute the National
Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board (hereinafter in this Code referred to as the
National Board) to discharge the functions conferred on it by or under this Code and to
advise to the Central Government on the matters relating to—
(a) standards, rules and regulations to be framed under this Code;
(b) implementation of the provisions of this Code and the rules and regulations
relating thereto;
(c) the issues of policy and programme relating to occupational safety and
health referred to it, from time to time, by the Central Government; and
(d) any other matter relating to this Code referred to, from time to time, by the
Central Government.
(2) The National Board shall consist of—
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment—Chairperson (ex officio);
(b) Director General, Factory Advice Service and Labour Institutes, Mumbai—
Member (ex officio);
(c) Director General, Mines Safety, Dhanbad—Member (ex officio);
(d) Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur—Member (ex officio);
(e) Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi—Member (ex officio);
(f) Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), New Delhi—Member (ex officio);
(g) Principal Secretaries dealing with labour matters of 4 States (by rotation as
the Central Government may deem fit)—Member (ex officio);
(h) Director General, Employee State Insurance Corporation, New Delhi—Member
(ex officio);
(i) Director General, Health Services, New Delhi—Member (ex officio);
(j) five representatives of employers—Member (ex officio);
(k) five representatives of employees—Member (ex officio);
(l) five eminent persons connected with the field of Occupational Safety and
Health, or representatives from reputed research institutions or similar other
discipline —Member:
(m) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment—Member Secretary
(ex officio).
(3) The terms of office of the Members referred to in clause ( g), (j), (k) and (
l) of
sub-section (2) shall be of three years and the procedure to be followed in their appointment,
the discharge of their functions by the National Board shall be such as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Board, determine the number,
nature and categories of other officers and employees required to assist the Board in the
efficient discharge of its functions and terms and conditions of service of such officers and
employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Duty not to
interfere with
or misuse
things.
National
Occupational
Safety and
Health
Advisory
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

20
(5) The Central Government may constitute as many technical committees or advisory
committees consisting of such number of members having such qualifications as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, to assist the National Board in discharge of its
function specified in sub-section (1).
17. (1) The State Government shall constitute a Board to be called the State Occupational
Safety and Health Advisory Board (hereinafter referred to as “State Advisory Board”) to
advise the State Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Code
as may be referred to it by the State Government.
(2) The constitution, procedure and other matters relating to such Advisory Board
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The State Government may constitute as many technical committees or advisory
committees of such Advisory Board including site appraisal committees, consisting of such
number of members and having such qualifications as may be prescribed, to assist the State
Government or State Advisory Board in dischar ge of their functions relating to the area
falling within their respective jurisdictions.
18. (1) The Central Government shall declare, by notification, standards on occupational
safety and health for work places relating to factories, mines, dock work, building and other
construction work and other establishments.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the power to declare standards
to be followed under sub-section (1), such standards shall relate to—
(a) physical, chemical, biological and any other hazards to be dealt with for the
period of working life of employee to ensure to the extent feasible on the basis of the
best available evidence or functional capacity, that no employee will suffer material
impairment of health or functional capacity even if such employee has regular exposure
to such hazards;
(b) the norms—
(i) appraising the hazards to employees and users to which they are
exposed;
(ii) relating to relevant symptoms and appropriate energy treatment and
proper conditions and precautions of safe use or exposure;
(iii) for monitoring and measuring exposure of employees to hazards;
(iv) for medical examination and other tests which shall be made available,
by the employer or at his cost, to the employees exposed to hazards; and
(v) for hazard evaluation procedures like safety audit, hazard and operability
study, fault-free analysis, event-free analysis and such other requirements;
(c) the medical examination including criteria for detection and reporting of
occupational diseases to be extended to the employees even after he ceases to be in
employment, if he is suffering from an occupational disease which arises out of or in
the course of employment;
(d) such aspects of occupational safety and health relating to work places which
the Central Government considers necessary on the report of the authority designated
by such Government for such purpose;
(e) such safety and health measures as may be required having regard to the
specific conditions prevailing at the workplaces relating to mine, factory, building and
other construction work, beedi and cigar, dock work or any other establishment notified;
and
(f) matters specified in the Second Schedule.
State
Occupational
Safety and
Health
Advisory
Board.
Occupational
safety and
health
standards.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 123, the Central Government may,
on the basis of the recommendation of the National Board and after notifying its intention so
to do for not less than forty-five days’, by notification, amend the Second Schedule to this
Code.
(4) The State Government may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, by
notification amend the standards made under sub-sections (1) and (2) for the establishment
for which it is the appropriate Government situated in the State.
19. It shall be the duty of such institutions in the field of occupational safety and
health as the Central Government may notify to conduct research, experiments and
demonstrations relating to occupational safety and health and thereafter submit their
recommendations to the appropriate Government.
20. (1) At any time during the normal working hours of an establishment or at any
other time,—
(a) the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator in the case of factory or mine; or
(b) the Director General of Factory Advice Service and Labour Institute in the
case of factory; or
(c) the Director General of Mines Safety in the case of mine; or
(d) the Director General of Health Services in the case of factory or mine; or
(e) such other officer as may be authorised by the appropriate Government in
the case of any other establishment or class of establishment,
as he may deem necessary, after giving notice in writing to the employer, conduct survey of
the factory or mine or such other establishment or class of establishments and such employer
shall afford all facilities for such survey, including facilities for the examination and testing of
plant and machinery and collection of samples and other data relevant to the survey.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “employer”
includes manager for the factory or in the case of any other establishment or class of
establishments such person who is for the time being responsible for the safety and the
occupational health of such other establishment or class of establishments, as the case may
be.
(2) For the purpose of facilitating surveys under sub-section (1) every worker shall, if
so required by the person conducting the survey, present himself to undergo such medical
examination as may be considered necessary by such person and furnish all information in
his possession which is relevant to the survey.
(3) Any time spent by a worker for undergoing medical examination or furnishing
information under sub-section ( 2) shall, for the purpose of calculating wages and extra
wages for overtime work, be deemed to be working hour for him.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the report submitted to the appropriate
Government by the person conducting the survey under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to
be a report submitted by an Inspector-cum-Facilitator under this Code.
21. For the purposes of this Code, the Central Government and the State Government
shall develop and maintain an effective programme of collection, compilation and analysis of
occupational safety and health statistics and for that purpose appropriate Government may
promote, encourage or directly engage in programme of studies, information and
communication concerning occupational safety and health statistics.
22. (1) The appropriate Government may, by general or special order, require any
establishment or class of establishments to constitute in the prescribed manner a Safety
Committee consisting of representatives of employers and workers engaged in such
establishment in such manner that the number of representatives of workers on the Committee
Research
related
activities.
Safety and
occupational
health
surveys.
Statistics.
Safety
Committee
and safety
officers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
shall not be less than the number of representatives of the employer and the representatives
of the workers shall be chosen in such manner and for such purpose as may be prescribed by
appropriate Government.
(2)  In every establishment relating to,—
(a) factory and building and other construction work wherein five hundred
workers or more; or
(b) mine wherein one hundred workers or more, are ordinarily employed,
the employer shall also appoint such number of safety officers, who shall possess such
qualifications and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by appropriate Government.
CHAPTER V
H
EALTH AND WORKING CONDITIONS
23. (1) The employer shall be responsible to maintain in his establishment such health
and working conditions for the employees as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred under sub-section (1),
the Central Government may prescribe for providing all or any of the following matters in the
establishment or class of establishments, namely:—
(i) cleanliness and hygiene;
(ii) ventilation, temperature and humidity;
(iii) environment free from dust, noxious gas, fumes and other impurities;
(iv) adequate standard of humidification, artificially increasing the humidity of
the air, ventilation and cooling of the air in work rooms;
(v) potable drinking water;
(vi) adequate standards to prevent overcrowding and to provide sufficient space
to employees or persons, as the case may be, employed therein;
(vii) adequate lighting;
(viii) sufficient arrangement for latrine and urinal accommodation to male, female
and transgender separately for employees maintaining hygiene therein;
(ix) effective arrangements for treatment of wastes and effluents; and
(x) any other arrangement which the Central Government considers appropriate.
CHAPTER VI
W
ELFARE PROVISIONS
24. (1) The employer shall be responsible to provide and maintain in his establishment
such welfare facilities for the workers as may be prescribed by the Central Government,
including,—
(i) adequate and suitable facilities for washing to workers for male and female
separately;
(ii) bathing places and locker rooms for male, female and transgender employees
separately;
(iii) place of keeping clothing not worn during working hours and for the drying
of wet clothing;
(iv) sitting arrangements for all workers obliged to work in a standing position;
(v) adequate standard of canteen or workers thereof in an establishment
employing one hundred or more workers including contract labour ordinarily employed;
Responsibility
of employer
for
maintaining
health and
working
conditions.
Welfare
facilities in
the
establishment,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

23
and in case of mines, medical examination of the workers employed or to be employed
in the mines, before their employment and at a specific intervals;
(vi) adequate first-aid boxes or cupboards with contents readily accessible during
all working hours; and
(vii) any other welfare measures which the Central Government considers, under
the set of circumstances, as required for decent life of the workers.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers referred to under sub-section (1),
the Central Government may also prescribe for the following matters, namely:—
(i) ambulance room in every factory, mine and other construction work wherein
more than five hundred workers are ordinarily employed;
(ii) medical facilities at the operating centres and halting stations, uniforms,
raincoats and other like amenities for protection from rain or cold for motor transport
workers;
(iii) adequate, suitable and separate shelters or rest-rooms for male, female and
transgender workers and lunch-room in every factory and mine wherein more than
fifty workers are ordinarily employed and in motor transport undertaking wherein
worker is required to halt at night;
(iv) the appointment of welfare officer in every factory, mine or plantation wherein
two hundred and fifty or more workers are ordinarily employed and the qualification,
conditions of service and duties of such welfare officer;
(v) to provide temporary living accommodation, free of charges and within the
work site or as near to it as may be possible by the employer to all building workers
employed by him and for causing removal or demolition of such temporary living
accommodation and for returning by the employer the possession of any land obtained
by him for such purpose from Municipal Board or any other local authority;
(vi) payment by the principal employer, the expenses incurred on providing the
accommodation to the contractor, where the building and other construction work is
done through the contractor;
(vii) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may make rules to provide for the facility of creche having
suitable room or rooms for the use of children under the age of six years of the employees at
suitable location and distance either separately or along with common facilities in
establishments wherein more than fifty workers are ordinarily employed.
(4) Every employer of plantation shall be responsible, subject to the provision of
sub-sections (1) to (3), to provide and maintain welfare facilities through his own resources
relating to drinking water, housing, medical, education and toilet to the workers in the
plantation or through schemes for such purpose sponsored by the Central Government or
State Government, Municipality or Panchayat for the locality in which the plantation is
situated.
Explanation.—For the purposes of  this sub-section,—
(i) the expression “Municipality” has the same meaning as assigned to it under
clause (e) of article 243P; and
(ii) the expression “Panchayat” has the same meaning as assigned to it under
clause (d) of article 243.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

24
CHAPTER VII
HOURS OF WORK AND ANNUAL LEA VE WITH WAGES
25. (1) No worker shall be required or allowed to work, in any establishment or class of
establishments for more than—
(a) such period as may be notified by the appropriate Government;
(b) such hours in a day as may be notified by the appropriate Government
subject to the period specified in clause (a); and
(c) the periods of work in each day shall be so fixed as not to exceed such
hours,with such intervals within such period, as may be notified by the appropriate
Government:
Provided that the period of work of a worker shall be so arranged, as not to
spread over more than such hours as may be notified by the appropriate Government
in any day inclusive of intervals for rest under this sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of mines,—
(i) the persons employed below ground in a mine shall not be allowed to
work for more than such hours as may be notified by the appropriate Government
in any day;
(ii) no work shall be carried on below ground in any mine except by a
system of shifts so arranged that the period of work for each shift is not spread
over more than the daily maximum hours as notified under clause (i);
(iii) no person employed in a mine shall be allowed to be present in any
part of a mine below ground except during the periods of work shown in respect
of him in the register maintained under sub-section (1) of section 33:
Provided also that the hours of work in case of motor transport worker
shall include—
(i) the time spent in work done during the running time of the
transport vehicle;
(ii) the time spent in subsidiary work; and
(iii) periods of mere attendance at terminals of less than fifteen
minutes.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section—
(a) “running time” in relation to a working day means the time
from the moment a transport vehicle starts functioning at the
beginning of the working day until the moment when the transport
vehicle ceases to function at the end of the working day, excluding
any time during which the running of the transport vehicle is
interrupted for a period exceeding such duration as may be prescribed
by the Central Government during which period the persons who
drive, or perform any other work in connection with the transport
vehicle are free to dispose of their time as they please or are engaged
in subsidiary work;
(b) “subsidiary work” means the work in connection with a
transport vehicle, its passengers or its load which is done outside
the running time of the transport vehicle, including in particular—
(i) the work in connection with accounts, the paying of
cash, the signing of registers, the handing over of service
sheets, the checking of tickets and other similar work;
(ii) taking over and garaging of the transport vehicles;
Weekly and
daily working
hours, leave,
etc. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
(iii) travelling from the place where a person signs on
to the place where he takes over the transport vehicle and
from the place where he leaves the transport vehicle to the
place where he signs off;
(iv) work in connection with the upkeep and repair of
the transport vehicle; and
(v) the loading and unloading of the transport vehicle;
(c) “period of mere attendance” means the period during which
a person remains at his post solely in order to reply to possible calls
or to resume action at the time fixed in the duty schedule.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the hours of work for
working journalist shall, subject to a maximum of one hundred and forty-four hours of work
during any period of four consecutive weeks and a period of not less than twenty-four
consecutive hours of rest during any period of seven consecutive days, be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), a sales promotion
employee, —
(i) in addition to such holidays, casual leave or other kinds of leave as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, shall be granted, if requested for—
(a) earned leave on full wages for not less than one-eleventh of the period
spent on duty;
(b) leave on medical certificate on one-half of the wages for not less than
one-eighteenth of the period of service;
(ii) may accumulate earned leave upto such maximum limit as may be prescribed
by the Central Government;
(iii) may limit up to which the earned leave may be availed of at a time by him and
the reasons for which such limit may be exceeded, shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Central Government;
(iv) shall,—
(a) when he voluntarily relinquishes his post or retires from service; or
(b) when his services are terminated for any reason whatsoever (not being
termination as punishment),
be entitled to cash compensation, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government (including conditions by way of specifying the
maximum period for which such cash compensation shall be payable), in respect of the
earned leave earned by him and not availed of;
(v) dies while in service, his heirs shall be entitled to cash compensation for the
earned leave earned by him and not availed of;
(vi) or his heirs shall be paid the cash compensation in respect of any period of
earned leave for which he or his heirs, is or are entitled to cash compensation under
clause (iv) or clause (v), as the case may be, shall be an amount equal to the wages due
to such sales promotion employee for such period.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section the working hours of an
adolescent workers shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of the Child and
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986.
61 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
26. (1) No worker shall be allowed to work in an establishment for more than six days
in a week:
Provided that in any motor transport undertaking, an employer may, in order to prevent
any dislocation of a motor transport service, require a worker to work on any day of rest
which is not a holiday so arranged that the worker does not work for more than ten days
consecutively without a holiday for a whole day intervening.
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, exempt such workers as it thinks
fit from the provisions of sub-section (1), subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
(3) Where, as a result of the passing of an order or the making of a rule under the
provisions of this Code exempting an establishment or the workers therein from the provisions
of sub-section (2), a worker is deprived of any of the weekly holidays, the worker shall be
allowed, within the month in which the holidays were due or within the two months immediately
following that month, compensatory holidays of equal number to the holidays so deprived.
27. There shall be paid wages at the rate of twice the rate of wages in respect of
overtime work, where a worker works in an establishment or class of establishments for more
than such hours of work in any day or in any week as prescribed by the appropriate
Government and the period of overtime work shall be calculated on a daily basis or weekly
basis, whichever is more favourable to such worker:
Provided that no worker shall be required to work overtime by the employer without
the prior consent of the worker in writing for such work.
28. Where a worker in an establishment works on a shift which extends beyond
midnight,—
(a) for the purposes of section 26, a holiday for a whole day shall mean in his
case a period of twenty-four consecutive hours beginning when his shift ends;
(b) the following day for him shall be deemed to be the period of twenty-four
hours beginning when such shift ends, and the hours he has worked after midnight
shall be counted in the previous day.
29. (1) The work shall not be carried on in any establishment by means of a system of
shifts so arranged that more than one relay of workers is engaged in work of the same kind
at the same time.
(2) The appropriate Government or subject to the control of the appropriate Government,
the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, may, by written order and for the reasons specified
therein, exempt on such conditions as may be deemed expedient, any establishment or class
of establishments or any department or section of an establishment or any category or
description of workers therein from the provisions of sub-section (1):
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to mines.
30. No worker shall be required or allowed to work in a mine or factory if he has already
been working in any other such similar establishment within the preceding twelve hours,
save in such circumstances as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
31. (1) There shall be displayed and correctly maintained in every establishment a
notice of periods of work, showing clearly for every day the periods during which workers
may be required to work in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
(2) The form of notice required by sub-section ( 1), the manner of display of such
notice and the manner in which such notice shall be sent to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator
shall be such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(3) Any proposed change in the system of work in any establishment which will
necessitate a change in the notice referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be intimated to the
Weekly and
compensatory
holidays.
Extra wages
for overtime.
Night shifts.
Prohibition
of
overlapping
shifts.
Restriction
on double
employment
in factory
and mine.
Notice of
periods of
work.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
Inspector-cum-Facilitator before the change is made, and except with the previous sanction
of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator, no such change shall be made until one week has elapsed
since that last change.
32. (1) Every worker employed in an establishment shall be entitled for leave with
wages subject to the following conditions, namely:—
(i) that he has worked one hundred and eighty days or more in such calendar
year;
(ii) that he shall be entitled for one day leave for every twenty days of his work,
and in the case of adolescent worker for fifteen days of his work, in case of worker
employed below ground mine, at the rate of one day for every fifteen days of his work,
in such calendar year;
(iii) any period of layoff, maternity leave or annual leave availed by such person
in such calendar year shall be counted for calculating the period of ninety days or
more under clause (i), but he shall not earn leave for the period so counted;
(iv) any holidays falling between the leave availed by such person in a calendar
year or prefixed or suffixed holiday shall be excluded from the period of leave so
availed;
(v) in case of such worker whose service commences otherwise than on the first
day of January shall be entitled to leave with wages at the rate specified in clause (ii),
if he has worked for one-fourth of the total number of days in the remainder of the
calendar year;
(vi) in case such worker is discharged or dismissed from service or quits
employment or is superannuated or dies while in service, during the course of the
calendar year, such worker or his heir or nominee, shall be entitled to wages in lieu of
the quantum of leave to which such worker was entitled immediately before his
discharge, dismissal, quitting of employment, superannuation or death, calculated as
specified in preceding clause, even if such worker has not worked for the required
period under this sub-section making such worker eligible to avail such leave, and
such payment shall be made—
(a) where such worker is discharged or dismissed or quits employment
before the expiry of the second working day from the date of such discharge,
dismissal or quitting; and
(b) where such worker is superannuated or dies while in service, before
the expiry of two months from the date of such superannuation or death;
(vii) if such worker does not in any one calendar year take the whole of the leave
allowed to him under this sub-section and the rules made thereunder, then, any leave
not taken by him shall be added to the leave to be allowed to him in the succeeding
calendar year so that—
(a) the total number of days of leave that may be carried forward to a
succeeding year shall not exceed thirty days; and
(b) such worker, who has applied for leave with wages but has not been
given such leave in accordance with this sub-section and the rules made
thereunder shall be entitled to carry forward the leave refused without any limit.
(viii) without prejudice to clause (vi) such worker shall be entitled on his demand
for encashment of leave at the end of calendar year;
(ix) such worker shall be entitled, where his total number of leave exceeds thirty
days under sub-clause (a) of clause (vii), to encash such exceeded leave.
Annual leave
with wages,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, extend the provisions of
sub-section (1) to any other establishment except railway establishment.
(3) The provisions of this sub-section ( 1) shall not operate to the prejudice of any
right to which a person employed in a mine may be entitled under any other law or under the
terms of any award, agreement or contract of service:
Provided that if such award, agreement or contract of service, provides for longer
annual leave with wages than that provided in sub-section (1), the quantum of leave, which
the person employed shall be entitled to, shall be in accordance with such award, agreement
or contract of service but leave shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (1) with respect of matters not provided for in such award, agreement or contract
of service:
Provided further that where the Central Government is satisfied that the leave rules
applicable to persons employed in any mine provide benefits which in its opinion are not
less favourable than those provided for in sub-section ( 1) it may, by order in writing and
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein exempt the mine from all or any of the
provisions of sub-section ( 1).
CHAPTER VIII
M
AINTENANCE OF REGISTERS, RECORDS AND RETURNS
33.  An employer of an establishment shall—
(a) maintain register in prescribed form, electronically or otherwise, containing
such particulars of workers as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government
including,—
(i) work performed by them;
(ii) number of hours of work constituting normal working hours in a day;
(iii) day of rest allowed in every period of seven days;
(iv) wage paid and receipts given therefor;
(v) leave, leave wages, overtime work, attendance and dangerous
occurrences; and
(vi) employment of adolescent;
(b) display notices at the workplace of the workers in the manner and form as
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government;
(c) issue wage slips to the workers, in electronic forms or otherwise; and
(d) file such return electronically or otherwise to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator
in such manner and during such periods as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
CHAPTER IX
I
NSPECTOR-CUM-FACILITA TORS AND OTHER AUTHORITY
34. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint Inspector-cum-
Facilitators for the purposes of this Code who shall exercise the powers conferred on them
under this Code throughout the State or such geographical limits assigned in relation to one
or more establishments situated in such State or geographical limits or in one or more
establishments, irrespective of geographical limits, assigned to him by the appropriate
Government, as the case may be.
(2) The Inspector-cum-Facilitators appointed under sub-section (1) shall, apart from
other duties to be discharged by them under this Code, conduct such inspections including
web based inspection in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
Maintenance
of registers
and records
and filing of
returns.
Appointment
of Inspector-
cum-
Facilitators.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint any person or persons
possessing the prescribed qualifications and experience to be Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator
for the purposes of such establishments or class of establishments and for such local limits
of jurisdiction as may be specified in the notification and the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator
may within the local limits of his jurisdiction exercise the powers of the Inspector-cum-
Facilitator:
Provided that a Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator may be appointed for the purposes of
a State or more than one States or for the purposes of the whole of the Country.
(4) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint for the purposes of
such establishments, as many Additional Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitators, Joint Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitators and Deputy Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitators or any other officer
of any designation as it thinks appropriate, to exercise such powers of the Chief Inspector-
cum-Facilitator within his jurisdiction as may be specified in the notification.
(5) Every Additional Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, Join t Chief Insp ector-cum-
Facilitator, Deputy Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator and every other officer appointed under
sub-section (4) shall, in addition to the powers of a Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator specified
in the notification by which the officer is appointed, exercise the powers of an Inspector-
cum-Facilitator within such local limits as may be specified in the notification.
(6) No person shall be appointed under sub-section (1), sub-section (3), sub-section (4)
or sub-section (7), or having been so appointed, shall continue to hold office, who is, or who
becomes, directly or indirectly interested in a workplace or work activity or in any process or
business carried on in any workplace or in any plant or machinery connected therewith.
(7) The appropriate Government may also, by notification, appoint such public officers
as it thinks fit to be additional Inspector-cum-Facilitators for exercising the powers and
discharging the duties of Inspector-cum-Facilitator for all or any of the purposes of this
Code within such local limits as may be specified in such notification.
(8) Without prejudice to the other functions of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator under
this Code, an Inspector-cum-Facilitator may in respect of any establishment or class of
establishments in local area or areas of his jurisdiction where the Chief Inspector-cum-
Facilitator with the approval of the appropriate Government and subject to such restrictions
or conditions as he may think fit to impose, by order in writing authorise the Inspector-cum-
Facilitator to exercise such of the powers of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator as may be
specified in such order:
Provided that the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, with the approval of the appropriate
Government, may by order in writing, prohibit the exercise, by any Inspector-cum-Facilitator
or any class of Inspector-cum-Facilitators specified in such order, of any such power by
such Inspector-cum-Facilitator or class of Inspector-cum-Facilitators.
(9) Every Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, Additional Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator,
Joint Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, Deputy Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, Inspector-
cum-Facilitator and every other officer appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a
public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be
officially subordinate to such authority as the appropriate Government may specify in this
behalf.
35. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an Inspector-cum-Facilitator, within
the local limits of his jurisdiction may,—
(i) enter, with such assistance of persons, being persons in the service of the
Government, or any local or other public authority, or with an expert, as he thinks fit,
any place which is used, or which he has reason to believe, is used as a workplace;
(ii) inspect and examine the mine, premises, plant, machinery, article or any other
relevant material;
Powers of
Inspector-
cum-
Facilitators.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

30
(iii) inquire into any accident or dangerous occurrence, whether resulting in
bodily injury, disability or death or not and take on the spot or otherwise statement of
any person which he may consider necessary for such inquiry;
(iv) in respect of a plantation and subject to any rules made by the State
Government in this behalf, within his jurisdiction, examine the crops grown in any
plantation or any worker employed therein or require the production of any register or
other document maintained in pursuance of this Code, and take on the spot or otherwise
statement of any person which he may consider necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Code relating to plantation;
(v) supply information and sensitises the employers and workers regarding the
provisions of this Code and compliance thereof;
(vi) require the production of any register or any other document relating to the
workplace or work activity;
(vii) search or seize, or take copies of, any register, record or other document or
any portion thereof, as he may consider necessary in respect of any offence under this
Code, which he has reason to believe, has been committed;
(viii) direct the concerned occupier or employer that any premises or any part
thereof, or anything lying therein, shall be left undisturbed (whether generally or in
particular respects) for so long as is necessary for the purpose of any inspection or
inquiry;
(ix) take measurements, photographs and videographs and make such recordings
as he considers necessary for the purpose of any examination or inquiry;
(x) take samples of any articles or substances found in any premises into which
he has power to enter and of the air of the atmosphere in or in the vicinity of any such
premises in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government;
(xi) direct the employer to—
(a) dismantle any arcticle or substance; or
(b) subject such article or substance to any process or test (but not so as
to damage or destroy it unless the same is, in the circumstances necessary, for
carrying out the purposes of any provision of this Code);
if such article or substance is found in any premises, being an article or substance
which appears to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator as having caused or is likely to
cause danger to the health and safety of employees, and take possession of
such article or substance or a part thereof and detain it for so long as is necessary
for such examination, as required;
(xii) issue show cause notice relating to safety, health and welfare provisions
arising under this Code, rules, regulations and bye-laws made thereunder;
(xiii) prosecute, conduct or defend before any court any complaint or other
proceeding arising under this Code, the rules and regulations made thereunder; and
(xiv) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) Any person required to produce any document or to give any information required
by an Inspector-cum-Facilitator under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be legally bound
to do so within the meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be,
apply to such search or seizure under sub-section (1) as they apply to any search or seizure
made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of that Code.
36. The District Magistrate shall, within the local limits of his jurisdiction, exercise
such powers and duties of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator in respect of mines as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Powers and
duties of
District
Magistrate.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

31
37. The appropriate Government may, by notification, empanel experts possessing
such specialised qualifications and experience as may be prescribed, and authorise the
employers of such start up establishments and class of other establishments to choose any
of such experts as are specified in the notification for third party certification in respect of
such start up establishments and class of other establishments who shall perform such
duties and hold such responsibilities as may be prescribed and submit their reports to the
concerned employer and Inspector-cum-Facilitator separately for the purpose of ensuring
compliance of the provisions of this Code.
38. (1) Without prejudice to the other powers of  the Chief  Inspector-cum-Facilitator
or Inspector-cum-Facilitator in this Code, the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Inspector-
cum-Facilitator,—
(A) in respect of a factory shall have the following special powers, namely:—
(a) where it appears to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator that conditions in a
factory or part thereof are such that they may cause serious hazard or imminent
danger by way of injury or death to the persons employed therein or to the
general public in the vicinity, he may, by order in writing to the occupier of the
factory, state the particulars in respect of which he considers the factory or part
thereof to be the cause of such serious hazard or imminent danger and prohibit
such occupier from employing any person in the factory or any part thereof
other than the minimum number of persons necessary to attend to the minimum
tasks till the hazard or danger is removed;
(b) any order issued by the Inspector-cum-Facilitator under sub-clause (a)
shall have effect for a period of three days until extended by the Chief Inspector-
cum-Facilitator by a subsequent order;
(c) any person aggrieved by an order of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator
under sub-clause ( a), and the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator under
sub-clause (b), shall have the right to appeal to the High Court;
(d) any person whose employment has been affected by an order issued
under sub-clause (a), shall, without prejudice to the rights of the parties under
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, be entitled to wages and other benefits and it
shall be the duty of the occupier to provide alternative employment to him
wherever possible in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government;
(B) in respect of mines shall have the following special powers, namely:—
(a) if, in respect of any matter for which no express provision is made by
or under this Code, it appears to the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or an
Inspector-cum-Facilitator that any mine or part thereof or any matter, thing or
practice in or connected with the mine, or with the control, supervision,
management or direction thereof, is dangerous to human life or safety or is
defective so as to threaten or tend to cause, the bodily injury of any person, he
may give notice in writing thereof to the employer of the mine stating therein the
particulars in respect of which he considers the mine or part thereof or the
matter, thing or practice to be dangerous or defective and require the same to be
remedied within such time and in such manner as he may specify in the notice;
(b) where the employer of a mine fails to comply with the terms of a notice
given under sub-clause ( a) within the period specified therein, the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Inspector-cum-Facilitator may, by order in
writing, prohibit the employment in or about the mine or any part thereof of any
person whose employment is not in his opinion reasonably necessary for securing
compliance with the terms of the notice;
(c) without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-clause ( a), the
Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Inspector-cum-Facilitator may, by order
Third party
audit and
certification.
Special
powers of
the Chief
Inspector-
cum-
Facilitator or
Inspector-
cum-
Facilitator in
respect of
factory,
mines and
dock work
and building
and other
construction
work.
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

32
in writing addressed to the employer of a mine, prohibit the extraction or reduction
of pillars or blocks of minerals in any mine or part thereof, if, in his opinion, such
operation is likely to cause the crushing of pillars or blocks of minerals or the
premature collapse of any part of the workings or otherwise endanger the mine
or the life or safety of persons employed therein or if, in his opinion, adequate
provision against the outbreak of fire or flooding has not been made by providing
for the sealing off and isolation of the part of the mine in which such operation
is contemplated and for restricting the area that might be affected by fire or
flooding;
(d) if  the Inspector-cum-Facilitator authorised, by general or special order
in writing by the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, is of opinion that there is
urgent and immediate danger to the life or safety of any person employed in any
mine or part thereof, he may, by order in writing containing a statement of the
grounds of his opinion, prohibit until he is satisfied that the danger is removed,
the employment in or about the mine or any part thereof of any person whose
employment is not in his opinion reasonably necessary for the purpose of
removing the danger;
(e) every person whose employment is prohibited under sub-clause (b) or
sub-clause (d) shall be entitled to payment of full wages for the period for which
he would have been, but for the prohibition in employment and the employer
shall be liable for payment of such full wages of that person:
Provided that the employer may instead of paying such full wages provide
such person with an alternative employment at the same wages which such
person was receiving in the employment which was prohibited;
(f) where a notice has been given under sub-clause (a) or an order made
under sub-clause (b) or  sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d) by an Inspector-cum-
Facilitator, employer of the mine may, within ten days after the receipt of the
notice or order, as the case may be, appeal against the same to the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator who may confirm, modify or cancel the notice or order;
(g) the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Inspector-cum-Facilitator
sending a notice under sub-clause (a) or making an order under sub-clause (b)
or sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d) and the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator making
an order (other than an order of cancellation in appeal) under sub-clause (f) shall
forthwith report the same to the Central Government;
(h) if  the employer of the mine objects to a notice sent under sub-clause (a)
by the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Inspector-cum-Facilitator or to an
order made by the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Inspector-cum-
Facilitator under sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d) or sub-clause (f),
he may, within twenty days after the receipt of the notice containing the
requisition or of the order or after the date of the decision on appeal, as the case
may be, send his objection in writing stating the grounds thereof to the Central
Government which shall, ordinarily within a period of two months from the date
of receipt of the objection, decide the matter.
(i) every notice under sub-clause ( a), or order under sub-clause ( b) or
sub-clause (c) or sub-clause ( d) or sub-clause ( f), to which objection is made
under sub-clause (h), shall be complied with, pending with the conserned Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitators or Inspector-cum-Facilitators of  the mine for the
decision of the Central Government:
Provided that the Central Government may, on the application of the
employer, suspend the operation of a notice under sub-clause ( a), pending its
decision on the objection.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45

33
(j) nothing in this section shall affect the powers of an Executive Magistrate
under section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(k) where in respect of any matter relating to safety of mine for which
express provision is made by or under this Code, the employer of a mine fails to
comply with such provisions, the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator may give notice
in writing requiring the same to be complied with within such time as he may
specify in the notice or within such extended period of time as he may, from time
to time, specify thereafter;
(l) where the employer fails to comply with the terms of a notice given
under sub-clause (k) within the period specified in such notice or within the
extended period of time specified under that sub-clause, the Chief Inspector-
cum-Facilitator may, by order in writing, prohibit the employment in or about the
mine or any part thereof of any person whose employment is not, in his opinion,
reasonably necessary for securing compliance with the terms of the notice;
(m) every person whose employment is prohibited under sub-clause ( l),
shall be entitled to payment of full wages for the period for which he would have
been, but for the prohibition, in employment, and the owner, agent or manager
shall be liable for payment of such full wages of that person:
Provided that the employer may, instead of paying such full wages, provide
such person with an alternative employment at the same wages which such
person was receiving in the employment which was prohibited under
sub-clause (l);
(n) the provisions of sub-clauses (g), (h) and (i) shall apply in relation to
a notice issued under sub-clause ( k) or an order made under sub-clause ( l) as
they apply in relation to a notice under sub-clause ( a) or an order under
sub-clause (b);
(o) Chief Inspector -cum-Facilitator may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, reverse or modify any order passed by him under this Code or under
any regulation, rule or bye-law made thereunder in relation to mine;
(p) no order prejudicial to the owner, agent or manager of a mine shall be
made under this section unless such owner, agent or manager has been given a
reasonable opportunity of making representation;
(q) the Central Government may reverse or modify any order passed by
Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator under this Code in relation to mine.
(C) in respect of dock work shall have the following special powers, namely:—
(a) if it appears to an Inspector-cum-Facilitator that any place where any
dock work is being carried on is in such a condition that it is dangerous to life,
safety or health, of dock workers, he may, in writing, serve on the employer, an
order prohibiting any dock work in such place until measures have been taken
to remove the cause of the danger to his satisfaction;
(b) an Inspector-cum-Facilitator after serving an order under clause ( a)
shall endorse a copy thereof to the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator who may
modify or cancel the order without waiting for an appeal;
(c) any person aggrieved by an order under clause (a) or clause (b) may,
within fifteen days from the date on which the order is communicated to him,
prefer an appeal to the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or where such order is by
the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, to the Central Government and the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Central Government shall, after giving the appellant
an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal within sixty days:
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
Provided that the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Central
Government may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of fifteen
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal in time:
Provided further that an order under clause ( a) shall be complied with,
pending the decision of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Central
Government.
(2) Without prejudice to the other powers of an Inspector-cum-Facilitator elsewhere in
this Code,—
(a) if it appears to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator that any site or place at which
any building or other construction work is being carried on, is in such condition that
it is dangerous to life, safety or health of building workers or the general public, he
may, in writing serve on the employer of building workers or on the employer of the
establishment or on the person in charge of such site or place an order prohibiting any
building or other construction work at such site or place until measures have been
taken to remove the cause of the danger to his satisfaction;
(b) an Inspector-cum-Facilitator serving an order under clause (a) shall endorse
a copy to the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator;
(c) such prohibition order shall be complied with by the employer forthwith.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order under clause (a) of sub-section (2), may, within
fifteen days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, may prefer an appeal
to the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or where such order is by the Chief Inspector-cum-
Facilitator, to the appropriate Government and the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the
appropriate Government, as the case may be, shall, after giving the appellant an opportunity
of being heard, dispose of the appeal within sixty days:
Provided that the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the appropriate Government may,
entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of fifteen days if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time:
Provided further that the prohibition, shall be complied with, subject to the decision of
the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the appropriate Government.
39. (1) All copies of, and extracts from, registers or other records pertaining to any
establishment and all other information relating to any manufacturing or commercial business
or any working process acquired by the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or an Inspector-
cum-Facilitator or by any one assisting him, in the course of the inspection or survey of any
establishment under this Code or acquired by any person authorised under section 20 in the
exercise of his duties thereunder, shall be regarded as confidential and shall not, while in
service or after leaving the service, be disclosed to any person or authority unless the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Inspector-cum-Facilitator considers disclosure necessary
to ensure the health, safety or welfare of any person employed in establishment.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to the disclosure of any such information to—
(a) any court;
(b) any Committee or Board constituted under this Code;
(c) an official superior or the employer of the establishment concerned;
(d) a Commissioner for employees’ compensation appointed under the
Employees’ Compensation Act, 1923;
(e) the Controller, Indian Bureau of Mines; and
(f) any such officer, authority or authorised as may be specified in this behalf by
the appropriate Government.
Secrecy of
information
by Chief
Inspector-
cum-
Facilitator or
Inspector-
cum-
Facilitator,
etc.
8 of 1923.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

35
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005, no
Chief  Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator shall disclose the source of
any complaint, without his consent, made to him regarding the contravention of the provisions
of this Code and shall also not while making an inspection under this Code in pursuance of
such complaint, disclose to the employer concerned or any of his representative that the
inspection is being made in pursuance of such complaint.
40. Every employer of an establishment shall afford the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator
and every Inspector-cum-Facilitator having jurisdiction or every person authorised by Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator all reasonable facilities for making any entry, inspection, survey,
measurement, examination or inquiry under this Code.
41. Any person in the service of the Government duly authorised in this behalf by a
special order in writing of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or of an Inspector-cum-
Facilitator may, for the purpose of surveying, levelling or measuring any mine or any output
therefrom, after giving not less than three days’ notice to the manager of such mine, enter the
mine and may survey, level or measure the mine or any part thereof or any output therefrom
at any time by day or night:
Provided that, where in the opinion of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or of an
Inspector-cum-Facilitator an emergency exists, he may, by order in writing, authorise any
such person to enter the mine for any of the aforesaid purposes without giving any such
notice.
42. ( 1) The appropriate Government may appoint medical practitioners having
prescribed qualification to be medical officers for the purposes of this Code in relation to
factory, mines, plantation, motor transport undertakings and any other establishment as
may be:
Provided that the medical officers so appointed shall before entering into their office,
disclose to the appropriate Government their interest in the concerned establishment.
(2) The medical officer shall perform the following duties, namely:—
(a) the examination and certification of workers in a mine or factory or any other
establishment engaged in such dangerous occupations or processes as may be prescribed;
(b) the exercise of such medical supervision for any factory, mines, plantation,
motor transport undertaking and such other establishment as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government where cases of illness have occurred which it is reasonable
to believe are due to the nature of any process carried on or other conditions of work
prevailing in such establishments;
(c) the examination and certification of adolescent for the purpose of ascertaining
his fitness for employment in factory, plantation, motor transport undertakings and
any other establishment as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government in any
work which is likely to cause injury to their health.
CHAPTER X
S
PECIAL PROVISION RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN
43. Notwithstanding any prohibition in any other law for the time being in force in this
behalf and subject to such conditions relating to safety, holidays and working hours or any
other condition to be observed by the employer as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government, the women workers may, with her consent, be employed in an establishment
before 6 a.m. and beyond 7 p.m.
44. Where the appropriate Government considers that the employment of women is
dangerous for their health and safety, in an establishment or class of establishments, due to
the operation carried out therein, such Government may in the prescribed manner, prohibit
the employment of women for such operation.
22 of 2005.
Facilities to
be afforded
to the
Inspector-
cum-
Facilitator.
Powers of
Special
Officer to
enter,
measure, etc.
in relation to
mine.
Medical
officer.
Employment
of women in
night.
Prohibition of
employment
of women in
dangerous
operation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

36
CHAPTER XI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CONTRACT LABOUR AND INTER-STA TE MIGRANT WORKER, ETC.
PART I
CONTRACT LABOUR AND INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKER
45. (1) This Part shall apply to—
(i) every establishment in which twenty or more contract labour are employed or
were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months through contract;
(ii) every manpower supply contractor who has employed on any day of the
preceding twelve months twenty or more contract labour:
Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to sections 59 to 62:
Provided further that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less than two
months’ notice of its intention so to do, by notification, apply the provisions of this Part to
any establishment or manpower supply contractor employing such number of worker less
than twenty as may be specified in the notification:
Provided also that, where any other threshold of contract labour as provided in this
sub-section is in force in a State under the law for the time being in force in such State
immediately before the commencement of this Code, then, such threshold shall prevail,
without prejudice to the first proviso, for the purposes of this sub-section till it is amended
by the competent legislature.
(2)  This Part shall not apply to the establishment in which work only of an intermittent
or casual nature is performed:
Provided that if a question arises as to whether work performed in an establishment is
of an intermittent or casual nature, the appropriate Government shall decide that question
after consultation with the National Board or a State Advisory Board and its decision thereon
shall be final.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, work performed in an establishment
shall not be deemed to be of an intermittent nature—
(i) if it was performed for more than one hundred and twenty days in the preceding
twelve months; or
(ii) if it is of seasonal character and is performed for more than sixty days in a
year.
46. The appropriate Government may, by an order, appoint such persons, being Gazetted
officers of the Government, as it thinks fit to be licensing officers and define the limits, within
which the licensing officer shall exercise the powers conferred on him by or under this Part
of the Code.
47. (1) No contractor to whom this Part applies shall—
(a) supply or engage contract labour in any establishment; or
(b) undertake or execute the work through contract labour,
except under and in accordance with a licence issued to him by a licensing officer after
satisfying that the contractor fulfils such requisite qualifications or criteria as may be
prescribed by the Central Government and such licence shall, in addition to the prescribed
particulars and conditions specified in sub-section (3), specify the number of such contract
labour who can be engaged and the amount of security to be deposited by the contractor.
(2) Where the contractor does not fulfil the requisite qualifications or criteria referred
to in sub-section (1), the licensing officer may issue him a “work specific licence” renewable
within such period as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government to supply or engage
Applicability
of this Part.
Appointment
of licensing
officers .
Licensing of
contractors.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

37
the contract labour, or execute the work through contract labour, only for the concerned
work order as may be specified in such licence and subject to such conditions as may be
specified in such licence.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Part,—
(a) a licence under sub-section (1), may contain such conditions including, in
particular, conditions as to hours of work, fixation of wages and other essential amenities
in respect of contract labour as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government;
(b) the licence referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall be obtained
from, if for such establishment the appropriate Government is—
(i) the Central Government, the licensing officer appointed by that
Government; and
(ii) the State Government, the licensing officer appointed by that
Government:
Provided that in case the contractor supplies or engages contract labour or
undertakes or executes the work under sub-section (1) in more than one establishment
situated in different States, then, he shall obtain the licence,—
(i) where for such establishments, Central Government is the appropriate
Government, from the licensing officer appointed by the Central Government
having jurisdiction over the place where the head office of the contractor is
situated; or
(ii) where for such establishments, State Government is the appropriate
Government from the licensing officer appointed by the State Government having
jurisdiction over the place where the head office of the contractor is situated.
48. (1) Every application for issuing a licence under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
of section 47 shall be made in such form and manner and shall contain such particulars
regarding the number of contract labour, nature of work for which contract labour is to be
employed and such other particulars as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) The licensing officer may make such investigation in respect of the application
received under sub-section (1) and in making any such investigation the licensing officer
shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(3) The licence issued under sub-section (1) of section 47 shall be valid for a period of
five years in respect of the number of contract labour specified therein and in case the
contractor wants to increase the number of the contract labour, then, he shall apply in the
prescribed manner for the renewal of the licence for such purpose to the licensing officer and
if the licence is renewed by the licensing officer in the prescribed manner, the contract labour
shall be increased to such extent by depositing such security deposit as specified in the
renewed licence for the balance period.
49. The contractor shall not charge directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, any fee or
commission from the contract labour.
50. (1) When a contractor receives work order from an establishment either to supply
contract labour in the establishment or to execute the contract through contract labour in the
establishment he shall, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, intimate
to the appropriate Government.
(2) Where the contractor fails to give intimation under sub-section (1), the licensing
officer may, after giving the holder of the licence an opportunity of showing cause, suspend
or cancel the licence in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
Grant of
licence.
No fees or
Commission
or any cost
to workers.
Information
regarding
work order
to be given
to the
appropriate
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

38
51. (1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, either on a reference made to him in this
behalf or otherwise, that—
(a) a licence granted under this Part has been obtained by misrepresentation or
suppression of any material fact, or
(b) the holder of a licence has, failed to comply with the conditions subject to
which the licence has been granted or has contravened any of the provisions of this
Part or the rules made thereunder, then code, without prejudice to any other penalty to
which the contractor may be liable under this Code, the licensing officer may, after
giving the contractor an opportunity of showing cause, revoke or suspend the licence.
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may
amend a licence granted under this Part.
52. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 47 or section 48 or
section 51 may, within thirty days from the date on which the order is communicated to him,
prefer an appeal to an appellate authority notified in this behalf by the appropriate
Government:
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal in time.
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the appellate authority shall, after
giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal within thirty days
from the date on which the appeal is preferred.
53. Welfare facilities relating to providing of canteens, rest rooms, drinking water and
first aid as referred to and prescribed, under section 23 and section 24 shall be provided by
the principal employer of the establishment to the contract labour who are employed in such
establishment.
54. Where any establishment is employing contract labour through a contractor who
is required to obtain a licence under this Part, but he has not obtained such licence, the
contract labour so engaged through such contractor, shall be deemed to be employed by the
principal employer.
55. (1) A contractor shall be responsible for payment of wages to each contract labour
employed by him and such wages shall be paid before the expiry of such period as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) Every contractor shall, make the disbursement of wages referred to in sub-section (1),
through bank transfer or electronic mode and inform the principal employer electronically
the amount so paid by such mode:
Provided that where it is not practicable to disburse such payment otherwise than in
cash, then, it shall be disbursed in the presence of a representative duly authorised by the
principal employer and it shall be the duty of such representative to certify the amount so
paid as wages in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(3) In case the contractor fails to make payment of wages referred to in sub-section (1),
within the prescribed period or makes short payment, then, the principal employer shall be
liable to make payment of the wages in full or the unpaid balance due, as the case may be, to
the concerned contract labour employed by the contractor and recover the amount so paid
from the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the contractor under
any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.
(4) The appropriate Government, in the event the contractor does not pay the wages
to the contract labour employed by him, shall pass the orders of making payment of such
wages from the amount deposited by such contractor as security deposit under the licence
issued by the licensing officer to the contractor, in the manner as prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
Revocation,
suspension
and
amendment
of licence .
Appeal.
Liability of
principal
employer for
welfare
facilities.
Effect of
employing
contract
labour from a
non-licenced
contractor.
Responsibility
for payment
of wages .
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

39
56. Every concerned contractor or principal employer of the establishment concerned
shall issue experience certificate, in such form as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government, to the contract labour annually, or as and when demanded by the contract
labour giving details of the work performed by such contract labour.
57. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the appropriate Government
may, after consultation with the National Board or a State Advisory Board, prohibit, by
notification, employment of contract labour in any process, operation or other work in any
establishment.
(2) Before issuing any notification under sub-section (1), in relation to an establishment,
the appropriate Government shall have regard to the conditions of work and benefits provided
for the contract labour in that establishment and other relevant factors, such as—
(a) whether the process, operation or other work is incidental to, or necessary
for the industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation that is carried on in the
establishment;
(b) whether it is of perennial nature, that is to say, it is of sufficient duration
having regard to the nature of industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation
carried on in that establishment;
(c) whether it is done ordinarily through regular workers in that establishment or
an establishment similar thereto; and
(d) whether it is sufficient to employ considerable number of whole-time worker.
Explanation.—If a question arises whether any process or operation or other work is
of perennial nature, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon shall be final.
58. The appropriate Government may, in the case of an emergency, direct, by
notification, that subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, and for such period or
periods, as may be specified in the notification, all or any of the provisions of this Code or
the rules made thereunder shall not apply to any establishment or class of establishments or
any class of contractors.
59. It shall be the duty of every employer of an establishment employing inter-State
migrant worker in connection with the work of that establishment,—
(i) to ensure suitable conditions of work to such worker having regard to the
fact that they are required to work in a State different from their own State;
(ii) in case of fatal accident or serious bodily injury to any such worker, to report
to the specified authorities of both the States and also the next of kin of the worker;
(iii) to provide and maintain suitable residential accommodation to such worker
during the period of their employment;
(iv) to provide the prescribed medical facilities and periodical medical examination
to the such worker, free of charge.
60. (1) There shall be paid by the contractor to every inter-State migrant worker at the
time of recruitment, a displacement allowance equal to fifty per cent. of the monthly wages
payable to him.
(2) The amount paid to a worker as displacement allowance under sub-section ( 1),
shall not be refundable and shall be in addition to the wages or other amount payable to him.
61. A journey allowance of a sum not less than the fare from the place of residence of
the inter-State migrant workers in his State to the place of work in the other State shall be
payable by the contractor to the workers both for the outward and return journeys at the
time of recruitment only and such worker shall be entitled to payment of wages during the
period of such journeys as if he were on duty.
Experience
certificate.
Prohibition
of
employment
of contract
labour .
Power to
exempt in
special cases.
Facilities to
inter-State
migrant
workers.
Displacement
allowance.
Journey
allowance,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

40
62. No suit or other proceeding shall lie in any court or before any authority for the
recovery of debt or any part thereof relating to an inter-State migrant worker after the
completion of his employment where it remains unsettled obligation to the contractor or the
principal employer and such debt or part thereof shall, on the completion of the period of
employment of such worker, be deemed to have been extinguished.
PART II
A
UDIO-VISUAL WORKERS
63. (1) No person shall be employed as an audio-visual worker in or in connection with
production of any audio-visual programme unless,—
(a) an agreement in writing is entered into—
(i) with such person by the producer of such audio-visual programme; or
(ii) by the producer of such audio-visual programme with the contractor,
where such person is employed through such contractor; and
(b) such agreement is registered with the competent authority by the producer
of such audio-visual programme.
(2) Every agreement, referred to in sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) be in the prescribed form;
(b) specify the name and such other particulars as may be prescribed by the
Central Government with respect to, the audio-visual worker whose employment the
agreement relates;
(c) include, where such audio-visual worker is employed through a contractor, a
specific condition to the effect that in the event of the contractor failing to discharge
his obligations under the agreement to the audio-visual worker with respect to payment
of wages or any other matter, the producer of the audio-visual programme shall also be
liable to discharge such obligations and shall be entitled to be reimbursed with respect
thereto by the contractor.
(3) A copy of the agreement referred to in sub-section ( 1) with respect to the
employment of the audio-visual worker shall, if such audio-visual worker is entitled to the
benefits of provident fund, also be forwarded by the producer of the audio-visual programme
to the authority as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter V , VI and VII, the agreement
referred to in sub-section (1) shall include,—
(i) nature of assignment;
(ii) wages and other benefits (including provident fund, if any);
(iii) health and working condition;
(iv) safety;
(v) hours of work; and
(vi) welfare facilities,
and it shall be responsibility of the producer to provide the facilities specified in the agreement
to the audio-visual worker and the payment of wages shall be through electronic mode.
PART III
M
INES
64. (1) Save as may be otherwise prescribed by the Central Government, every mine
shall be under a sole manager who shall have the prescribed qualifications and the owner or
agent of every mine shall appoint a person having such qualifications to be the manager:
Past
liabilities.
Prohibition
of
employment
of audio-
visual worker
without
agreement.
Managers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

41
Provided that the owner or agent may appoint himself as manager if he possesses the
prescribed qualifications.
(2) Subject to any instructions given to him by or on behalf of the owner or agent of
the mine, the manager shall be responsible for the overall management, control, supervision
and direction of the mine and all such instructions when given by the owner or agent shall
be confirmed in writing forthwith.
(3) Except in case of an emergency, the owner or agent of a mine or anyone on his
behalf shall not give, otherwise than through the manager, instructions affecting the fulfillment
of his statutory duties, to a person, employed in a mine, who is responsible to the manager.
65. (1) The provisions of this Code, except those contained in sections 35, 38, 40, 41
and 44, shall not apply to—
(a) any mine or part thereof in which excavation is being made for prospecting
purposes only and not for the purpose of obtaining minerals for use or sale subject to
such conditions relating to number of employees, depth of excavation and other
matters as may be prescribed by the Central Government;
(b) any mine engaged in the extraction of  kankar, murrum, laterite, boulder,
gravel, shingle, ordinary sand (excluding mouldings and glass sand and other mineral
sands), ordinary clay (excluding kaolin, china clay, white clay or fire clay), building
stone, slate, road metal, earth, fullers earth (marl, chalk) and lime stone subject to such
conditions relating to workings, opencast workings and explosives as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government
may declare that the provisions of this Code shall apply to such mine or part thereof as may
be prescribed by it.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), if at any time any
of the conditions specified in clause ( a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) is not fulfilled in
relation to any mine referred to in that sub-section, the provisions of this Code not set out in
sub-section (1), shall become immediately applicable, and it shall be the duty of the employer
of the mine to inform about such non-fulfillment to such authority in such manner and within
such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
66. (1) In case of an emergency involving serious risk to the safety of  the mine or of
persons employed therein, or in case of an accident, whether actual or apprehended, or in
case of any act of God or in case of any urgent work to be done to machinery, plant or
equipment of the mine as a result of breakdown of such machinery plant or equipment, the
manager may, subject to the provision of clause (B) of sub-section (1) of section 38 and in
accordance with the provisions as specified in section 25 relating to exemption from weekly
day of rest, hours of work above ground, hours of work below ground and notices regarding
hours of work relating to mines, permit persons to be employed in contravention of sections
25, 30 and sub-section (1) of section 31 on such work as may be necessary to protect the
safety of the mine or of the persons employed therein:
Provided that in case of any urgent work to be done to machinery, plant or equipment
under this section, the manager may take the action permitted by this section, although the
production of mineral would thereby be incidentally affected, but any action so taken shall
not exceed the limits necessary for the purpose of avoiding serious interference with the
ordinary working of the mine.
(2) Every case in which action has been taken by the manager under sub-section (1),
shall be recorded together with the circumstances relating thereto and a report thereof shall
also be made to the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
Code not to
apply in
certain cases.
Exemption
from
provision
regarding
employment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

42
67. (1) No person below eighteen years of age shall be allowed to work in any mine or
part thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), apprentices and other
trainees, not below sixteen years of age, may be allowed to work, under proper supervision,
in a mine or part thereof  by the manager as referred to in section 64:
Provided that, in the case of trainees, other than apprentices, prior approval of the
Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or an Inspector-cum-Facilitator shall be obtained before
they are allowed to work.
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the provisions for medical examination of
apprentice, other trainee and employee in the mine to ensure their fitness to work and to
prevent the persons below sixteen years of age to work as apprentice or trainee and those
who are not adults to work as such employee.
Explanation.— In this section, “apprentice” means an apprentice as defined in
clause (a) of section 2 of the Apprentices Act, 1961.
68. If any question arises as to whether any excavation or working (or premises in or
adjacent to and belonging to a mine, on which any process ancillary to the getting, dressing
or preparation for sale of minerals or of coke is being carried on) is a mine within the meaning
of this Code, the Central Government may decide the question, and a certificate signed by a
Secretary to the Central Government in the Ministry of Labour shall be conclusive on the
point.
PART IV
B
EEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS
69. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Part, no employer shall use or allow to use
any place or premises as an industrial premises unless he holds a valid licence issued under
this section and no such premises shall be used except in accordance with the terms and
conditions of such licence.
(2) Any person who intends to use or allows to use any place or premises specified in
sub-section (1), shall make an application in writing to the competent authority, appointed
by the State Government, in such form on payment of such fees as may be prescribed by the
State Government, for a licence to use, or allow to use, such premises as an industrial
premises.
(3) The application shall specify the maximum number of employees proposed to be
employed at any time of the day in the place or premises and shall be accompanied by a plan
of the place or premises prepared in such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(4) The competent authority shall, in deciding whether to grant or refuse a licence,
have regard to the following matters, namely:—
(a) the suitability of the place or premises which is proposed to be used for the
manufacture of beedi or cigar or both;
(b) previous experience of the applicant or he has employed experienced person
or has entered into agreement with the experienced person for employment for the
period of licence;
(c) the financial resources of the applicant including his financial capacity to
meet the demands arising out of the provisions of the laws for the time being in force
relating to welfare of labour;
(d) whether the application is made bona fide on behalf of the applicant himself
or in benami of any other person; and
(e) welfare of the labour in the locality, the interest of the public generally and
such other matters as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Employment
of persons
below
eighteen
years of age.
52 of 1961.
Decision of
question
whether a
mine is
covered
under this
Code.
Licence to
industrial
premises and
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

43
(5)  A licence granted under this section shall be valid for three years and may be
renewed thereafter.
(6) An application for the renewal of a licence granted under this section shall be made
at least thirty days before the expiry of the period thereof, on payment of such fees as may
be prescribed by the State Government, and where such an application has been made, the
licence shall be deemed to continue, notwithstanding the expiry of the period thereof, until
the renewal of the licence, or, as the case may be, the rejection of the application for the
renewal thereof:
Provided that the competent authority shall not grant or renew a licence unless it is
satisfied that the provisions of this Code and the rules made thereunder have been complied
with:
Provided further that the competent authority shall, in deciding whether to renew a
licence or to refuse a renewal thereof, have regard to the matters specified in sub-section (3).
(7) The competent authority may, after giving the holder of a licence an opportunity of
being heard, cancel or suspend any licence granted or renewed under this section, if it
appears to it that such licence has been obtained by misrepresentation or fraud or that the
licencee has contravened or failed to comply with any of the provisions of this Code or the
rules made thereunder or any of the terms or conditions of the licence.
(8) The State Government may issue in writing to a competent authority such directions
of a general character as that Government may consider necessary in respect of any matter
relating to the grant or renewal of licences under this section.
(9) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, the competent authority may
grant or renew licences under this Part on such terms and conditions as it may determine and
where the competent authority refuses to grant or renew any licence, it shall do so by an
order communicated to the applicant, giving the reasons in writing for such refusal.
70. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the competent authority refusing to
grant or renew a licence or cancelling or suspending a licence may, within such time and on
payment of such fees as may be prescribed, appeal to such authority as the State Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf, and such authority may by order confirm, modify
or reverse any order refusing to grant or renew a licence or cancelling or suspending a
licence.
71. (1) The State Government may permit, the wetting or cutting of beedi or tobacco
leaves by employees outside the industrial premises on an application made to it by the
employer on behalf of such employees, as may be prescribed.
(2) The employer shall maintain the record of the work permitted under sub-section (1),
to be carried on outside the industrial premises, in the form as may be prescribed.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no employer shall require or allow any
manufacturing process connected with the making of beedi or cigar or both to be carried on
outside the industrial premises:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any labour who is given raw
material by an employer or a contractor to make beedi or cigar or both at home.
72. Nothing contained in this Part shall apply to the owner or occupier of a private
dwelling house, not being an employee of an employer to whom this Part applies, who
carries on any manufacturing process in such private dwelling house with the assistance of
the members of his family living with him in such dwelling house and dependent on him.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “family” does not include child, as defined in the Child and Adolescent
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, for this section.
Appeals.
Permission
to work by
employees
outside
industrial
premises.
Part not to
apply to self-
employed
persons in
private
dwelling
houses.
61 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

44
(ii) “private dwelling house” means a house in which persons engaged in the
manufacture of beedi or cigar or both, reside.
PART V
BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS
73. No person about whom the employer knows or has reasons to believe that he is a
deaf or he has a defective vision or he has a tendency to giddiness shall be required or
allowed to work in any such operation of building or other construction work which is likely
to involve a risk of any accident either to the building worker himself or to any other person.
PART VI
F
ACTORIES
74. (1) The appropriate  Government may make rules in  respect of  factory or class or
description of factories for—
(a) the submission of plans including specifications, nature and certification
thereof;
(b) the previous permission for the site on which the factory is to be situated
and for the construction or extension thereof; and
(c) registration and  licensing and renewal thereof including fees to be payable
for such registration, licensing and renewal, as the case may be.
(2) If on an application for permission referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1)
accompanied by the plans and specifications required by the rules made under clause (c) of
that sub-section, sent to the State Government or Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator in the
mode prescribed including electronic mode, no order is communicated to the applicant
within three months from the date on which it is so sent, the permission applied for in the
said application shall be deemed to have been granted.
(3) Where a State Government or a Chief  Inspector-cum-Facilitator refuses to grant
permission to the site, construction or extension of a factory and licensing of a factory, the
applicant may within thirty days of the date of such refusal appeal to the Central Government
if the decision appealed from was of the State Government and to the State Government in
any other case.
Explanation.—A factory shall not be deemed to be extended within the meaning of
this section by reason only of the replacement of any plant or machinery or within such
limits as may be prescribed, of the addition of any plant or machinery if such replacement or
addition does not reduce the minimum clear space required for safe working around the plant
or machinery or adversely affect the environmental conditions from the evolution or emission
of steam, heat or dust or fumes injurious to health.
75. Where any premises or separate buildings are leased to different occupiers for use
as separate factories, the owner of the premises and occupiers of the factories utilising such
common facilities which include safety and fire prevention and protection, access, hygiene,
occupational health, ventilation, temperature, emergency preparedness and response,
canteens, shelter, rest rooms and crèches shall jointly and severally be responsible for
providing maintenance of such common facilities and services as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government.
76. (1) The appropriate  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare that all or any of the provisions of this Part shall apply to any place wherein a
manufacturing process is carried on with or without the aid of power or is so ordinarily
carried on irrespective of the number of workers working in the factory.
(2) After a place is so declared, it shall be deemed to be a factory for the purposes of
this Code, and the owner shall be deemed to be the occupier, and any person working
therein, a worker.
Prohibition
of
employment
of certain
persons in
certain
building or
other
construction
work.
Approval
and licensing
of factories.
Liability of
owner of
premises in
certain
circumstances.
Power to
apply Code
to certain
premises.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

45
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “owner” shall include a lessee or
mortgagee with possession of the premises.
77. The appropriate Government may by rules make the provisions relating to any
factory or class or description of factories in which manufacturing process or operation is
carried on which exposes any of the persons employed in it to a serious risk of bodily injury,
poisoning or disease, for—
(a) specifying the manufacturing process or operation and declaring it to be
dangerous;
(b) prohibiting or restricting the employment of pregnant women in the
manufacturing process or operation;
(c) the  periodical  medical examination before, or at any time during the
employment to ascertain the fitness of a worker or employee for such employment on
the cost of the occupier; and
(d)  welfare amenities, sanitary facilities, protective equipment and clothing and
any other requirement necessary for dangerous operations.
78. (1) The appropriate Government may, constitute one or more site appraisal
committees consisting of a chairman and other members, for such purpose as may be
prescribed including  to consider and to give recommendations on an application for grant
of permission for the initial location of a factory involving a hazardous process or for the
expansion of such factory.
(2) The site appraisal committee referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall make its
recommendation within a period of ninety days of the receipt of the application for any of the
purpose referred to in the said sub-section in such form, as may be prescribed.
79. (1) The occupier of every factory involving a hazardous process shall disclose in
the manner prescribed by the State Government all information regarding dangers, including
health hazards and the measures to overcome such hazards arising from the exposure to or
handling of the materials or substances in the manufacture, transportation, storage and
other processes, to the workers employed in the factory, the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator,
the local authority within whose jurisdiction the factory is situated and the general public in
the vicinity.
(2) The occupier shall, at the time of registering the factory involving a hazardous
process, lay down a detailed policy with respect to the health and safety of the workers
employed therein and intimate such policy to the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator and the
local authority and, thereafter, at such intervals as may be prescribed by the State Government,
inform the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator and the local authority of any change made in the
said policy.
(3) The information furnished under sub-section (1) shall include accurate information
as to the quantity, specifications and other characteristics of wastes and the manner of their
disposal.
(4) Every occupier shall, with the approval of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator,
draw up an on-site emergency plan and detailed disaster control measures for his factory
and make known to the workers employed therein and to the general public living in the
vicinity of the factory the safety measures required to be taken in the event of an accident
taking place.
(5) Every occupier of a factory shall, if such factory proposes to engage in a hazardous
process at any time after the commencement of this Code, within a period of thirty days
before the commencement of such process, inform the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator about
the nature and details of the process in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed
by the State Government.
Dangerous
operations.
Constitution
of site
appraisal
committee.
Compulsory
disclosure of
information
by occupier.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

46
(6) Where any occupier of a factory contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 5),
the licence issued under section 74 to such factory shall, notwithstanding any penalty
which may be imposed on the occupier of factory under the provisions of this Code, be liable
for cancellation.
(7) The occupier of a factory involving a hazardous process shall, with the previous
approval of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, lay down measures for the handling, usage,
transportation and storage of hazardous substances inside the factory premises and the
disposal of such substances outside the factory premises and publicise them in the manner
prescribed by the State Government among the workers and the general public living in the
vicinity.
80. Every occupier of a factory involving any hazardous process shall—
(a) maintain accurate and up-to-date health records or, as the case may be,
medical records, of the workers in the factory who are exposed to any chemical, toxic
or any other harmful substances which are manufactured, stored, handled or transported
and such records shall be accessible to the workers subject to such conditions as may
be prescribed by the State Government;
(b) appoint persons who possess qualifications and experience in handling
hazardous substances and are competent to supervise such handling within the factory
and to provide at the working place all the necessary facilities for protecting the
workers in the manner prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that where any question arises as to the qualifications and experience
of a person so appointed, the decision of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator shall be
final;
(c) provide for medical examination of every worker—
(i) before such worker is assigned to a job involving the handling of, or
working with, a hazardous substance; and
(ii)   while continuing in such job, and after he has ceased to work in such
job, at intervals not exceeding twelve months, in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
81. (1) The Central Government may, in the event of the occurrence of an extraordinary
situation involving a factory engaged in a hazardous process, direct the National Board to
inquire into the standards of health and safety observed in the factory with a view to finding
out the causes of any failure or neglect in the adoption of any measures or standards
prescribed by the State Government for the health and safety of the workers employed in the
factory or the general public affected, or likely to be affected, due to such failure or neglect
and for the prevention and recurrence of such extraordinary situations in future in such
factory or elsewhere.
(2) The recommendations of the National Board shall be advisory in the nature.
82. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that no standards of safety have
been prescribed in respect of a hazardous process or class of hazardous processes, or where
the standards so prescribed are inadequate, it may direct the Directorate General Occupational
Safety and Health formerly known as Directorate General of Factory Advice Service and
Labour Institutes or any Institution authorised in matters relating to standards of safety in
hazardous processes, to lay down emergency standards for enforcement of suitable standards
in respect of such hazardous processes.
(2) The emergency standards laid down under sub-section ( 1) shall, until they are
incorporated in the rules made under this Code, be enforceable and have the same effect as
if they had been incorporated in the rules made under this Code.
Specific
responsibility
of occupier
in relation to
hazardous
processes.
National
Board to
inquire into
certain
situations.
Emergency
standards.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

47
83. The maximum permissible limits of exposure of chemical and toxic substances in
manufacturing process in any factory shall be of the value as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
84. (1) Where the workers employed in any factory engaged in a hazardous process
have reasonable apprehension that there is a likelihood of imminent danger to their lives or
health due to any accident, they may, bring the same to the notice of the occupier, agent,
manager or any other person who is in-charge of the factory or the process concerned
directly or through their representatives in the Safety Committee and simultaneously bring
the same to the notice of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
(2) It shall be the duty of such occupier, agent, manager or the person in-charge of the
factory or process to take immediate remedial action if he is satisfied about the existence of
such imminent danger and send a report forthwith of the action taken to the nearest
Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
(3) If the occupier, agent, manager or the person in-charge referred to in sub-section (2)
is not satisfied about the existence of any imminent danger as apprehended by the workers,
he shall, nevertheless, refer the matter forthwith to the nearest Inspector-cum-Facilitator
whose decision on the question of the existence of such imminent danger shall be final.
85. The appropriate Government may prescribe the manner in which the appropriate
authority to whom the manager or occupier of the factory may make appeal against the order
of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator and the procedure for disposing of such appeals.
86. (1) The appropriate Government may prescribe the provisions defining the persons
who hold positions of supervision or management or employed in a confidential position in
a factory or empowering the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator to declare any person, other
than a person so defined, as a person holding position of supervision or management or
employed in a confidential position in a factory if, in the opinion of the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator, such person holds such position or is so employed and the
provisions of this Code, shall not apply to any person so defined or declared.
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, in respect of any
worker or class of workers in any establishment or class of establishments, for providing the
exemption, extent of exemption and conditions subject to which such exemption may be
given.
(3) In making rules under sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2), the appropriate
Government shall prescribe for any establishment or class of establishments relating to
overtime hours in respect of the following, namely:—
(i)  the total number of hours of work in any day;
(ii) the spread over in any one day;
(iii) the total number of hours of work in a week;
(iv) the total number of hours of overtime in a quarter; and
(v) or any other related aspect.
(4) The appropriate Government or the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator may, by order
in writing, exempt on such conditions as it may deem expedient, any or all of the adult
workers in any establishment or class of establishments and any exemption so granted shall
be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
Permissible
limits of
exposure of
chemicals
and toxic
substances.
Right of
workers to
warn about
imminent
danger.
Appeal
against the
order of
Inspector-
cum-
facilitator in
case of
factory.
Power to
make
exempting
rules and
order.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

48
Explanation.—“Quarter” means a period of three consecutive months beginning on
the 1st day of January, the 1st day of April, the 1st day of July or the 1st day of October.
CHAPTER XII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
87. Save as is otherwise expressly provided in this Code, if in, or in respect of, any
establishment, there is any contravention of the provisions of this Code or rules or regulations
or bye-laws or any of standards, made thereunder or of any order in writing given under the
Code or such rules or regulations or bye-laws or standards,  the employer of the establishment
shall be liable to penalty which shall not be less than two lakhs but  which may extend up to
three lakh rupees, and if the contravention is continued after the conviction, then, with
further fine which may extend to two thousand rupees for each day till the contravention is
so continued.
88. (1) Whoever wilfully—
(i) prevents or causes obstruction to a Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or an officer of the appropriate Government or a person
authorised to discharge any duty or to exercise any powers under this Code or the
rules or the regulations or the bye-laws made thereunder, from discharging such duty
or exercising such power; or
(ii) refuses entry to the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or person or public authority or experts referred to in
clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) of section 35 to any place where such Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator or such person or authority or
experts is entitled to enter; or
(iii) fails or refuses to produce any document which he is required to produce; or
(iv)  fails to comply with any requisition or order issued to him,
under this Code or the rules, regulations or bye-laws made thereunder then, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence punishable under sub-section ( 1) is
again convicted of an offence under the same provision, then, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with both.
89. (1) Any person, who is required under this Code or the rules or regulations or
bye-laws or order made thereunder, to—
(i) maintain any register or other document or to file returns, omits or fails to
maintain such register or document or to file such returns; or
(ii) produce any register or plan or record or report or any other document, omits
or fails to produce such register or plan or record or report or such other document,
then, he shall be liable to penalty which shall not be less than rupees fifty thousand but
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence punishable under sub-section ( 1) is
again convicted of an offence under the same provision, then, he shall be liable to penalty
which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees.
90. (1) Any person, who, save as permitted by or under this Code, contravenes, any—
(i) provision of this Code or of any rule, regulation or bye-laws; or
(ii) order prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of workers
including women, audio-visual worker and contract labour and employee below
eighteen years of age in case of mines,
General
penalty for
offences.
Punishment
for causing
obstruction
to Chief-
Inspector-
cum-
Facilitator or
Inspector-
cum-
Facilitator,
etc.
Penalty for
non-
maintenance
of register,
records and
non-filing of
returns, etc.
Punishment
for
contravention
of certain
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

49
then, he shall be  liable to penalty which shall not be less than fifty thousand but which may
extend to one lakh rupees.
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence punishable under sub-section ( 1) is
again convicted of an offence under the same provision, then, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
two lakh rupees, or with both.
91. (1) Whoever—
(a) produces false records or counterfeits or knowingly makes or produces or
uses a false statement, declaration or evidence regarding any document in connection
with compliance of any of the provisions of this Code or any rules, regulations or
bye-laws or any order made thereunder; or
(b) falsifies any plan or section, the maintenance of which is required by or
under this Code or produces before any authority such plan or section, knowing the
same to be false; or
(c) makes, gives or delivers knowingly a false plan, section, return, notice, record
or report containing a statement, entry or detail,
then, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence punishable under sub-section ( 1) is
again convicted of an offence under the same provision, then, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with both.
92. Any person who, without reasonable excuse, the burden to prove such excuse lies
upon him, omits to make or furnish in the prescribed form or manner or at, or within, the
prescribed time any plan, section, return, notice, register, record or report required by or
under any provision of this Code to be made or furnished, then he shall be liable to penalty
which shall not be less than rupees one lakh but which may extend to two lakh rupees.
93. (1) Whoever being the Chief  Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator
or any other person referred to in section 39 or section 116 discloses, contrary to the
provisions of that section, any such information as is referred to in that section without the
consent of the appropriate Government, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with
both.
(2) No court shall proceed to the trial of any offence under this section except with the
previous sanction of the appropriate Government.
94. Whoever, except in so far as it may be necessary for the purposes of a prosecution
for any offence punishable under this Code, publishes or discloses to any person the results
of an analysis, of a sample of substance used or intended to be used in any process under
this Code, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to six months
or with fine, which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.
95. (1) Whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of his duties specified under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 6 or clause ( d) of section 13 in so far as such
duty relates to hazardous processes or section 80,
shall, in respect of such failure or contravention, be punishable with an imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, and
in case the failure or contravention continues, with additional fine which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention
continues, after the conviction for the first such failure or contravention.
Punishment
for
falsification
of records,
etc.
Penalty for
omission to
furnish plans,
etc.
Punishment
for disclosure
of
information.
Penalty for
wrongfully
disclosing
results of
analysis.
Penalty for
contravention
of the
provisions of
duties
relating to
hazardous
processes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

50
(2) If the failure or contravention referred to in sub-section ( 1) continues beyond a
period of one year after the date of conviction, the offender shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with a fine of twenty lakh rupees,
or with both.
96. (1) If a person fails to comply with or contravenes any duties under this Code  or
the rules, regulations, or bye-laws or orders made thereunder and such non-compliance or
contravention has resulted in an accident or dangerous occurrences causing,—
(a) death, he shall be punishable with an imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years or with a fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees or with
both; or
(b) serious bodily injury to any person within the establishment, he shall be
punishable with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with a fine
which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but not exceeding four lakh rupees or
both:
Provided that while imposing the fine under this section, the court may direct
that a portion of the fine, which shall not be less than fifty per cent. thereof, shall be
given as compensation to the victim or to the legal heirs of the victim, in the case of his
death.
(2) Where a person having been convicted under sub-section ( 1) is again convicted
thereunder, shall be punishable with double the punishment provided under that sub-sections
for first conviction.
97. Whoever continues to work in contravention of any general or special
order issued under the provisions of section 38, shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees:
Provided that the court shall not impose a fine under this section which shall be less
than two lakh rupees without recording in the judgement the reasons for imposing such fine.
98. Whoever in contravention of the provisions of section 64, fails to appoint a
manager shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
99. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 13, except clause (d) thereof, if any employee
employed in a workplace contravenes any provision of this Code or any rules or orders made
thereunder, imposing any duty or liability on employee, he shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
(2) Where an employee is convicted of an offence punishable under sub-section ( 1)
the employer of the establishment shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence in respect
of that contravention, unless it is proved that he failed to take all reasonable measures for its
prevention.
100. No prosecution shall be instituted against any owner, agent or manager of a mine
for any offence under this Code except at the instance of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator
or of the District Magistrate or of Inspector-cum-Facilitator authorised in this behalf by
general or special order in writing by the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator:
Provided that the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or the District Magistrate or the
Inspector-cum-Facilitator as so authorised shall before instituting such prosecution satisfy
himself that the owner, agent or manager of a mine had failed to exercise due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of duties
relating to
safety
provisions
resulting in
an accident.
Special
provision for
contravention
of order under
section 38.
Failure to
appoint
manager in
mine.
Offences by
employees.
Prosecution
of owner,
agent or
manager of a
mine.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

51
Provided further that in respect of an offence committed in the course of the technical
direction and management of a mine, the District Magistrate shall not institute any
prosecution against an owner, agent or manager of a mine without the previous approval of
the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
101. Where the owner, agent or manager of the mine or employer or occupier of the
factory is charged with an offence punishable under this Code he shall be entitled, upon
complaint duly made by him and on giving to the prosecutor not less than three clear days’
notice in writing of his intention so to do, to have any other person whom he charges as the
actual offender brought before the Court at the time appointed for hearing the charge; and if,
after the commission of the offence has been proved, the owner, agent or manager of the
mine or occupier or manager of the factory, as the case may be, proves to the satisfaction of
the Court—
(a) that he has exercised due diligence to enforce the execution of this Code, and
(b) that the said other person committed the offence in question without his
knowledge, consent or connivance,
that other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to the like punishment
as if he was the owner, agent or manager of the mine or occupier or manager of the factory,
as the case may be, and the owner, agent or manager of a mine or the occupier or the manager
of the factory shall be, discharged from any liability under this Code in respect of such
offence:
Provided that in seeking to prove as aforesaid the owner, agent or manager of a mine
or the occupier or manager of the factory, as the case may be, may be examined on oath, and
his evidence and that of any witness whom he calls in his support, shall be subject to cross-
examination on behalf of the person he charges as the actual offender and by the prosecutor:
Provided further that, if the person charged as the actual offender by the owner, agent
or manager of the mine or occupier or manager of the factory as the case may be, cannot be
brought before the court at the time appointed for hearing the charge, the court shall adjourn
the hearing from time to time for a period not exceeding three months and if by the end of the
said period the person charged as the actual offender cannot still be brought before the
Court, the Court shall proceed to hear the charge against the owner, agent or manager of the
mine or occupier or manager of the factory, as the case may be, and shall, if the offence be
proved, convict him.
102. (1) Where an offence under this Code has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in-charge  of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where any offence under
this Code has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any  neglect on the part of
any director, manager, company secretary or other officer of the company, such director,
manager, company secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
Exemption
of owner,
agent or
manager of a
mine or
occupier of a
factory from
liability in
certain cases.
Offences by
companies,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

52
(b) “director”, means,—
(i) in relation to a firm, a partner thereof; or
(ii) the owner of a mine, being a firm or other association of individuals or
a company; or
(iii ) in case of association of individuals other than specified in
sub-clause (ii), any of its members.
103. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Code,
unless a complaint in respect thereof is made within six months of the date on which the
alleged commission of the offence came to the knowledge of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator
and a complaint is filed in this regard.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Code.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) in the case of a continuing offence, the period of limitation shall be computed
with reference to every point of time during which the offence continues;
(b) where for the performance of any act, time is granted or extended on an
application made by the employer of an establishment, the period of limitation shall be
computed from the date on which the time so granted or extended expired.
104. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 103, for the purpose of
imposing penalty under sections 87, 89, 90, 92, 99 and sub-section (3) of section 107, the
appropriate Government may appoint any officer not below the rank of Under Secretary to
the Government of India or an officer of equivalent rank in the State Government, as the case
may be, for holding enquiry in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) While holding the enquiry, the officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall have the
power to summon and enforce attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any document, which in the
opinion of  such officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the enquiry and
if, on such enquiry, he is satisfied that the person has committed any offence under the
provisions referred to in sub-section ( 1), he may impose such penalty as he thinks fit in
accordance with such provisions.
105. For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction on any court in relation to an offence
under this Code or the rules, regulation or bye-laws made thereunder in connection with an
establishment, the place where the establishment is for the time being situate, shall be
deemed to be the place where such offence has been committed.
106. (1) Where the employer of a mine or a factory or a dock is convicted of an offence
punishable under this Code, the court may, in addition to awarding him any punishment, by
order in writing, require him within a period specified in the order (which may be extended by
the court from time to time on application made in this behalf) to take such measures as may
be specified in the order for remedying the matters in respect of which the offence was
committed.
(2) Where an order is made under sub-section ( 1), the employer of the mine or the
factory shall not be liable under this Code in respect of the continuance of the offence
during the period or extended period, if any, but if on the expiry of such period or extended
period the order of the Court has not been fully complied with, employer shall be deemed to
have committed a further offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for
every day after such expiry on which the order has not been complied with, or with both.
Limitation
of
prosecution
and
cognizance
of offence.
Power of
officers of
appropriate
Government
to impose
penalty in
certain cases.
Jurisdiction
of a court for
entertaining
proceedings,
etc., for
offence.
Power of
court to
make orders.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

53
107. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
any offence punishable under this Code, not being an offence punishable with imprisonment
only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, on an application of the accused, either
before or after the holding of the enquiry under section 104, be compoundable for a sum of
fifty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for such offence in such manner as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government, by such Gazetted Officer, as the said Government
may, by notification,  specify in this behalf:
Provided that the composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of
an acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has been compounded:
Provided further that where the composition of any offence is made after commencement
of the inquiry under section 104 such composition shall be brought by the officer in writing,
to the notice of the Officers referred to in section 104 before whom the inquiry is pending and
on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, the person against whom the
offence is so compounded shall be discharged.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to an offence committed by a
person for the second or subsequent time within a period of five years from the date of
commission of such offence—
(a) which was earlier compounded; or
(b) for which such person was earlier convicted.
(3) Any person who fails to comply with an order made by the officer referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be liable to pay a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of the maximum
fine provided for the offence, in addition to such fine.
CHAPTER XIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
108. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any power exercisable
by it under this Code or rules made thereunder shall, in relation to such matters and subject
to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercisable also by the
State Government or by such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government as
may be specified in the said notification.
109. (1) When any offence is committed under this Code involving an issue of a
certain age of a person and such person is in the opinion of the court prima facie under such
age, the burden shall be on the accused to prove that such person is not under such age.
(2) The prescribed medical authority shall, while examining a worker for issuing the
certificate of age for the purposes of this Code, take into account the Aadhaar card of the
worker, and in the absence thereof, the date of birth certificate from school or the matriculation
or equivalent certificate from the concerned examination Board of the worker, if available,
and in the absence thereof, the birth certificate of the worker given by a corporation or a
municipal authority or a Panchayat, and only in the absence of any of the methods specified
in this sub-section, the age shall be determined by such medical authority through an
ossification test or any other latest medical age determination test.
110. In any proceeding for an offence for the contravention of any provision of this
Code or regulations or bye-laws or rules made thereunder consisting of a failure to comply
with a duty or requirement to do something, it shall be for the person who is alleged to have
failed to comply with such duty or requirement, to prove that it was not reasonably practicable
or all practicable measures were taken to satisfy the duty or requirement.
111. (1) Any person desirous of obtaining common licence in respect of a factory, for
engaging contract worker and industrial premises for beedi and cigar work under this Code
shall make an application to such authority as may be designated by the appropriate
Government by notification.
Compounding
of offences.
2 of 1974.
Delegation
of powers.
Onus as to
age.
Onus of
proving
limits of
what is
practicable,
etc.
Common
licence for
contractor,
factories and
to industrial
premises and
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

54
(2) The application referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in such form and filed in such
manner and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the designated authority shall
refer the same to the concerned licensing officers for his report within a period of thirty days
and the provisions of this Code relating to his area shall apply accordingly.
(4) Where the licensing authority agrees to grant licence in respect of a factory, for
engaging contract worker and industrial premises for beedi and cigar work, the designated
authority shall issue a licence within sixty days of the receipt of application:
Provided that where no report as referred to in sub-section (2) is received within the
period specified therein it shall be presumed that the concerned licensing officer has no
objection to the grant of the same:
Provided further that where a licensing officer opposes to grant of such licence, the
applicant may be granted the licence in respect of rest of the areas specified in his application.
(5) Where all but one of the licensing officers oppose to grant the licence, the application
for common licence shall be deemed to have been rejected and the applicant shall apply to
respective licensing officer under the provisions of this Code.
(6) any person aggrieved, by any order passed under this section, may file an appeal
in such form, accompanied with such fee to such appellate authority as may be prescribed
by the Central Government; and
(7) the rules relating to this section shall be made by the Central Government.
112. (1) The provisions of this Code shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in the terms
of any award, agreement or contract of service whether made before or after the
commencement of this Code:
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwise
an employee is entitled to benefits in respect of any matters which are more favourable to
him than those to which he will be entitled to under this Code, the employee shall continue
to get the former notwithstanding that he receives benefits in respect of other matters under
this Code.
(2) Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed as precluding any employee
from entering into an agreement with an employer for granting him rights or privileges in
respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be
entitled under this Code.
113. (1) The appropriate Government may, in the event of the occurrence of an accident
in an establishment which has caused or had the potentiality to cause serious danger to
employees and other persons within, and in the vicinity of the workplace or whether immediate
or delayed, or any occupational disease as specified in the third Schedule, which has been
or is suspected to have been contracted, in epidemic proportions, appoint one or more
persons possessing legal or special knowledge to act as assessors or competent persons in
such inquiry in order to inquire into the causes of the accident and disease, fix responsibilities
and suggest a plan of action for the future to prevent such accidents or diseases and submit
the report to the appropriate Government.
(2) The appropriate Government may direct a Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or any
other officer under the control of the Government concerned or appoint a committee to
undertake a survey in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government on
the situation relating to safety or health at work at any workplace or class of workplaces or
into the effect of work activity on the health of the employees and other persons within and
in the vicinity of the workplace.
Effect of law
and
agreements
inconsistent
with this
Code.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to direct
inquiry in
certain cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

55
(3) The officer directed or committee appointed under sub-section ( 2) to hold an
inquiry, shall have the powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for
the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of
documents and material objects, and may also so far as may be necessary for the purposes
of the inquiry, exercise such powers of an Inspector-cum-Facilitator under this Code as may
be necessary.
(4) The Central Government may make rules for regulating the procedure of inquiries
and other related matters under this section.
114. The appropriate Government may, if it thinks fit, cause to be published any report
submitted to it by the National Board or State Advisory Board or any extracts from any
report submitted to it under this Code.
115. The Central Government may give directions to a State Government for the
implementation of the provisions of this Code.
116. (1) No person shall in respect of the establishment, disclose any information
relating to any manufacturing or commercial business or any working process which may
come to his knowledge in the course of his official duties.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to any disclosure of information made with
the previous consent in writing of the owner of the business or process or for the purposes
of any legal proceeding (including adjudication or arbitration), pursuant to any of the relevant
statutory provisions or of any criminal proceeding or proceeding before a tribunal under this
Code which may be taken, whether pursuant to any of the relevant statutory provisions or
otherwise, or for the purposes of any report of any such proceedings.
117. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter to which any provision
of this Code applies and no injunction shall be granted by any civil court in respect of
anything which is done or intended to be done by or under this Code.
118. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Code or
any rule or regulation or bye-laws order made thereunder.
(2) No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, any
Board or Committees constituted under this Code or any member of such Board or any
officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person authorised by the
Government or any Board or committee, for any damage caused or likely to be caused by
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Code or
any rule or regulation or bye-laws order made or issued thereunder.
119. The appropriate Government may, by notification and subject to such
conditions and restrictions, if any, and for such period or periods as may be specified
in the notification, direct that all or any of the provisions of this Code or the rules or the
regulations made thereunder shall not apply to or in relation to any establishment or
class of establishments.
120. In case of a public emergency, the appropriate Government may, by notification,
exempt any workplace or work activity or class thereof from all or any of the provisions of
this Code for such period and subject to such conditions as it may think fit:
Provided that no such notification shall be made for a period exceeding three months
at a time.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section ‘public emergency’ means a grave
emergency whereby the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened,
whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance.
Publication
of reports.
Powers of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
General
restriction
on disclosure
of
information.
Jurisdiction
of civil
courts barred.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Power to
exempt in
special cases.
Power to
exempt
during public
emergency.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

56
121. The appropriate Government may exempt, subject to such conditions as it may
consider necessary, any workshop or workplace where a manufacturing process is carried
on and which is attached to a public institution maintained for the purposes of education,
training, research or information, from all or any of the provisions of this Code:
Provided that no such exemption shall be granted from the provisions relating to
hours of work and holidays unless the persons having the control of the institution submit,
for the approval of the appropriate Government, a scheme of the regulation of the hours of
employment, intervals for meals, and holidays of  the persons employed in or attending the
institution or who are inmates for the institution, and the appropriate Government is satisfied
that the provisions of the scheme are not less favourable than the corresponding provisions
of this Code.
122. Every person required to give any notice or to furnish any information to any
authority in relation to the provisions of this Code shall be legally bound to do so within the
meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code.
123. The Central Government may, by notification, amend any Schedule by way of
addition, alteration or omission therein and on any such notification being issued, the
Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
124. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Code, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date
on which this Code comes into force.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
125. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous
publication and by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Code.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) income from the sources under Explanation to clause (w) of sub-section (1)
of section 2;
(b) to prescribe the substance as hazardous substance under clause ( z) of
sub-section (1) of section 2;
(c) the late fee under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 3;
(d) the manner of submitting application under sub-section (2) of section 3 and
the form of such application and the particulars to be contained therein and the fees to
be accompanied therewith;
(e) the form and manner of sending the notice and the authority to whom the
notice shall be sent and the manner of intimating the authority under sub-section (1)
of section 5;
(f) test free of cost to such employees of such age or such class of establishments
under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(g) the information to be included in the letter of appointment under clause (f) of
sub-section (1) of section 6;
Power to
exempt
public
institution.
Persons
required to
give notice,
etc., legally
bound to do
so.
Power of
Central
Government
to amend
Schedule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to make
rules.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

57
(h) the nature of bodily injury and the form of notice and the time within which
the notice shall be sent under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(i) nature of dangerous occurrence and the form of notice, the time within which
and the authority to which notice shall be given under section 11;
(j) the form of notice related to certain diseases and the time within which the
notice shall be sent to the authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 12;
(k) the form and manner of the report and the time within which such report shall
be sent to the office of the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator under sub-section ( 2) of
section 12;
(l) such other duties of employees under clause (g) of section 13;
(m) the manner of constituting a safety committee and the manner and the
purpose for choosing the representative of the employer and the workers in the Safety
Committee under sub-section (1) of section 22;
(n) the qualifications, duties and number of safety officers under sub-section (2)
of section 22;
(o) condition for exemption of workers from weekly and compensatory holidays
under sub-section (2) of section 26;
(p) circumstances for exemption from restriction on double employment in factory
and mine under section 30;
(q) the form and manner of display of such notice and the manner in which such
notice is sent to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator under sub-section (2) of section 31;
(r) the form of registers and particulars of workers under clause (a) of section 33;
(s) the manner and form of displaying notices under clause (b) of section 33;
(t) the manner of filing return to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator under clause (d)
of section 33;
(u) the manner of conducting inspection including web based inspection under
sub-section (2) of section 34;
(v) the qualification and experience of Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator under
sub-section (3) of section 34;
(w) the manner of taking samples of any article or substance found in any
premises under clause (x) of sub-section (1) of section 35;
(x) the powers and duties of Inspector-cum-Facilitator under clause ( xiv) of
sub-section (1) of section 35;
(y) the qualification, experience, duties and responsibilities of experts to be
empaneled under section 37;
(z) the manner of providing alternative employment under sub-clause ( d) of
clause (A) of sub-section (1) of section 38;
(za) the qualification for the appointment of medical practitioner and other
establishment under sub-section (1) of section 42;
(zb) other establishment and the dangerous occupation or processes under
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 42;
(zc) medical supervision and any other establishment in respect of illness under
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 42;
(zd) examination and certification of adolescent for his fitness for employment
and any other establishment under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 42;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

58
(ze) any other condition to be observed by the employer under section 43;
(zf) conditions as to hours of work, fixation of wages and other essential amenities
in respect of contract labour under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 47;
(zg) the particulars for great of licence under sub-section (1) of section 48;
(zh) the procedure for grant of  licence under sub-section (2) of section 48;
(zi) manner of applying for the renewal of licence and the manner of renewal of
licence under sub-section (3) of section 48;
(zj) information regarding work order for supply or engagement of contract
labour under sub-section (1) of section 50;
(zk) to suspend or cancel the licence in such manner for contract labour under
sub-section (2) of section 50;
(zl) the period before which the wages shall be paid under sub-section ( 1) of
section 55;
(zm) the manner of certifying the amounts paid as wages under proviso to
sub-section (2) of section 55 ;
(zn) the format of issuing experience certificate under section 56;
(zo) the conditions relating to number of employees, depth of excavation and
other matter under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 65;
(zp) the conditions relating to workings, opencast workings and explosives
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 65;
(zq) any other common facilities for liability of owner of premises under
section 75;
(zr) from of application for establishment of factory involving hazardous process
under sub-section (2) of section 78;
(zs) the appellate authority against the order of Inspector-cum-Facilitator of
factory under section 85;
(zt) for exemption, extent of exemption and conditions subject to which such
exemption in respect of any worker or class of worker in an establishment or class of
establishments under sub-section (2) of section 86;
(zu) rules selecting to overtime hours under sub-section (3) of section 86;
(zv) the manner of holding inquiry by the adjudicating officer under
sub-section (1
) of section 104;
(zw) the manner of compounding of offence under sub-section ( 1) of
section 106;
(zx) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under this
Code.
126. (1) The Central Government may, subject to the conditions of previous publication
and by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Code.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the authority under sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( zo) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 2;
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

59
(b) to define the occupier in case of owner of dock under proviso of sub-clause
(iii) of clause (zo) of sub-section (1) of section 2;
(c) form of certificate of registration, the time within which and the conditions
subject to which such certificates shall be issued under sub-section ( 3) of section 3;
(d) other particulars and form under sub-section (4) of section 3;
(e) the manner of informing closing of establishment and certifying payment to
the registering officer under sub-section (5) of section 3;
(f) procedure of National Board and the officers and staff thereof under
sub-section (3) of section 16;
(g) the number of members, qualifications and terms and conditions of service
under sub-section (4) of section 16;
(h) the number of members of technical committees or advisory committees and
their qualifications under sub-section (5) of section 16;
(i) health and working conditions under sub-section (1) of section 23;
(j) welfare facilities for the workers under sub-section (1) of section 24;
(k) to define “running time” in relation to a working day under Explanation (a)
of sub-section (1) of section 25;
(l) the hours of work for working journalist under sub-section (2) of section 25;
(m) other kinds of leave under clause (i) of sub-section (3) of section 25;
(n) the maximum period of accumulating leave under clause ( ii) of
sub-section (3) of section 25;
(o) the limit up to which the earned leave may be availed of at a time and the
reasons for which such leave may be exceeding under clause (iii) of sub-section (3) of
section 25;
(p) conditions and restrictions for entitlement of cash compensation under
clause (iv) of sub-section (3) of section 25;
(q) powers and duties of District Magistrate under section 36;
(r) requisite qualifications or criteria under sub-section (1) of  section 47;
(s) period of renewal of licence under sub-section (2) of  section 47;
(t) specify the name and such other particulars under clause (b) of sub-section (2)
section of 63;
(u) authority to whom the information relating to audio-visual programme by the
producer under sub-section (3) of  section 63;
(v) the matter which may be save and the qualifications of sole manager under
sub-section (1) of section 64;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

60
(w) to declare the mines and part threeof for the purpose of applicability of the
provisions of this Code under sub-section (2) of section 65;
(x) for the grant of common lincence under section 111;
(y) qualification under clause (g) of section 128.
(z) the language of the bye-laws under sub-section (7) of section 131;
127. (1) The State Government may, subject to the conditions of previous publication
and by notification, make rules for the matters relating to the factories, plantation and any
other matter for the carrying out the provision of this Code by the State Government.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, procedure and other matters relating to State Advisory
Board under sub-section (2) of section 17;
(b) the number of members and their qualifications under sub-section ( 3) of
section 17;
(c) the form of application and the payment of fees under sub-section ( 2) of
section 69;
(d) the manner of preparing the plan of the place of premises under sub-section (3)
of section 69;
(e) other matter under clause (e) of sub-section (4) of section 69;
(f) fees under sub-section (6) of section 69;
(g) the time of filing appeal, fees and the appellate authority under section 70;
(h) the form of application by the employee under sub-section (1) of section 71;
(i) form of maintaining the record of the work under sub-section ( 2) of
section 71;
(j) rules for manner and approval, licensing of factories under sub-section ( 1)
of section 74;
(k) mode of submission of application under sub-section (2) of section 74;
(l) limit for replacement of any plant or machinery under Explanation to
section 74;
(m) the manner of disclosing information by occupier of a factory under
sub-section (
1) of section 79;
(n) the interval of informing Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator and the local
authority about the policy relating to hazardous process of a factory under
sub-section (2) of section 79;
(o) the form and manner of informing Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator under
sub-section (5) of section 79;
Power of
State
Government
to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

61
(p) the manner of publicising among the workers and the general public living in
the vicinity of the factory including a hazardous process under sub-section ( 7) of
section 79;
(q) maintain health and medical records of the workers and the conditions for
accessibility by workers engaged in hazardous process under clause (a) of section 80;
(r) the qualification and experience of persons handling hazardous substance
and manner of providing necessary facilities for protecting the workers under clause (b)
of section 80;
(s) the manner of providing medical examination of a worker under sub-clause (ii)
of clause (c) of section 80;
(t) the maximum permissible limit of exposure of chemical and toxic substances
in manufacturing process in any factory under section 83;
(u) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification and in consultation with the State
Government, make rules for the purposes of bringing uniformity, throughout the country, in
occupational safety, health or such other matters as it considers necessary in respect of
factories.
128. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
regulations consistent with this Code for all or any of the following purposes, namely:—
(a) for prescribing the qualifications required for appointment as Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator;
(b) for prescribing and regulating the duties and powers of the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator and of Inspector-cum-Facilitators in regard to the inspection
of mines under this Code;
(c) for prescribing the duties of owners, agents and managers of mines and of
persons acting under them, and for prescribing the qualifications (including age) of
agents and managers of mines and of persons acting under them;
(d) for requiring facilities to be provided for enabling managers of mines and
other persons acting under them to efficiently discharge their duties;
(e) for regulating the manner of ascertaining, by examination or otherwise, the
qualifications of managers of mines and persons acting under them, and the granting
and renewal of certificates of competency;
(f) for fixing the fees, if any, to be paid in respect of such examinations and of the
grant and renewal of such certificates;
(g) for determining the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to
which it shall be lawful for more mines than one to be under a single manager, or for
any mines to be under a manager not having the prescribed qualifications;
(h) for providing for inquiries to be made under this Code, including any inquiry
relating to misconduct or incompetence on the part of any person holding a certificate
under this Code and for the suspension or cancellation of any such certificate and for
providing, wherever necessary, that the person appointed to hold an inquiry shall
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for the
purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of
documents and material objects;
Power of
Central
Government
to make
regulations in
relation to
mines and
dock work.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

62
(i) for regulating, subject to the provisions of the Indian Explosives Act, 1884,
and of any rules made thereunder, the storage, conveyance and use of explosives;
(j) for prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of women in mines or
in any class of mines or on particular kinds of labour which are attended by danger to
the life, safety or health of such persons and for limiting the weight of any single load
that may be carried by any such person;
(k) for providing for the safety of the persons employed in a mine, their means of
entrance there into and exit there from, the number of shafts or outlets to be furnished,
and the fencing of shafts, pits, outlets, pathways and subsidences;
(l) for prohibiting the employment in a mine either as manager or in any other
specified capacity of any person except persons paid by the owner of the mine and
directly answerable to the owner or manager of the mine;
(m) for providing for the safety of the roads and working places in mines, including
the sitting, maintenance and extraction or reduction of pillars or blocks of minerals and
the maintenance of sufficient barriers between mine and mine;
(n) for the inspection of workings and sealed off fire-areas in a mine, and for the
restriction of workings in the vicinity of the sea or any lake or river or any other body
of surface water, whether natural or artificial, or of any public road or building, and for
requiring due precaution to be taken against the irruption or inrush of water or other
liquid matter into, outbreak of fire in or premature collapse of, any workings;
(o) for providing for the ventilation of mines and the action to be taken in
respect of dust, fire, and inflammable and noxious gases, including precautions against
spontaneous combustion, underground fire and coal dust;
(p) for regulating, subject to the provisions of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910,
and of any rules made thereunder, the generation, storage, transformation, transmission
and use of electricity in mines and for providing for the care and the regulation of the
use of all electrical apparatus and electrical cables in mines and of all other machinery
and plant therein;
(q) for regulating the use of machinery in mines, for providing for the safety of
persons employed on or near such machinery and on haulage roads and for restricting
the use of certain classes of locomotives underground;
(r) for providing for proper lighting of mines and regulating the use of safety
lamps therein and for the search of persons entering a mine in which safety lamps are
in use;
(s) for providing against explosions or ignitions of inflammable gas or dust or
irruptions of or accumulations of water in mines and against danger arising there from
and for prohibiting, restricting or regulating the extraction of minerals in circumstances
likely to result in the premature collapse of workings or to result in or to aggravate the
collapse of workings or irruptions of water or ignitions in mines;
(t) for specifying type of accidents for the purposes of notice under section 10
and for specifying the notices of accidents and dangerous occurrences, and the notices,
reports and returns of mineral output, persons employed and other matters provided
for by regulations, to be furnished by owners, agents and managers of mines, and for
prescribing the forms of such notices, returns and reports, the persons and authorities
to whom they are to be furnished, the particulars to be contained in them, and the time
within which they are to be submitted;
(u) for requiring owners, agents and managers of mines to have fixed boundaries
for the mines, for prescribing the plans and sections and field notes connected therewith
to be kept by them and the manner and places in which such plans, sections and field
4 of 1884.
9 of 1910.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

63
notes are to be kept for purposes of record and for the submission of copies thereof to
the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator, and for requiring the making of fresh surveys and
plans by them, and in the event of non-compliance, for having the survey made and
plans prepared through any other agency and for the recovery of expenses thereof in
the same manner as an arrear of land revenue;
(v) for regulating the procedure on the occurrence of accidents or accidental
explosions or ignitions in or about, mines for dealing effectively with the situation.
(w) for specifying the form of, and the particulars to be contained in, the notice
to be given by the owner, agent or manager of a mine under section 5;
(x) for specifying the notice to be given by the owner, agent or manager of a
mine before mining operations are commenced at or extended to any point within
forty-five meters of any railway subject to the provisions of the Indian Railways Act,
1890 or of any public roads or other works as the case may be, which are maintained by
the Government or any local authority;
(y) for the protection from injury, in respect of any mine when the workings are
discontinued, of property vested in the Government or any local authority or railway
company as defined in the Indian Railways Act, 1890;
(z) for requiring protective works to be constructed by the owner, agent or
manager of a mine before the mine is closed, and in the event of non-compliance, for
getting such works executed by any other agency and for recovering the expenses
thereof from such owner in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue;
(za) for requiring the fencing of any mine or part of a mine or any quarry, incline,
shaft, pit or outlet, whether the same is being worked or not, or any dangerous or
prohibited area, subsidence, haulage, tramline or pathway, where such fencing is
necessary for the protection of the public;
(zb) for specifying the number of officials to be appointed;
(zc) for specifying the qualifications of the officials to be appointed;
(zd) for specifying the qualifications and experience of the agents;
(ze) for specifying the period during which the agent shall be resident in India;
(zf) for specifying duties and responsibilities of suppliers, designers, importer
and contractors for safety in  mines;
(zg) for requiring the owners, agents and managers of mines to formulate, maintain
and enforce safety management plan in their mines;
(zh) for requiring the managers of mines to formulate and implement codes of
practice or standard operating procedure in respect of any machinery or operation
used in the mines;
(zi) for providing for the safety in opencast mines and associated operations
and machineries used therein;
(zj) for regulating the extraction of methane from working or abandoned coal
mines or from virgin coal seam;
(zk) for specifying the forms of returns which shall be filed by the establishments
or the class of establishments under this code;
(zl) for the general requirement relating to the construction, equipping and
maintenance for the safety of working places on shore, ship, dock, structure and other
places at which any dock work is carried on;
9 of 1890.
9 of 1890.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

64
(zm) for the safety of any regular approaches over a dock, wharf, quay or other
places which dock workers have to use for going for work and for fencing of such
places and projects;
(zn) for the efficient lighting of all areas of dock, ship, any other vessel, dock
structure or working places where any dock work is carried on and of all approaches to
such places to which dock workers are required to go in the course of their employment;
(zo) providing and maintaining adequate ventilation and suitable temperature in
every building or an enclosure on ship where dock workers are employed;
(zp) providing for the fire and explosion prevention and protection;
(zq) providing for safe means of access to ships, holds, stagings, equipment,
lifting appliances and other working places;
(zr) providing for the safety of workers engaged in the opening and closing of
hatches, protection of ways and other openings in the docks which may be dangerous
to them;
(zs) providing for the safety of workers on docks from the risk of falling overboard
being struck by cargo during loading or unloading operations;
(zt) providing for the construction, maintenance and use of lifting and other
cargo handling appliances and services, such as, pallets containing or supporting
loads and provision of safety appliances on them, if necessary;
(zu) providing for the safety of workers employed in freight container terminals
or other terminals for handling unitised cargo;
(zv) providing for the fencing of machinery, live electrical conductors, steam
pipes and hazardous openings;
(zw) providing for the construction, maintenance and use of staging;
(zx) providing for the rigging and use of ship’s derricks;
(zy) providing for the testing, examination, inspection and certification as
appropriate of loose gears including chains and ropes and of slings and other liftings
devices used in the dock work;
(zz) providing for the precautions to be taken to facilitate escape of workers
when employed in a hold, bin, hopper or the like or between decks of a hold while
handling coal or other bulk cargo;
(zza) providing for the measures to be taken in order to prevent dangerous
methods of working in the stacking, unstacking, stowing and unstowing of cargo or
handling in connection therewith;
(zzb) providing for the handling of dangerous substances and working in
dangerous or harmful environments and the precautions to be taken in connection
with such handling;
(zzc) providing for the work in connection with cleaning, chipping, painting,
operations and precautions to be taken in connection with such work;
(zzd) providing for the employment of persons for handling cargo, handling
appliances, power operated hatch covers or other power operated ship’s equipment,
such as, door in the hull of a ship, ramp, retraceable car deck or similar equipment or to
give signals to the drivers of such machinery;
(zze) providing for the transport  of dock workers;
(zzf) providing for the precautions to be taken to protect dock workers against
harmful effects of excessive noise, vibrations and air pollution at the work place;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

65
(zzg) providing for protective equipment or protective clothing;
(zzh) providing for the sanitary, washing and welfare facilities;
(zzi) providing for—
(i) the medical supervision;
(ii) the ambulance rooms, first aid and rescue facilities and arrangements
for the removal of dock workers to the nearest place of treatment;
(iii) the safety and health organisation; and
(iv) the training of dock workers and for the obligations and rights of the
dock workers for their safety and health at the work place;
(zzj) providing for the investigation of occupational accidents, dangerous
occurrences and diseases, specifying such diseases and the forms of notices, the
persons and authorities to whom, they are to be furnished, the particulars to be contained
in them and the time within which they are to be submitted;
(zzk) providing for the submission of statement of accidents, man-days lost,
volume of cargo handled and particulars of dock workers; and
(zzl) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
129. The power to make rules, regulations, and bye-laws under this Code shall be
subject to the condition of the previous publication of the same being made, in the following
manner, namely:—
(a) the date to be specified after a draft of rule, regulation, standard and bye-
laws proposed to be made will be taken under consideration, shall not be less than
forty-five days from the date on which the draft of the proposed rule, regulation,
standard and bye-laws is published for general information;
(b) rule, regulation, standard and bye-laws shall be published in the Official
Gazette and, on such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in this Code.
130. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 130, regulations under section 129
may be made without previous publication and without reference to the National Occupational
Safety Health Advisory Board constituted under sub-section (1) of section 16 if the Central
Government is satisfied that for the prevention of apprehended danger or the speedy remedy
of conditions likely to cause danger it is necessary in making such regulations to dispense
with the delay that would result from such publication and reference:
Provided that any regulations so made shall be sent to the said National Occupational
Safety Health Advisory Board for information and shall not remain in force for more than one
year from the making thereof.
131. (1) The employer of a mine may, and shall, if called upon to do so by the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator, to frame and submit to the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator a draft of such by-laws, not being
inconsistent with this Code or any regulations or rules for the time being in force, governing
the use of any particular machinery or the adoption of a particular method of working in the
mine, as the employer may deem necessary to prevent accidents and provide for the safety,
convenience and discipline of the persons employed in the mine.
(2) If any such Employer—
(a) fails to submit within two months a draft of bye-laws after being called upon
to do so by the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator, or
(b) submits a draft of bye-laws which is not in the opinion of the Chief Inspector-
cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator sufficient, the Chief Inspector-cum-
Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator may—
Prior
publication
of rules, etc.
Power to
make
regulation
without
previous
publication.
Bye-laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

66
(i) propose a draft of such bye-laws as appear to him to be sufficient; or
(ii) propose such amendments in any draft submitted to him by the
employer as will, in his opinion, render it sufficient, and shall send such draft
bye-laws or draft amendments to the employer for consideration.
(3) If within a period of two months from the date on which any draft bye-laws or draft
amendments are sent by the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator to
the employer under the provisions of sub-section (2), the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or
Inspector-cum-Facilitator and the employer are unable to agree as to the terms of the
bye-laws to be made under sub-section (1), the Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-
cum-Facilitator shall refer the draft bye-laws for settlement to the technical Committee
constituted under sub-section (5) of section 16 in respect of mines.
(4) When such draft bye-laws have been agreed to by the employer and the Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator, or, when they are unable to agree,
have been settled by the Committee constituted under sub-section ( 5) of section 16 in
respect of mines, a copy of the draft bye-laws shall be sent by the Chief Inspector-cum-
Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator to the Central Government for approval:
Provided that the Central Government may make such modification of the draft bye-
laws as it thinks fit:
Provided further that before the Central Government approves the draft bye-laws,
whether with or without modifications, there shall be published, in such manner as the
Central Government may think best adapted for informing the persons affected, a notice of
the proposal to make the bye-laws and of the place where copies of the draft bye-laws may
be obtained, and of the time (which shall not be less than thirty days) within which any
objections with reference to the draft by-laws, made by or on behalf of persons affected
should be sent to the Central Government.
(5) Every objection under second proviso to sub-section ( 4) shall be in writing and
shall state—
(i) the specific grounds of objections, and
(ii) the omissions, additions or modifications asked for.
(6) The Central Government shall consider any objection made within the required
time by or on behalf of persons appearing to it to be affected, and may approve the bye-laws
either in the form in which they were published or after making such amendments thereto as
it thinks fit.
(7) The bye-laws, when so approved by the Central Government, shall have effect as
if enacted in this Code, and the employer  shall cause a copy of the bye-laws, in English and
in such other language or languages as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be
posted up in some conspicuous place at or near the mine, where the bye-laws may be
conveniently read or seen by the persons employed; and, as often as the same become
defaced, obliterated or destroyed, shall cause them to be renewed with all reasonable dispatch.
(8) The Central Government may, by order in writing rescind, in whole or in part, any
bye-laws so made, and thereupon such bye-law shall cease to have effect accordingly.
132. Every  standard, rule, regulation and bye-laws made by the Central Government
under this Code shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the regulation, rule or bye-law or both Houses agree that the
regulation, rule or bye-law should not be made, the regulation, rule or bye-law shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
Laying of
regulations,
rules and
bye-laws,
etc., before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

67
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that regulation, rule or bye-law, as the case may be.
133.  Every rule made by the State Government under this Code shall be laid, as soon
as may be, after it is made, before the State Legislative.
134. (1) The following Acts shall stand repealed with effect from such date as may be
notified in this behalf, namely:—
(a) The Factories Act, 1948;
(b) The Mines Act, 1952;
(c) The Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 1986;
(d) The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996;
(e) The Plantations Labour Act, 1951;
(f) The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970;
(g) The Inter-State Migrant workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions
of  Service) Act, 1979;
(h) The Working Journalist and other News Paper Employees (Conditions of
Service and Miscellaneous Provision) Act, 1955;
(i) The Working Journalist (Fixation of rates of wages) Act, 1958;
(j) The Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961;
(k) The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976;
(l) The Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966;
(m) The Cine Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers Act, 1981.
(2) Every Chief Inspector, Additional Chief Inspector, Joint Chief Inspector, Deputy
Chief Inspector, Inspector and every other officer appointed for the purposes under any of
the provisions of the enactments repealed by this Code, shall be deemed to have been
appointed under this Code for such purposes under this Code.
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
enactments so repealed (including any rule, regulation, bye-laws, notification, nomination,
appointment, order or direction made thereunder) shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Code and shall be in force to the extent
they are not contrary to the provisions of this Code till they are repealed by the Central
Government.
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), provisions of section 6 of
the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply to the repeal of such enactment.
Laying of
rules made by
State
Government.
Repeal and
savings.
63 of 1948.
35 of 1952.
54 of 1986.
27 of 1996.
69 of 1951.
37 of 1970.
30 of 1979.
45 of 1955.
29 of 1958.
11 of 1976.
32 of 1966.
50 of 1981.
10 of 1897.
27 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

68
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 2(y)]
List of Industries involving hazardous processes
1. Ferrous Metallurgical Industries
-Integrated Iron and Steel
-Ferro-alloys
-Special Steels
2. Non-ferrous metallurgical Industries
-Primary Metallurgical Industries, namely, zinc, lead, copper, manganese and
aluminium
3. Foundries (ferrous and non-ferrous)
-Castings and forgings including cleaning or smoothening/roughening by
sand and shot blasting
4. Coal (including coke) industries
-Coal, Lignite, Coke, etc.
-Fuel Gases (including Coal Gas, Producer Gas, Water Gas)
5. Power Generating Industries
6. Pulp and paper (including paper products) industries
7. Fertiliser Industries
-Nitrogenous
-Phosphatic
-Mixed
8. Cement Industries
-Portland Cement (including slag cement, puzzolona cement and their products)
9. Petroleum Industries
-Oil Refining
-Lubricating Oils and Greases
10. Petro-chemical Industries
11. Drugs and Pharmaceutical Industries
-Narcotics, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals
12. Fermentation Industries (Distilleries and Breweries)
13. Rubber (Synthetic) Industries
14. Paints and Pigment Industries
15. Leather Tanning Industries
16. Electro-plating Industries
17. Chemical Industries
-Coke Oven by-products and Coaltar Distillation products

69
-Industrial Gases (nitrogen, oxygen, acetylene, argon, carbondioxide, hydrogen,
sulphur dioxide, nitrous oxide, halogenated hydrocarbon, ozone, etc.)
-Industrial Carbon
-Alkalies and Acids
-Chromates and dichromates
-Lead and its compounds
-Electrochemicals (metallic sodium, potassium and magnesium, chlorates,
perchlorates and peroxides)
-Electrothermal produces (artificial abrasive, calcium carbide)
-Nitrogenous compounds (cyanides, cyanamides and other nitrogenous
compounds)
-Phosphorous and its compounds
-Halogens and Halogenated compounds (Chlorine, Fluorine, Bromine and Iodine)
-Explosives (including industrial explosives and detonators and fuses)
18. Insecticides, Fungicides, Herbicides and other Pesticides Industries
19. Synthetic Resin and plastics
20. Man made Fibre (Cellulosic and non-cellulosic) industry
21. Manufacture and repair of electrical accumulators
22. Glass and Ceramics
23. Grinding or glazing of metals
24. Manufacture, handling and processing of asbestos and its products
25. Extraction of oils and fats from vegetable and animal sources
26. Manufacture, handling and use of benzene and substances containing benzene
27. Manufacturing processes and operations involving carbon disulphide
28. Dyes and Dyestuff including their intermediates
29. Highly flammable liquids and gases

70
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 18(2)(f)]
List of matters:
(i) fencing of machinery;
(ii)  work on or near machinery in motion;
(iii) employment of adolescents on dangerous machines;
(iv) striking gear and devices for cutting off power;
(v) self acting machines;
(vi) casing of new machinery;
(vii) prohibition of employment of women and children near cotton openers;
(viii) hoists and lifts;
(ix) lifting machines, chains, ropes and lifting tackles;
(x) revolving machinery;
(xi) pressure plant;
(xii) floors, stairs and means of access;
(xiii) pits, sumps, openings in floors and other similar indentation of area;
(xiv) safety officers;
(xv) protection of eyes;
(xvi) precautions against dangerous fumes, gases, etc.;
(xvii) precautions regarding the use of portable electric light;
(xviii) explosive or inflammable dust, gas, etc.;
(xix) safety committee;
(xx) power to require specifications of defective parts or tests of stability;
(xxi) safety of buildings and machinery;
(xxii) maintenance of buildings;
(xxiii) prohibition in certain cases of danger;
(xxiv) notice in respect of accidents;
(xxv) court of inquiry in case of accidents;
(xxvi) safety management in plantation;
(xxvii) the general requirement relating to the construction, equipments and
maintenance for the safety of working places on shore, ship, dock, structure and other
places at which any dock work is carried on;
(xxviii) the safety of any regular approaches over a dock, wharf, quay or other
places which dock worker have to use for going for work and for fencing of such
places and projects;
(xxix) the efficient lighting of all areas of dock, ship, any other vessel, dock
structure or working places where any dock work is carried on and of all approaches to
such places to which dock workers are required to go in the course of their employment;

71
(xxx) adequate ventilation and suitable temperature in every building or an
enclosure on ship where dock workers are employed;
(xxxi) the fire and explosion preventions and protection;
(xxxii) safe means of access to ships, holds, stagings, equipment, appliances
and other working places;
(xxxiii) the Construction, maintenance and use of lifting and other cargo handling
appliances and services, such as, pallets containing or supporting loads and provision
of safety appliances on them, if necessary;
(xxxiv) the safety of workers employed in freight container terminals of other
terminals for handing unitized cargo;
(xxxv) the fencing of machinery, live electrical conductors, steam pipes and
hazardous openings;
(xxxvi) the construction, maintenance and use of staging;
(xxxvii) the rigging and use of ship's derricks;
(xxxviii) the testing, examination, inspection and certification as appropriate of'
loose gears including chains and ropes and of slings and other lifting devices used in
the dock work;
(xxxix) the precautions to be taken to facilitate escape of workers when employed
in a hold, bin, hopper or the like or between decks of a hold while handing coal of other
bulk cargo;
(xl) the measures to be taken in order to prevent dangerous methods of' working
in the stacking, unstacking, stowing and unstowing of cargo or handing in connection
therewith;
(xli) the handling of dangerous substances and working, in dangerous or harmful
environments and the precautions to be taken in connection with such handling;
(xlii) the work in connection with cleaning, chipping painting, operations and
precautions to be taken in connection with such work;
(xliii) the employment of persons for handling cargo, handling appliances, power
operated batch covers or other power operated ship's equipment such as, door in the
hull of a ship, ramp, retraceable car deck or similar equipment or to give signals to the
drivers of such machinery;
(xliv) the transport of dock workers;
(xlv) the precautions to be taken to protect dock workers against harmful effects
of excessive noise, vibration and air pollution at the work place;
(xlvi) protective equipment and protective clothing;
(xlvii) the sanitary, washing and welfare facilities;
(xlviii) the medical supervision;
(xlix) the ambulance rooms, first aid and rescue facilities and arrangements for
the removal of dock workers to the nearest place of treatment;
(l) the investigation of occupational accidents, dangerous occurrences and
diseases, specifying such diseases and the forms of' notices, the persons and
authorities to whom, they are to be furnished, the particulars to be contained in them
and the time within which they are to be submitted; and
(li) the submission of statement of accidents, man-days lost, volume of cargo
handled and particulars of dock workers.

72
(lii) the safe means of access to, and the safety of, any working place, including
the provision of suitable and sufficient scaffolding at various stages when work cannot
be safely done from the ground or from any part of a building or from a ladder or such
other means of support;
(liii) the precautions to be taken in connection with the demolition of the whole
or any substantial part of a building or other structure under the supervision of a
competent person child the avoidance of danger from collapse of any building or
other structure while removing any part of the framed building or other structure by
shoring or otherwise;
(liv) the handling or use of explosive under the control of competent persons so
that there is no exposure to the risk of injury from explosion or from flying material;
(lv) the erection installation, use and maintenance of transporting equipment,
such as locomotives, trucks, wagons and other vehicles and trailers and appointment
of competent persons to drive or operate such equipment;
(lvi) the erection, installation, use and maintenance of hoists, lifting appliances
and lifting gear including periodical testing and examination and heat treatment where
necessary, precautions to be taken while raising or lowering loads, restrictions on
carriage of persons and appointment of competent persons on hoists or other lifting
appliances;
(lvii) the adequate and suitable lighting of every workplace and approach thereto,
of every place where raising or lowering operations with the use of hoists, lifting
appliances or lifting gears are in progress and of all openings dangerous to building
workers employed;
(lviii) the precautions to be taken to prevent inhalation of dust, fumes, gases or
vapours during any grinding, cleaning, spraying or manipulation of any material and
steps to be taken to secure and maintain adequate ventilation of every working place
or confined space;
(lix) the measures to be taken during stacking or unstacking, stowing or
unstowing of materials or goods or handling in connection therewith;
(lx) the safeguarding of machinery including the fencing of every fly-wheel and
every moving part of prime mover and every part of transmission or other machinery,
unless it is in such a position or of such construction as to be safe to every worker
working only of the operations and as if it were securely fenced:
(lxi) the safe handling and use of plant, including tools and equipment operated
by compressed air:
(lxii) the precaution to be taken in case of fire;
(lxiii) the limits of weight to be lifted or moved by workers;
(lxiv) the safe transport of workers to or from any workplace by water and
provision of means for rescue from drowning;
(lxv) the steps to be taken to prevent danger to workers from live electric wires
or apparatus including electrical machinery and tools and from overhead wires;
(lxvi) the keeping of safety nets, safety sheets and safety belts where the special
nature or the circumstances of work render them necessary for the safety of the
workers;
(lxvii) the standards to be complied with regard to scaffolding, ladders and
stairs, lifting appliances, ropes, chains and accessories, earth moving equipment and
floating operational equipments;

73
(lxviii) the precautions to be taken with regard to pile driving, concrete work,
work with hot asphalt, tar or other similar things, insulation work, demolition operations,
excavation, underground construction and handling materials;
(lxix) the safety policy, that is to say, a policy relating to steps to be taken to
ensure the safety and health of the building workers, the administrative arrangements
therefore and the matters connected therewith, to be framed by the employers and
contractors for tile operations to be carried on in a building or other construction
work;
(lxx) emergency standards for enforcement of suitable standards in respect of
hazardous processes in a factory;
(lxxi) the maximum permissible threshold limits of exposure of chemical and
toxic substances in manufacturing processes (whether hazardous or otherwise) in any
factory;
(lxxii) lightning;
(lxxiii) any other matter which is the Central Government considers under the
circumstance for better working condition for safety at the work place.

74
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 12(1)]
List of Notifiable Diseases
1. Lead poisoning, including poisoning by any preparation or compound of lead
or their sequelae.
2. Lead-tetra-ethyle poisoning.
3. Phosphorus poisoning or its sequelae.
4. Mercury poisoning or its sequelae.
5. Manganese poisoning or its sequelae.
6. Arsenic poisoning or its sequelae.
7. Poisoning by nitrous fumes.
8. Carbon bisulphide poisoning.
9. Benzene poisoning, including poisoning by any of its homologues, their nitro
or amido derivatives or its sequelae.
10. Chrome ulceration or its sequelae.
11. Anthrax.
12. Silicosis.
13. Poisoning by halogens or halogen derivatives of the hydrocarbons of the
aliphatic series.
14. Pathological manifestations due to—
(a) radium or other radio-active substances;
(b) X-rays.
15. Primary epitheliomatous cancer of the skin.
16. Toxic anaemia.
17. Toxic jaundice due to poisonous substances.
18. Oil acne or dermatitis due to mineral oils and compounds containing mineral
oil base.
19. Byssionosis.
20. Asbestosis.
21. Occupational or contact dermatitis caused by direct contract with chemicals
and paints. These are of two types, that is, primary irritants and allergic sensitizers.
22. Noise induced hearing loss (exposure to high noise levels).
23. Beriyllium poisoning.
24. Carbon monoxide poisoning.
25. Coal miners' pneumoconiosis.
26. Phosgene poisoning.
27. Occupational cancer.
28. Isocyanates poisoning.
29. Toxic nephritis.

75
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Second National Commission on Labour (the Commission) had submitted its
Report on “Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions of the Workers” in June,
2002. In pursuance of the recommendations of the said Commission, it has become necessary
to enact a Central Legislation in the form of a Code, namely the Occupational Safety, Health
and Working Conditions Code, 2019 which incorporates the essential features of the thirteen
enactments relating to factories, mines, dock workers, building and other construction
workers, plantations labour, contract labour, Inter-State migrant workmen, working Journalist
and other news paper employees, motor transport workers, sales promotion employees,
beedi and cigar workers, cine workers and cinema theatre workers and to repeal the respective
enactments.  It provides broader legislative framework to secure just and humane conditions
of work with flexibility and to provide enabling provisions for making rules and regulations
in tune with the emerging technologies.
2. The Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2019 simplifies,
amalgamates and rationalises the provisions of thirteen enactments in the aforesaid areas
and to comprise them in a concise volume with certain important changes.  The salient
features of the said Code, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:––
(i) to impart flexibility in adapting dynamic factors and technological changes,
in the matters relating to health, safety, welfare and working conditions of workers;
(ii) to apply the provisions of the proposed Code for all establishments having
ten or more workers, other than the establishments relating to mines and docks;
(iii) to expand––
(a) the ambit of the provisions relating to working conditions of cine
and theatre workers to include them in the digital audio-visual workers
encompassing all forms of electronic media;
(b) the scope of journalists to include them in electronic media such as
in e-paper establishment or in radio or in other media;
(c) the scope of Inter-State migrant workers to include therein the workers
recruited or engaged by an employer directly, from one State to another State
for employment in his establishment;
(d) the definition of “family” to include therein the dependent grand-
parents in order to take care of them in old age;
(iv) to provide the concept of “one registration” for all establishments having
ten or more employees;
(v) to constitute “the National Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board”
to give recommendations to the Central Government on policy matters, relating to
occupational safety, health and working conditions of workers;
(vi) to constitute “the State Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board”
at the State level to advice the State Government on such matters arising out of the
administration of the proposed Code;
(vii) to make a provision for the constitution of “Safety Committee” by the
appropriate Government in any establishment or class of establishments;
(viii) to allow the women employees to work at night, that is, beyond 7 PM and
before 6AM subject to the conditions relating to safety, holiday, working hours and
their consent;

76
(ix) to make a provision of “common license” for factory, contract labour and
beedi and cigar establishments and to introduce the concept of a single all India
license for five years for engaging the contract labour;
(x) to enable the courts to give a portion of monetary penalties upto fifty per
cent. to the worker who is a victim of accident or to the legal heirs of such victim in the
case of his death; and
(xi) to make a provision for adjudging the penalties imposed under the Code.
3. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the
Code.
4. The Code seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR.
The 16th July, 2019.

77
Notes on clauses
Clause 1 of the Bill relates to short title, extent, commencement and application of the
Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code.
Clause 2 of the Code relates to the definition of certain expressions used in the
proposed Code.
Clause 3 of the Code relates to the procedure for the registration of certain
establishments.
Clause 4 of the Code relates to the provision of appeal against the order of the
registering officer under clause 3.
Clause 5 of the Code relates to the notice by employer for the commencement and
cessation of the operation of any industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation in
the concern establishment.
Clause 6 of the Code relates to the duties of employer.
Clause 7 of the Code relates to the duties and responsibilities of owner, agent and
manager in relation to mine.
Clause 8 of the Code relates to the duties of manufacturers, designer, importers or
suppliers.
Clause 9 of the Code relates to the duties of architects, project engineers and designers
in respect of building or other construction work, project or part thereof.
Clause 10 of the Code relates to the notice of certain accidents at any place in an
establishment by the employer or owner or agent or manager.
Clause 11 of the Code relates to the notice of certain dangerous occurrences by the
employer to the authorities determined by the appropriate Government by rules.
Clause 12 of the Code relates to the notice of certain diseases specified in the third
schedule to the Code.
Clause 13 of the Code relates to the duties of the employees at workplace.
Clause 14 of the Code relates to the rights of employee to obtain the information from
the employer.
Clause 15 of the Code relates to the duty not to interfere with or misuse things which
is provided in the interest of health, safety or welfare.
Clause 16 of the Code relates to the constitution of National Occupational Safety and
Health Advisory Board and the constitution of technical committees or advisory committees
to assist the National Board.
Clause 17 of the Code relates to the constitution of State Occupational Safety and
Health Advisory Board and the committee to assist the Board.
Clause 18 of the Code empowers the Central Government to declare standards on
occupational safety and health for work places.
Clause 19 of the Code relates to the research related activities in the area of
occupational safety and health so as to conduct research, experiments and demonstrations.
Clause 20 of the Code relates to the safety and occupational health surveys by the
Director General of Factory Advice Service, Director General of Mines Safety, Director
General of Health Service and other officers authorised by the appropriate Government.

78
Clause 21 of the Code relates to the statistics.
Clause 22 of the Code relates to the constitution of Safety Committee and appointment
of safety officers.
Clause 23 of the Code relates to the responsibility of employer for maintaining health
and working conditions.
Clause 24 of the Code relates to impose responsibility on the employer to provide
and maintain the welfare facilities.
Clause 25 of the Code relates to the weekly and daily working hours, leave, etc.
Clause 26 of the Code relates to the weekly and compensatory holidays to the workers.
Clause 27 of the Code relates to the extra wages for overtime.
Clause 28 of the Code relates to the provisions regarding night shifts.
Clause 29 of the Code relates to the prohibition of overlapping shifts and arrangement
of the system of shifts.
Clause 30 of the Code relates to the restriction on double employment in factory and
mine.
Clause 31 of the Code relates to the notice of periods of work.
Clause 32 of the Code relates to the provision of annual leave with wages in an
establishment.
Clause 33 of the Code relates to maintenance of registers and records and filing of
returns by the employer electronically or otherwise in accordance with the rules made by
the appropriate Government.
Clause 34 of the Code relates to the appointment of Inspector-cum-Facilitators and
Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
Clause 35 of the Code relates to the powers of Inspector-cum-Facilitators which
includes power to enter to work place, examine the premises, etc., inquire into any accident
or dangerous occurrence, etc., with necessary details in this regard.
Clause 36 of the Code relates to the powers and duties of District Magistrate in
respect of mines.
Clause 37 of the Code relates to the third party audit and certification by the empanel
experts.
Clause 38 of the Code relates to the special powers of Inspector-cum-Facilitator in
respect of factory, mines and dock work and building and other construction work.
Clause 39 of the Code relates to the secrecy of information by Chief Inspector-cum-
Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator, etc.
Clause 40 of the Code relates to the facilities to be afforded to the Inspector-cum-
Facilitator. Such facilities shall be provided by the employer of the establishment.
Clause 41 of the Code relates to the powers of Special Officer to enter, measure, etc.,
in relation to mine.
Clause 42 of the Code relates to the appointment of the medical officer.
Clause 43 of the Code relates to the employment of women in night subject to the
conditions to safety, holidays and working hours with the consent of such women before
6 a.m. and beyond 7 p.m.
Clause 44 of the Code relates to the prohibition of employment of women in dangerous
operation.

79
Clause 45 of the Code relates to the details of the applicability of part I of chapter XI
of the proposed Code.
Clause 46 of the Code relates to the appointment of licensing officers who shall be
the Gazetted Officers of the appropriate Government for the purpose of part I, chapter XI of
the proposed Code.
Clause 47 of the Code relates to the licensing of contractors.
Clause 48 of the Code relates to the grant of license.
Clause 49 of the Code relates to the provisions that the contractor shall not charge
directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, any fee or commission from the contract labour.
Clause 50 of the Code relates to the information regarding work order to be given to
the appropriate Government.
Clause 51 of the Code relates to revocation, suspension and amendment of licence.
Clause 52 of the Code relates to the provisions of the appeal.  Such appeal shall be
made by the aggrieved person against the order made in respect of licensing of contractor,
grant of licence and revocation, suspension and amendment of licence.
Clause 53 of the Code relates to the liability of principal employer for welfare facilities
relating to providing of canteens, rest rooms, drinking water and first aid.
Clause 54 of the Code relates to the effect of employing contract labour from a non-
licenced contractor.  In case of employment of contract labour through such contractor
shall be deemed to be employed by the principal employer.
Clause 55 of the Code relates to the responsibility for payment of wages.
Clause 56 of the Code relates to the experience certificate to be given by the concerned
contractor or principal employer of the establishment concerned to the contract labour
annually or as and when demanded giving details therein of the work performed by the
contract labour.
Clause 57 of the Code relates to the prohibition of employment of contract labour.
The appropriate Government is empowered under this clause to impose restriction in respect
of the employment, after consultation with the National Board or a State Advisory Board.
Clause 58 of the Code relates to the power to exempt in special cases.  Such exemption
relating to provisions of the proposed Code or the rules made thereunder shall be made by
the appropriate Government, in the case of an emergency as specified in the clause.
Clause 59 of the Code relates to the facilities to inter-State Migrant workers.  Such
facilities shall be provided by the employer of an establishment employing inter-State
Migrant worker for the purposes as specified in the clause.
Clause 60 of the Code relates to displacement allowance.  Such allowance shall be
paid by the contractor to the inter-State Migrant worker at the time of recruitment which
shall be equal to fifty per cent. of the monthly wages payable to the workers, and so paid
amount shall not be refundable and shall be in addition to the wages or other amount
payable to the worker.
Clause 61 of the Code relates to the journey allowance, etc.  Such journey allowance
shall be confined from the place of residence of the inter-State Migrant workers in his State
to the place of work in the other State and vice versa and shall be payable by the contractor.
Clause 62 of the Code relates to the past liabilities.  On the completion of the period
of employment of the inter-State migrant worker, the past liabilities deemed to have been
extinguished and shall not be recoverable by the principal employer or the contractor.
Clause 63 of the Code relates to the prohibition of employment of audio-visual worker
without agreement.  Such agreement shall be in writing and between the audio-visual

80
worker and the producer of audio-visual programme or between producers of the audio-
visual programme with the contractor and shall be registered with the competent authority.
Clause 64 of the Code relates to the managers in mine.  Subject to the rules made in
this behalf, every mine shall be under the sole manager. The clause also provides the
responsibility of a manager.
Clause 65 of the Code relates to non-applicability of the Code in certain cases such
as excavation in mine being made for prospecting purposes only and not for the purpose of
obtaining minerals for use or sale subject to the conditions specified in the clause and in
case the mine engaged in the extraction of kankar, murrum, laterite, boulder, gravel, shingle,
ordinary sand, etc., as specified in the Code.
Clause 66 of the Code relates to the exemption from provision of the Code regarding
employment.  Such exemptions or in case of emergency involving serious risk to the safety
of the mine or of persons employed therein, or in case of an accident, or in case of any act
of God or in case of any urgent work to be done to machinery, plant or equipment of the
mine as a result of breakdown of such machinery plant or equipment.
Clause 67 of the Code relates to the employment of persons below eighteen years of
age.  It provides that no person below eighteen years of age shall be allowed to work in any
mine or part thereof but in case of apprentices and other trainees, such age limit is not
below sixteen years.
Clause 68 of the Code relates to decision of question whether any excavation or
working or premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine on which any process
ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of minerals or of coke is being
carried on in a mine shall be decided by the Secretary to the Government of India and a
certificate given by him in this behalf shall be conclusive.
Clause 69 of the Code relates to provide licence to industrial premises and person.
Without licence no employer shall use or allow to use any place or premises.
Clause 70 of the Code relates to appeals.  A person aggrieved by the decision of the
competent authority refusing to grant or renew a licence or cancelling or suspending a
licence may, within the prescribed time and with prescribed fee, appeal to such authority
notified by the State Government.
Clause 71 of the Code relates to permission to work by employees outside industrial
premises.  Such permission shall be granted by the State Government and the employer
shall maintain the record of the work permitted to be carried on outside the industrial
premises.
Clause 72 of the Code relates to non-applicability of part IV relating to beedi and
cigar workers.
Clause 73 of the Code relates to prohibition of employment of certain persons in
certain building or other construction work.  The employer shall not allow the person who
is deaf, of defective vision or has a tendency to giddiness to work in any operation of
building or other construction work as specified in the clause.
Clause 74 of the Code relates to approval and licensing of factories.  The registration
and licensing shall be made in accordance with the rules framed by the appropriate
Government.
Clause 75 of the Code relates to liability of owner of premises in certain circumstances.
The owner of the premises and occupier of the factories utilising common facilities shall
jointly and severally be responsible for provision and maintenance of the common facilities
and services as specified in the clause.
Clause 76 of the Code relates to power to apply the proposed code certain premises.
The provision of part VI of the proposed code shall apply to any place wherein manufacturing

81
process is carried on with or without the aid of power irrespective of the number of workers
working in the factory by the appropriate government by notification.
Clause 77 of the Code relates to dangerous operation.  In this respect, the appropriate
government may make the rule relating to any factory or class or description of factories in
which manufacturing process is carried on in which exposes any of the persons employed
in it to a serious risk of bodily injury, poisoning or disease as specified in the clause.
Clause 78 of the Code relates to constitution of Site Appraisal Committee.  The Site
Appraisal Committee constituted under this clause shall make its recommendation within a
period of ninety days of the receipt of the application for grant of permission for the initial
location of a factory involving a hazardous process or for the expansion of such factory,
etc.
Clause 79 of the Code relates to compulsory disclosure of information by the occupier.
The disclosure shall be in the manner provided by the State Government in the rules and as
specified in the clause.
Clause 80 of the Code relates to the specific responsibility of the occupier in relation
to hazardous process.  Such responsibility of the occupier of a factory involving hazardous
process relates to maintaining accurate and up-to-date health records.
Clause 81 of the Code relates to National Board to inquire into certain situations
specified in the clause.  In such situation, the Central Government may direct the National
Board to inquire into the standards of health and safety observed in the factory with a view
to finding out the causes of the failure or neglect in the adoption of any measures or
standards as per rules.
Clause 82 of the Code relates to emergency standards.  The Central Government may
direct the Directorate General Occupational Safety and Health formerly known as Directorate
General of Factory Advice Service and Labour Institutes or any Institution authorised in
matters relating to standards of safety in hazardous processes, to lay down emergency
standards for enforcement of suitable standards in respect of the hazardous processes.
Clause 83 of the Code relates to permissible limits of exposure of chemicals and toxic
substances.  The maximum permissible limits in any factory shall be of the value as may be
in the rules by the State Government.
Clause 84 of the Code relates to right of workers to warn about imminent danger.  In
the case of reasonable apprehension of imminent danger, the workers may bring the same
in the notice of the occupier, agent, manager, or any other person who is incharge of the
factory or the person concerned directly or through their representatives in the Safety
Committee and simultaneously bring the same to the notice of the Inspector-cum-Facilitator.
Clause 85 of the Code relates to appeal against the order of Inspector-cum-Facilitator
in case of factory.  The details regarding appeal shall be provided by the State Government
in the rules.
Clause 86 of the Code relates to the power to make exempting rules and order.  This
clause provides for defining by rules made by the appropriate government defining the
persons who hold positions of supervision or management or employed in a confidential
position in a factory.
Clause 87 of the Code relates to the general penalty for offences.  Such offences are
those offences which are not expressly provided under the other provisions of the proposed
Code.
Clause 88 of the Code relates to the punishment for causing obstruction to Chief
Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator etc.
Clause 89 of the Code relates to penalty for non-maintenance of register, records and
non-filing of returns, etc.

82
Clause 90 of the Code relates to punishment for contravention of provisions of the
proposed code or any rules, regulation, or bye-laws, etc. It also provides enhanced
punishment in case of repetition of such offences after conviction.
Clause 91 of the Code relates to punishment for falsification of records, etc.
Clause 92 of the Code relates to penalty for omission to furnish plans, etc., without
reasonable excuse and the burden of proof lies on the person making the omission.
Clause 93 of the Code relates to punishment for disclosure of information.  The
details regarding the information have been specified in the clause.
Clause 94 of the Code relates to penalty for wrongfully disclosing results of analysis.
The details of the disclosure have been specified in the clause.
Clause 95 of the Code relates to penalty for contravention of the provisions of duties
relating to hazardous processes as specified in the clause.
Clause 96 of the Code relates to penalty for contravention of the provisions of duties
relating to safety provisions resulting in an accident.
Clause 97 of the Code relates to punishment for working in contravention of any
general or special order issued under the provisions of clause 38.
Clause 98 of the Code relates to punishment for failure to appoint manager in
contravention of the provision of the clause 64.
Clause 99 of the Code relates to offences by employees.
Clause 100 of the Code relates to prosecution of owner, agent or manager of a mine as
specified in the clause.
Clause 101 of the Code relates to exemption of owner, agent or manager of a mine or
occupier of a factory from liability in certain cases.  Such cases are that the owner, agent or
manager or occupier proves to the satisfaction of the court that he has exercise due diligence
to enforce execution of the proposed court or that the other person committed the offence
in question without his knowledge, consent or connivance.
Clause 102 of the Code relates to offences by companies, etc., under the circumstances
specified in the clause every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 103 of the Code relates to limitation of prosecution and cognizance of offence
under the proposed Code.
Clause 104 of the Code relates to power of officers of appropriate Government to
impose penalty in certain cases.  Such cases are offences under the proposed Code in
which only fine is the penalty.
Clause 105 of the Code relates to jurisdiction of a court for entertaining proceedings,
etc., for offence.  The jurisdiction of the court shall be the place where the establishment is
for the time being situated.
Clause 106 of the Code relates to the power of court to make order.  Such order relates
to the awarding punishment requiring the offender within a period specified in the order.
Clause 107 of the Code relates to compounding of offences.  Under the provision, the
offences in which only fine is punishment, are compoundable.
Clause 108 of the Code relates to delegation of powers.  In delegation, the conditions
subject to which the delegation would be made, may be specified.

83
Clause 109 of the Code relates to onus as to age.  The burden of onus is on the
accused to prove that such person is not under such age.
Clause 110 of the Code relates to onus of proving limits of what is practicable, etc.
This relates to the failure to comply with the duty to do something, it shall be for the person
who is alleged to have failed to comply with such duty or requirement, to prove that it was
not reasonably practicable or all practicable measures were taken to satisfy the duty or
requirement.
Clause 111 of the Code relates to common licence for contractor, factories and to
industrial premises and person.
Clause 112 of the Code relates to effect of law and agreements inconsistent with the
proposed Code.
Clause 113 of the Code relates to power of the appropriate Government to direct
inquiry in certain cases.  Such cases relate to event of the occurrence of an accident in an
establishment which has caused or had the potentiality to cause serious danger to employees
and other persons within, and in the vicinity of the workplace or whether immediate or
delayed, or any occupational disease as specified in the Third Schedule.
Clause 114 of the Code relates to publication of reports.  Such reports are the reports,
submitted to the appropriate Government by the National Board or State Advisory Board or
any extracts from any report submitted to it under the proposed Code.
Clause 115 of the Code relates to powers of Central Government to give directions to
State Government for the implementation of the provisions of the proposed Code.
Clause 116 of the Code relates to general restriction on disclosure of information.
Clause 117 of the Code relates to barring of the jurisdiction of civil courts in respect
of the matters to which any provision of the proposed Code applies and no injunction shall
be granted by any civil court in respect of anything which is done or intended to be done
by or under the proposed Code.
Clause 118 of the Code relates to protection to the person from legal proceeding if
action is taken in good faith in pursuance of the proposed Code.
Clause 119 of the Code relates to power to exempt in special cases as specified in the
clause.
Clause 120 of the Code relates to power to exempt during public emergency.
Clause 121 of the Code relates to power to exempt public institution.  Such institution,
workshop or workplace where a manufacturing process is carried on and which is attached
to a public institution maintained for the purposes of education, training, research or
information, from all or any of the provisions of the proposed Code.
Clause 122 of the Code relates to persons required to give notice, etc., legally, bound
to do so within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 123 of the Code relates to power of Central Government to amend the Schedule
by way of addition, alteration or omission therein.
Clause 124 of the Code relates to power of Central Government to remove difficulties
by the order published in the Official Gazette.
Clause 125 of the Code relates to power of appropriate Government to make rules
subject to condition of previous publication and by notification, for carrying out the
purposes of the proposed Code.
Clause 126 of the Code relates to power of the Central Government to make rules
subject to condition of previous publication and by notification, for carrying out the
purposes of the proposed Code.

84
Clause 127 of the Code relates to power of the State Government to make rules
subject to condition of previous publication and by notification, for carrying out the
purposes of the proposed Code.
Clause 128 of the Code relates to power of Central Government to make regulations
in relation to mines and dock work by notification in the Official Gazette which shall be
consistent with the proposed Code.
Clause 129 of the Code relates to prior publication of rules, etc.  The power to make
rules, regulations, and bye-laws under the proposed Code shall be subject to the condition
of the previous publication.
Clause 130 of the Code relates to power to make regulation without previous
publication.  The matters in which regulations shall be made are specified in the clause.
Clause 131 of the Code relates to frame bye-laws.  The employer of a mine is
empowered to made bye-laws as specified in the clause.
Clause 132 of the Code relates to laying of regulations, rules and bye-laws, etc.,
before Parliament.
Clause 133 of the Code relates to laying of rules made by State Government before
the State Legislature.
Clause 134 of the Code relates to repeal and savings.  The enactments which are
being repealed are enumerated in the clause.  Every Chief Inspector, Additional Chief
Inspector, Joint Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector, Inspector and every other officer
appointed for the purposes under any of the provisions of the enactments repealed by the
proposed Code, shall be deemed to have been appointed under the proposed Code for
such purposes under the proposed Code.  Certain actions under the repealed enactments
have also been saved.

85
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
The provisions of the Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions
Code, 2019 does not involve any expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring, from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

86
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 125 of the Code seeks to empower the appropriate Government, by notification
and subject to condition of previous publication, to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Code. In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide for—( a) income from the sources under Explanation to
clause ( x) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2; ( b) to prescribe the substance as hazardous
substance under clause ( za) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2; ( c) the late fee under the
proviso to sub-section (1) of section 3; (e) the form and manner of sending the notice and
the authority to whom the notice shall be sent and the manner of intimating the authority
under sub-section ( 1) of section 5; ( f) test free of cost to such employees of such age or
such class of establishments under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 6; ( g) the
information to be included in the letter of appointment under clause ( f) sub-section (1) of
section 6; (h) the nature of bodily injury and the form of notice and the time within which
the notice shall be sent under sub-section ( 1) of section 10; ( i) nature of dangerous
occurrence and the form of notice, the time within which and the authority to which notice
shall be given under section 11; ( j) the form of notice related to certain diseases and the
time within which the notice shall be sent to the authority under sub-section ( 1) of
section 12; ( m) the manner of constituting a safety committee and the manner and the
purpose for choosing the representative of the employer and the workers in the Safety
Committee under sub-section (1) of section 22; (o) condition for exemption of workers from
weekly and compensatory holidays under sub-section ( 2) of section 26; ( q) the form and
manner of display of such notice and the manner in which such notice is sent to the
Inspector-cum-Facilitator under sub-section (2) of section 31; (t) the manner of filing return
to the Inspector-cum-Facilitator under clause (d) of section 33; (u) the manner of conducting
inspection including web based inspection under sub-section ( 2) of section 34; ( v) the
qualification and experience of Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator under sub-section ( 3) of
section 34; ( y) the qualification, experience, duties and responsibilities of experts to be
empanelled under section 37; (za) the qualification for the appointment of medical practitioner
and other establishment under sub-section ( 1) of section 42; ( zd) examination and
certification of adolescent for his fitness for employment and any other establishment
under clause (I) of sub-section (2) of section 42; (zf) conditions as to hours of work, fixation
of wages and other essential amenities in respect of contract labour under clause ( a) of
sub-section (3) of section  47.
Clause 126 of the Code seeks to empower the Central Government, by notification
and subject to condition of previous publication, to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Code. In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide for—(a) the authority under sub-clause (iii) of clause (zo)
of sub-section (1) of section 2; ( b) to define the occupier in case of owner of dock under
proviso of clause (zo) of sub-section (1) of section 2; (c) form of certificate of registration,
the time within which and the conditions subject to which such certificates shall be issued
under sub-section (3) of section 3; (d) other particulars and form under sub-section ( 4) of
section 3; (e) the manner of informing closing of establishment and certifying payment to
the registering officer; (f) procedure for constitution of the National Board and the officers
and staff thereof and the number of members, qualifications and terms and conditions of
service, members of technical committees or advisory committees and their qualifications;
(i) health and working conditions under sub-section (1) of section 23; (j) welfare facilities
for the workers under sub-section ( 1) of section 24; ( m) the hours of work for working
journalist under sub-section (3) of section 25; ( n) other kinds of leave under clause ( i) of
sub-section ( 4) of section 25; ( o) the maximum period of accumulating leave under
clause (ii) sub-section (4) of section 25; ( q) conditions and restrictions for entitlement of
cash compensation under clause (iv) of sub-section (4) of section 25; (r) powers and duties

87
of District Magistrate under section 36; (u) the form and manner for issuing a licence and
such other particulars under sub-section (1) of section 48; (w) application for renewal of the
licence and procedure of renewal of licence by the licensing officer under sub-section (3) of
section 48; (y) authority to whom the information relating to audio-visual programme by the
producer under sub-section ( 3) of section 63; ( z) the matter which may be save and the
qualifications of sole manager under sub-section (1) of section 64.
Clause 127 of the Code seeks to empower the State Government, by notification and
subject to condition of previous publication, to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Code. In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for—( a) the constitution, procedure and other matters relating to
State Advisory Board under sub-section (2) of section 17; (d) the manner of preparing the
plan of the place of premises under sub-section ( 3) of section 69; ( g) the time of filing
appeal, fees and the appellate authority under section 70; (j) rules for manner and approval,
licensing of factories under sub-section ( 1) of section 74; ( m) form of application for
establishment of factory involving hazardous process under sub-section ( 1) of section 78;
(n) the manner of disclosing information by occupier of a factory under sub-section (1) of
section 79; (r) maintain health and medical records of the workers and the conditions for
accessibility by workers engaged in hazardous process under clause ( a) of section 80; ( u)
the maximum permissible limit of exposure of chemical and toxic substances in manufacturing
process in any factory under section 83; (v) rules relating to the persons who hold position
of supervision or management or employed in confidential position in a factory under
sub-section (1) of section 86.
Clause 128 of the Code seeks to empower the Central Government, by notification and
subject to condition of previous publication, to make regulations in relation to Mines and
dock work. In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such regulations may provide for—( a) for prescribing the qualifications required for
appointment as Chief Inspector-cum-Facilitator or Inspector-cum-Facilitator; ( c) for
prescribing the duties of owners, agents and managers of mines and of persons acting
under them, and for prescribing the qualifications (including age) of agents and managers
of mines and of persons acting under them; (f) for fixing the fees, if any, to be paid in respect
of such examinations and of the grant and renewal of such certificates; (g) for determining
the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which it shall be lawful for more
mines than one to be under a single manager, or for any mines to be under a manager not
having the prescribed qualifications; (h) for providing for inquiries to be made under this
Code including any inquiry relating to misconduct or incompetence on the part of any
person holding a certificate under this Code and for the suspension or cancellation of any
such certificate and for providing, wherever necessary, that the person appointed to hold
an inquiry shall have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
for the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of
documents and material objects; ( q) “for regulating the use of machinery in mines, for
providing for the safety of persons employed on or near such machinery and on haulage
roads and for restricting the use of certain classes of locomotives underground; ( u) for
requiring owners, agents and managers of mines to have fixed boundaries for the mines, for
prescribing the plans and sections and field notes connected there with to be kept by them
and the manner and places in which such plans, sections and field notes are to be kept for
purposes of record and for the submission of copies thereof to the Chief Inspector-cum-
Facilitator, and for requiring the making of fresh surveys and plans by them, and in the
event of non-compliance, for having the survey made and plans prepared through any
other agency and for the recovery of expenses thereof in the same manner as an arrear of
land revenue; (zi) for providing for the safety in opencast mines and associated operations
and machineries used therein; (zk) for specifying the forms of returns which shall be filed by
the establishments or the class of establishments under this Code; ( zy) providing for the
testing, examination, inspection and certification as appropriate of loose gears including
chains and ropes and of slings and other lifting devices used in the dock work; ( zzb)

88
providing for the handling of dangerous substances and working in dangerous or harmful
environments and the precautions to be taken in connection with such handling; ( zzk)
providing for the submission of statement of accidents, man-days lost, volume of cargo
handled and particulars of dock workers.
2. The matters in respect of which the said rules and regulations may be made are
matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to provide
for them in the proposed Code itself.  The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the laws regulating the occupational safety, health and working
conditions of the persons employed in an establishment and the matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
[Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar, Minister of State for Labour and Employment,
(Independent Charge) ]
MGIPMRND—1798LS(S3)—18-07-2019.