1
THE HUMAN TRAFFICKING (PREVENTION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish a Central Human Trafficking Prevention Commission for prevention of
human trafficking in the country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Human Trafficking (Prevention) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  186 of  2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Commission" means the Central Human Trafficking Prevention Commission
established under section 4;
(c) "human trafficking" means an act of recruiting or transferring any person for
unlawful purpose including sexual exploitations or engaging him as forced labour
within the country or in a foreign country; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the same
meanings, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the commencement
of this Act and in consultation with the State Governments concerned, by notification in the
Official Gazette, formulate a National Policy aimed at prevention of growing incidents of
human trafficking and overall welfare, protection and rehabilitation of victims of human
trafficking.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national policy formulated
under sub-section (1).
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Central Human Trafficking Prevention Commission for prevention of the human
trafficking of citizens within the country or abroad.
(2) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The Commission may establish its branches in the States and Union territories in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Commission shall consist of one Chairperson and such other members having
relevant experience in the field to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of the
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name of aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(7) The Commission may appoint such number of officers and employees as may be
necessary for the efficient functioning of the Commission and carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
officers and employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Commission shall —
(a) take rehabilitation and welfare measures for victims of human trafficking;
(b) provide boarding and lodging facilities for victims of human trafficking;
(c) provide emergency medical care and necessary legal assistance to victims of
human trafficking; and
(d) undertake such other measures as may be deemed fit for prevention of human
trafficking.
Formulation of
National
Policy to
prevent
Human
Trafficking.
45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.
Establishment
of Central
Human
Trafficking
Prevention
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. The appropriate Government shall formulate rehabilitation scheme for persons
rescued from trafficking and take such other welfare measures for prevention of human
trafficking under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under  this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
session, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3)  Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Appropriate
Government
to formulate
rehabilitation
scheme.
Act to have
overriding
effects.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has become the largest base of human trafficking in the world. In the abominable
market of human trafficking, India is being identified both as a consumer and producer.
According to the United States "Trafficking in Persons", Report, 2009, India is in the league
of such nations where the Governments have proved to be unsuccessful in prevention of
incidents of human trafficking.
Human trafficking has taken deep roots in the society. The network of human trafficking
has been spreading across the country. Lakhs of women are being trafficked every year
within the country, out of which more than forty per cent. are minors. Forty per cent. of the
kidnapped children are forced into child labour or prostitution.
Human trafficking is a heinous and inhumane crime. The web of human trafficking is
spreading rapidly in the country and it is not only spoiling the image of India in the world, but
also contaminating the society on a large scale. If the growing numbers o2f incidents of
human trafficking are not checked in time, the situation would go out of control.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE
July 7, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Central Human Trafficking Prevention
Commission for prevention of the human trafficking. Clause 5 provides for rehabilitation and
welfare measure of persons victims of human trafficking. Clause 6 provides for the formulation
of rehabilitation scheme for persons rescued from human trafficking. Clause 7 provides that
the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely
to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a Central Human Trafficking Prevention Commission for prevention of human
trafficking in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2173LS(S3)—27-10-2017.