1
THE POPULATION STABILIZATION BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of family planning measures by the Central and the State
Governments for population stabilization in the country through various incentives
and disincentives so as to ensure that the population is commensurate with its
social, economic and other developments and with the ecological balance and
bridge the gap between the haves and have nots and for achieving quality of life
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This act may be called the Population Stabilization Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, ex-
tent
and
commencement.
Bill No.  187  of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "small family" means family having one child.
3. It is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act are for the purposes of giving
effect to the policies of the State towards securing the principles laid down in article 38 of
the Constitution of India.
4. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate a comprehensive population policy particularly for the purposes of having
one child norm for the eligible couples and other issues including economic, educational,
legal, medical, social and other incidental aspect to promote small family norms so as to
effectively control the booming population of the country in order to achieve rapid economic
progress and raise the standard of living of the masses.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the employee of the Central Government or of a Public Sector enterprise under the control
of the Central Government who adopts small family norm by undergoing sterilization
operation himself or of the spouse after the birth of his first child shall be given:—
(a) one year additional salary with all allowances along with two additional
increments as incentives;
(b) plot or house site or built house from Housing Board or Development
Authority of the Government at subsidized rates;
(c) loan for construction or purchasing the House from banks or financial
institutions on nominal rate of interest;
(d) free healthcare facilities;
(e) free educational facilities to the child with vocational training and
professional courses wherever necessary; and
(f) such other benefits and incentives as may be prescribed.
6. The incentives and benefits referred to in section 5 shall be extended mutatis
mutandis to the general public in the manner provided therein.
7. Whoever in contravention of small family norm procreates more than one child,
shall lose the incentives and benefits provided in this Act and in addition thereto shall,—
(a) be denied the subsidies in matters of loans extended to him;
(b) not be eligible to get the benefits of Public Distribution System;
(c) not be given any loan by any bank or financial institution; and
(d) not be entitled for such other facilities as may be prescribed.
8. Any women having one living child shall not be provided with maternity facilities
in any Government Hospital, Dispensary, Health Centre or Medical Centre for the birth of
her second child:
Provided that if, such women agrees to undergo sterilization operation after the birth
of her second child then she shall be provided with the requisite maternity facilities forthwith.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the election laws for the time
being in force, a citizen shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member of either House
Formulation of
Comprehensive
Population
Policy.
Extention of
benefits to
general
public.
Loss of
benefits
whoever
contravenes
small family
norm.
No maternity
facilities to
be given for
those having
more than
one living
children.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Definitions.
Facilities to
Government
employees
who adopts
small family
norm.
Declaration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
of Parliament or of the legislature of a State or of any body of the local self Government, if
that citizen has more than two living children:
Provided that this provision shall not apply in case of a citizen having more than two
living children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no marriage shall be solemnized between a male who is less than twenty-five years of age
and a female who is less than twenty-two years of age.
(3) Every serving government employee shall give an undertaking that he shall not
procreate more than one child:
Provided that this provision shall not apply to those government employees who
have more than the prescribed number of living children on or before the date of
commencement of this Act.
10. Whoever contravenes,—
(a) the provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 9 shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but may extend
to four years and also with a fine, which may extend to two lakh rupees.
(b) the provisions of sub-section ( 3) of section 9 shall forfeit his right to
promotion and shall not be eligible for any further increment till he is in government
service.
11. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) implement the revised National Population Policy to achieve the goals
enumerated therein;
(b) set up maternity hospitals and centers in sufficient numbers at conspicuous
places;
(c) distribute contraceptive pills, condoms through Healthcare Centres and
Non-Governmental Organisations;
(d) organize sterilization camps from time to time;
(e) distribute iron and vitamin capsules and tablets amongst the expecting
mothers;
(f) give wide publicity to the benefits of having small families; and
(g) undertake such other measures as it may deem fit and expedient for the
purposes of this Act.
12. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act from
time to time.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act as may appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
14. The provisions of this Act  shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not, save as otherwise
expressly provided in this Act, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force in
any part of this country.
Penalty.
Duties of the
Government.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Savings.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
16. (1) The Central Govenment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is the second most populous country after China with highest birth rate in the
World. China's annual rate of population growth has been 0.6 per cent., against India's
1.4 per cent. Our population is around 1.3 billion, and is increasing every moment. Around
2030, India will become the most populous country on the earth—with a population of
1.6 billion by 2050. Our global land area is 2.4 per cent., but we have more than sixteen per
cent. of the global population making it the most densely populated nation of the world.
This scenario is compelling as half the population lives in slums and under squalid
conditions. This has caused overcrowding due to which law and order situation also is
deteriorating. Unemployment is rising rapidly causing frustration amongst the unemployed,
particularly the youth who are being lured by anti-national and anti-social elements. There
is unparallel transformation of human values, social institutions and economic structures.
Agriculture land holdings are becoming smaller and smaller and uneconomical and farmers
are committing suicides due to this fact. The housing needs are far beyond the available
finances and the shortage is appalling. Educational facilities are becoming hopelessly
poor. Overcrowding is also causing environmental degradation. Jungles are vanishing for
fuel, construction, furniture and for funeral purposes which has resulted water shortage
and less rain and increased carbondioxide in the environment resulting in harmful diseases.
The healthcare facilities are far from satisfactory and if, the population is not stabilised, we
can hardly expect to achieve quality life and the situation will become from bad to worse.
It is, therefore, imperative that effective steps must be taken to check the increasing
population. A clear message must go across the nations that since our resources are limited,
we have to opt for smaller families. It is very unfortunate that despite availability of various
birth control measures and several Family Planning Programmes, the population continues
to rise menacingly. This Bill is a step towards population stabilization in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
July 7, 2015.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides certain benefits to Government employees who adopt
small family norm. Clause 6 provides for extension of benefits to general public who adopt
small family norm. Clause 12 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite
funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore,
will involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore out of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 16 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of family planning measures by the Central and the State
Governments for population stabilization in the country through various incentives
and disincentives so as to ensure that the population is commensurate with its
social, economic and other developments and with the ecological balance
and bridge the gap between the haves and have nots and for achieving
quality of life and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1489LS(S3)—17-07-2015.