5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 187 of 2024
THE MENSTRUAL LEA VE AND HYGIENE BILL, 2024
By
Smt. Shambha vi, M.P.
A
BILL
to make provisions for securing the right to paid menstrual leave for working women  
and female students and also to provide the access to menstrual hygiene facilities  
and other health benefits during the period of menstruation and  
for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
CHAPTER I
Preliminary
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Menstrual Leave and Hygiene Bill, 2024.
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
  (a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title and 
commencement.
Definitions.
10

  (b) “educational institutions” means a place where persons of different ages study to 
gain an education, that includes any secondary or higher secondary school, college or 
institution or University imparting higher education; 
  (c) “employee” means – 
  (i) in respect of an establishment, a person, including an apprentice engaged 
under the Apprentices Act, 1961, employed on wages by such establishment to do 
any skilled, semi-skilled, unskilled, manual, operational, supervisory, managerial, 
administrative, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of 
employment be express or implied; 
  (ii) a person declared to be an employee by the appropriate Government; and
  (iii) a worker including a gig-worker, home-based worker and wage worker but 
does not include any member of the Armed Forces of the Union:
  Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this clause, in case of a 
mine a person is said to be— employed in a mine who works as the manager or who 
works under appointment by the owner, agent or manager of the mine or with the 
knowledge of the manager, whether for wages or not—
  (a) in any mining operation (including the concomitant operations of handling 
and transport of minerals up to the point of dispatch and of gathering sand and 
transport thereof to the mine);
  (b) in operations or services relating to the development of the mine including 
construction of plant therein but excluding construction of buildings, roads, wells 
and any building work not directly connected with any existing or future mining 
operations;
  (c) in operating, servicing, maintaining or repairing any part of any machinery 
used in or about the mine;
  (d) in operations, within the premises of the mine, of loading for dispatch of 
minerals;
  (e) in any office of the mine; 
  (f) in any welfare, health, sanitary or conservance services required to be provided 
under this Code relating to mine, or watch and ward, within the premises of the mine 
excluding residential area; or in any kind of work whatsoever which is preparatory 
or incidental to, or connected with, mining operations;
  (d) “employer” means a person who employs, whether directly or through any person, 
or on his behalf, or on behalf of any person, one or more employees in his establishment 
and where the establishment is carried on by any department of the Central Government 
or the State Government, the authority specified, by the head of such department, in this 
behalf or where no authority, is so specified the head of the department and in relation 
to an establishment carried on by a local authority, the chief executive of that authority, 
and includes,— 
  (i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the occupier of the factory; 
  (ii) in relation to mine, the owner of the mine or agent or manager having requisite 
qualification under the law for the time being in force and appointed by the owner or 
agent of the mine as such;
  (iii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority which 
has ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment and where said affairs are 
entrusted to a manager or managing director, such manager or managing director;
  (iv) Contractor; and
  (v) legal representative of a deceased employer;
2
10
52 of 1961.
5
30
40
35
25
45
20
15

  ( e) “establishment” includes an office of the appropriate Government, quasi 
Government or department including telegraph office, post office, telephone exchange, 
a mine, a plantation, an agricultural field, a hospital or nursing home, a shop or any 
business establishment, a brick kiln, construction site, any banking establishment, any 
private office or house, any school, college university or like institution, establishment 
for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances and any other such 
place where a women is employed for any work whatsoever;  
  (f) “menstruation” means the natural bodily process of releasing blood and associated 
matter from the uterus through the vagina as part of the menstrual cycle;
  (g) “menstrual cycle” means the monthly process in shedding of the uterus lining 
occurs through menstruation which lasts for about twenty-eight days but which may 
vary between women and from month to month; 
  (h) “prescribed” means as prescribed by the rules under this Act;
  ( i) “workplace” means a workplace as referred to in Section 2(o) of the Sexual 
Harassment of Woman at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013; 
  ( j) “woman” means individuals with a uterus who experiences menstruation, 
regardless of their gender; and
  (k) “working woman” means a woman who is employed whether directly or indirectly 
through any agency or contractor, as the case may be, for wages and remuneration.
 3.  The Act shall be applicable,–
  (a) to every establishment being a factory, mine or plantation including any such 
establishment belonging to appropriate Government and to every establishment 
wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other 
performances; 
  (b) to every shop or establishment within the meaning of any law for the time being 
in force in relation to shops and establishments in a State:
  Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, after giving not less than month’s notice of its intention of so doing, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this 
Act shall apply also to any other establishment or class of establishments, industrial, 
commercial, agricultural or otherwise; and 
  (c) to every person who is self-employed or working in the unorganized sector or in 
establishments where less than ten persons are employed.
CHAPTER II
Rights of Woman During Menstruation
 4.  Every woman shall be entitled to the following rights,–
  (a) in case of working woman Right to paid leave and absence from work for the 
prescribed number of days during her menstruation in any establishment registered with 
the appropriate Government; 
  (b) in case of students Right to leave of absence from educational institutions for the 
prescribed number of days during her menstruation; and 
  (c) right to free access to good quality and biodegradable menstrual health products 
and facilities free of cost.
 5.  (1) Every woman enrolled in an educational institution shall be entitled to have a 
menstrual leave of two days for each menstrual cycle. 
Application of 
the Act.
Menstrual leave 
for Students.
Rights of 
Woman.
14 of 2013.
10
5
30
40
35
25
45
20
15
3

 ( 2) The menstrual leave provided to the woman students shall not be counted for the 
purpose of determining the minimum percentage of attendance required or any other leave 
entitlements granted to students by the institutions under any rules, regulation and policies. 
 ( 3) Educational institutions may deny granting of menstrual leave to woman students 
during scheduled examinations: 
 Provided that the menstrual leave may be granted for those examinations which can be 
rescheduled and where the student is hospitalised. 
 6. (1) Every woman employee in an establishment, either private or public, shall be 
entitled to have two days of paid menstrual leave for each menstrual cycle. 
 ( 2) The menstrual leave shall be provided in addition to any other leave entitlements 
provided by the establishment or the employers under any other law, contract or policy. 
 ( 3) The establishment may deny granting of menstrual leave to working woman in the 
following instances –
   (a) where the presence of woman is deemed to be important to prevent any significant 
disruption to the functioning of the workplace; and
  (b) where the presence of woman is deemed critical:
  Provided that in the above mentioned situation, the employer shall provide an 
alternative arrangement or working conditions to the women who are working during 
the period of menstruation: 
  Provided further that if the woman requires additional leave beyond the prescribed 
number of days due to any serious health condition directly related to menstruation, 
then an additional leave of two days shall be given to the woman:
 Provided also that the woman at the time of filing an application for claiming 
menstrual leave shall also attach a medical certificate from a certified medical 
practitioner: 
  Provided also that if the woman requires additional leave beyond the prescribed 
number of days but the health conditions pertaining to menstruation are not so serious, 
then the woman may,–
  (a) choose to work from home, with full payment on the permission of the 
employees and nature of work;
  (b) choose Half-day work, where the woman may receive salary for half a day at 
the discretion of the employer.
 ( 4) Any absence beyond the period or prescribed under sub-section (2) shall be treated 
as unpaid leave:
 Provided, upon the discretion of the employee, the additional unpaid leave shall be 
adjusted to the other forms of leave available to the working woman.
CHAPTER III
Procedure for Application of Lea ve
 7. ( 1) Any woman entitled to menstrual leave under this Act shall submit an initial 
medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner to the designated officer in the 
establishment or educational institution, as the case may be except in cases where there is a 
significant variation in the menstruation cycle as mentioned in sub-section (3).
 ( 2) The medical certificate referred to in sub-section (1) shall specify the expected dates 
of menstrual cycle of the woman and the leave shall be granted by the employer or the head 
of the educational institution based on the dates indicated in the medical certificate: 
Menstrual leave 
for Working 
Woman.
Submission 
of Medical 
Certificates or 
Menstrual Leave 
Eligibility.
10
5
30
40
35
25
45
20
15
4

 Provided that any variations in the expected dates of menstrual cycle up to seven 
days shall be acknowledged, and the initial medical certificate submitted to be  utilised for 
granting menstrual leave. 
 ( 3) In cases where there is significant variation in the expected date of menstruation 
which is beyond seven days, then the woman shall be required to submit a new medical 
certificate from a certified medical practitioner along with the application for menstrual 
leave to the designated officer of the establishment or educational institution, as the case 
may be.
 ( 4) Upon submission of the new medical certificate by the woman under sub-section (2) 
the expected dates of menstruation mentioned and indicated therein shall be considered by 
the designated officer.
 ( 5) The designated officer shall ensure that all medical certificates are kept confidential 
and used solely for the purpose of processing menstrual leave. 
 ( 6) The certificates submitted by the woman shall be returned within seven days after 
review and the recording of the expected dates of menstruation.
 8.  (1) Any woman entitled to menstrual leave under this Act may, at her own discretion, 
choose to not avail the leave of absence provided to her during the days of her menstruation:
 Provided that no employer shall coerce or otherwise, compel any woman to not avail 
the leave of absence during her menstruation, the choice made shall be done voluntarily by 
the woman. 
 ( 2) Any woman, entitled to menstrual leave under this Act, voluntarily decides to not 
avail the leave of absence during the designated leave period, shall waive the right to carry 
forward or to accumulate the unused leave to next month or for future use. 
 ( 3) The woman who voluntarily chooses to not avail the benefit of leave of absence 
during the menstrual period, shall receive the same benefits as applicable during the regular 
days. 
 9. (1) Any women enrolled in an educational institution or employed in an establishment 
shall be entitled to claim for menstrual leave for the prescribed number of days per menstrual 
cycle under the provisions of this Act, through the submission of an application form. 
 ( 2) The woman employee or the student shall submit a Menstrual Leave Application 
Form to the designated officer of the establishment or the educational institutions, as the 
case may be either in electronic form or physical form, within a period of seven days from 
the taking of menstrual leave. 
 ( 3) The application shall include the following information namely,–
   (a) full name of the woman; 
   (b) specific dates for which menstrual leave is being claimed; 
  ( c) details based on their position and status as an employee or student in the 
establishment and educational institution; and
   ( d) a declaration affirming that the leave requested has been taken on account of 
menstruation. 
 ( 4) Upon receipt of the application, the establishment or the educational institution shall 
review the specific dates claimed with the recorded dates for menstruation and satisfied, 
shall provide an acknowledgment for granting the menstrual leave within seven days from 
receipt of application.  
 ( 5) All applications submitted by the woman shall be recorded and stored by the 
establishment or the educational institution in a confidential manner.
Working during 
Menstrual 
Period.
10
5
30
40
35
25
45
20
15
5

CHAPTER IV
Health Facilities
 10.  Every woman in her workplace or in the educational institution shall have access 
to good quality and biodegradable menstrual health products, including but not limited to 
sanitary napkins, menstrual cups, tampons and other necessary menstrual products free of 
cost. 
 11. Every establishment or educational institution shall – 
   (a) ensure that good and biodegradable menstrual health products including but not 
limited to sanitary napkins, menstrual cups, tampons and other necessary menstrual 
products, be stored in easily accessible and hygienic restrooms within their premises; 
   (b) provide to all the woman, the menstrual health products referred in clause (a), 
free of charge; 
   ( c) ensure the implementation of Guidelines on Menstrual Hygiene Management 
(MHM) issued by the Central Government under the Swachh Bharat Mission Guidelines 
(SBM-G);
   (d) ensure there are adequate waste-baskets, dustbins, trash-cans and tissue papers, 
toilet rolls, bags, envelopes or newspapers for the safe, secure and easy disposal of 
menstrual discharge; 
   (e) intimate in writing and electronically to every woman, every benefit available to 
her under this Act; 
   ( f) ensure that the menstrual health products provided to the woman are changed 
and restocked on a monthly basis, so as to guarantee their availability and quality at all 
times; and 
   (g) take such steps, as may be necessary, for creating awareness among the women 
employees and students on menstrual hygiene management and removing the stigma or 
taboo associated with menstruation. 
CHAPTER V
Griev ances and Redressal
 12.  ( 1) Every workplace and educational institution shall establish a Menstrual 
Leave Board to oversee, monitor, regulate, govern and address the issues relating to the 
implementation of menstrual leave for women employees and students, respectively. 
 ( 2) The Menstrual Leave Board shall consist of the following members to be nominated 
by the employer,–
   (a) a woman employed at a senior level at workplace and educational institutions 
who shall be the Chairperson of the Board; and
    (b) not less than two members from amongst the employees from the workplace and 
students from educational institutions.  
(3) The Menstrual Leave Board shall,–
    (a) grant or deny the Menstrual Leave Application Form; 
     (b) hear any complaint or grievances arising from the denial and misuse of menstrual 
leaves entitled to them;
    (c) conduct inquiries and reports of any complaint; 
   ( d) prepare Report on the number of leaves taken and not taken on the name of 
menstrual leave; 
Duties of 
Establishment 
and Educational 
Institutions.
Facilities to 
woman.
10
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
6

    (e) maintain confidentiality of the menstrual leave  matters; and
    (f) maintain of the records pertaining to the menstrual leaves granted that must be 
submitted.
 ( 4) The menstrual leave Board shall address the grievance pertaining to menstrual 
leave in an establishment and educational institution within fourteen days from the date of 
complaint being submitted.
CHAPTER VI
Penalties and Protections
 13.  Whoever,— 
    (a) denies leave to a woman during her menstruation; or
    (b) obstructs a woman from the entitlement of menstrual leave; or
    (c) makes a false claim or certificate for availing the benefits; or
    (d) contravenes any provision of this Act, 
   shall be liable for punishment in the form of fine which shall not be less than ten 
thousand rupees but may extend to fifty thousand rupees for the first offence and for 
any subsequent offence with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but may 
extend to five lakh rupees, along with community services as may be prescribed by the 
Menstrual Leave Board. 
 14.  No woman in an establishment or an educational institution shall face any form of 
discrimination on the reason of her availing menstrual leave. 
CHAPTER VII
Miscellaneous
 15. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law on this behalf, provide such sums of money named Menstrual Health Facilities 
Fund to the State Governments as it thinks necessary for carrying out the provisions 
of this Act. 
 16. The appropriate Government shall appoint, as many as officials as it thinks 
fit, for the purpose of reviewing the report maintained by the establishment and 
educational institutions on the granting of menstrual leave for the woman employees 
and students respectively:
 Provided where there more than one officer is appointed for the purpose of reviewing 
the menstrual leave reports made by the establishments and education institutions, then the 
State Government shall designate one of such officers as the Chief Officer which shall be 
responsible for delegating the tasks to other officers as may be prescribed.
 17.  (1) The Central and State Governments may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council, 
as the case maybe, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Punishments.
Power to make 
rules.
Menstrual 
Health Facilities 
Fund.
Protection 
against 
Discrimination.
Role of 
Government 
Officers. 
10
5
30
40
35
25
45
20
15
7

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Menstruation is a biological process that women experience every month, often 
accompanied by severe pain, discomfort, fatigue and strain. Menstruating women faces a 
lot of biological and physical challenges during their menstrual cycle. There is an urgent 
necessity of a legal framework pertaining to menstrual leave to address this issue, ensuring 
the protection and dignity of women in workplaces and educational institutions. 
History of paid menstrual leave dates back to a period as early as World War II. Globally, 
several countries, including Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Taiwan, Indonesia and Italy have 
recognized the importance of menstrual leave and have enacted laws or introduced policies 
to provide women with paid leave during menstruation. Certain companies, schools and 
universities have already introduced menstrual leave. However, there remains a lack of a 
nationwide legislation to safeguard the rights of menstruating individuals. Moreover, a girls 
school in the State of Kerala has granted students with  menstrual leave as early as 1912.
The concept of menstrual leave is an extension of scope of Article 21 of the Constitution 
of India, which mentions that one should not be expected to work while menstruating due to 
their discomfort and pains caused during that period. Inadequate sanitary facilities and lack 
of adequate menstruation alternatives, violate both the basic right and human right to health.  
The proposed bill shall provide working women and students with the right to menstrual 
leave for two days during their menstrual cycle. The bill also mentions the procedure and 
guidelines for claiming menstrual leave through the submission of medical certificates and 
applications. 
The bill prohibits any form of discrimination against women for availing the benefits 
of menstrual leave, ensuring that they are not unfairly treated or penalized. The bill also 
ensures mandatory and free access of women to good quality and biodegradable menstrual 
health products in workplaces and educational institutions. The bill is also provided with 
mechanisms to file grievances for misuse and denial of menstrual leave. 
The proposed legislation thus seeks to entitle all menstruating women to two days of 
paid leave per menstrual cycle to safeguard their health, welfare and constitutional rights. 
The bill is enacted to create a progressive framework that supports the mental and physical 
well being of menstruating individuals.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   S H A M B H A V I  
November 13, 2024
8

9
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 15 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law on this behalf, provide such sums of money named Menstrual 
Health Facilities Fund to the State Governments as it thinks necessary for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. Clause 16 provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint, 
as many officials as it thinks fit, for the purpose of reviewing the report maintained by 
the establishment and educational institutions on the granting of menstrual leave for the 
woman employees and students respectively. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure 
of about rupees fifty crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India per 
annum. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

10
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. As the rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power, is therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to make provisions for securing the right to paid menstrual leave for working women  
and female students and also to provide the access to menstrual hygiene facilities  
and other health benefits during the period of menstruation and  
for matters connected therewith.
(Smt. Shambhavi, M.P .) 