1 • Page 
2. Page 
3. Page 
4. Page 
Page 
6. Page 
LLI< SARHA 
CGRH!GEND", 
to 
THE AIR (PREVENTI(j~' AND CUNTRuL OF PGLWTI(.,N) BILL, 1980 
(TO be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
(i i) , line 4,-
after "b y" ~ "the" 
(i i) , line 6,-
omi! "the" 
(iii), line 2,-
for "thi s" ~ "the" 
3, line 11,-
ill "pre judict n read "prejudice" ---
4, line 32,-
~ ."power" ~ "powe rs" 
7, line 23,-
:f.2£. lithink" read "t.hinks" 
7. Paqe 8, Ijn~ 37,-
i..2! "pollutions" ~ "pOllution" 
fit Page 10, line 25,-
for lI(a)" read "(9)" 
9. Page 13, line 7,-
for "record record " , . read .. - "record," 
--
10. Page 13, line 29,-
for " of" read " or" -
11. Page 14, line 35,-
.f££ II on" ~ "or" 
12. Page 16, line 34,-
for "ther-" read "there-" 

2 
13. Page 18, line 5,-
i2.£ "P~EDURE" }'f!acl "PRCCEDURE" 
14. Page 18, line 8,-
for 11 nder" ~ "under" 
.-
15. FagclL, in the iT,.~rgi"nal heading to clause 37,-
re ad "Ord0 rs" -
16. P age 19, - -
f££ the existing marginal heading ,to clause 41, 
~2. nGffences by Government Departments." 
17. Page 1~, line 38,-
.fter " suit" insert " I 
prosecut ion" 
18. Page 21, in the marginal heading to clause 49.-
fOr "this" read "the" 
19. Page 28,-
for line 19, ~ -
"Control of Water Pollution under the Water 
(Prevention and Control of" 
20. P~ge 28, linc; 40,-
.f£! 11 C Osu ltant Ii ~ II consultant" 
21. Page 31, line 5,-
for "pursuc~nce" read "pursuance"' 
22. Page 32, line 16 from bot tom ,-
i2£ "expand" ~ "expend" 
23. Page 33, line 3,-
for "pollut in" -
.24. Page 33, line 7,-
~ "odd it ina 111 
NEW DELHI; 
• November 18, 1980 
R"artika 2~, 1902 (Sakay-
re5ld " poll ut ion" 
read -
"add i tioni11" 

• 
As INTRODUCED IN Lo:< SABRA ON 
Bill No. 181 of 1_ 
THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTJO~) BILL, 1_ 
~ It ,'Iv i IJOl) 
CLAtTSli:S 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
, 
CENTRAL AND STATE BOARDS FOR THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF Am 
PoLLUTION 
3. Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution. 
4. State Boards for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution 
to be State Boards for the Prevention and Control of Air 
Pollution. 
5. Constitution Of State Boards. 
6. Centra] Board to exercise the powers and perform the functions 
of a State Board in the Union territories. 
7. Terms and conditions of service ot members. 
8. Disqualifications. 
9. Vacation of seats by members. 
10. Meetings of Board. 
11. Constitution of committees. 
12. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular 
purposes. 
13. Vacancy in E/Jard not to invalidate acts or proceedings. 
14. Member-secretary and ofticers and other employees of State 
Boards. 
15. Delegation of powers. 
CHAPI'ER III 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF BOARDS 
16. Functions of Central Board. 
17. Functions of State Boards. 
18. Power to Jive directions. 
CHAPI'ER IV 
PREV&NTION AND CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION 
19. Power to declare air pollution control areas. 
20. POwer to give instructions for ensuring standards for emission 
from automobiles. 

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
21. Restrictions on use of certain industrial plants. 
'S. ~Nbrls earrY1ng on industry, etc., not to allow emission of air 
pollutants in e:xcess of the standards laid d9WD by the StJlte 
BOlrd. 
23. Furnishing of information to the State Board and other agencies 
in certain cases. 
24. Power of entry and inspection. 
25. Power to obtain inrormatiol1. 
26. Power to take samples of air or emission and procedure to be 
followed in connection therewith. 
27. Reports of the result of analysis on samples taken under section 
26. 
28. State Air Laboratory. 
29. Analysts. 
30. Reports of analysts. 
31. Appeals. 
CHAPTER V 
FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
32. Contributions by Central Government. 
33. Fund of Board. 
34. Budget. 
35. Annual report. 
36. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
37. Failure to comp1y with the provisions of section 21 (5) or sec-
tion 22 or with 'Orders or directions issued under the Act. 
38. Penalties for certain acts. 
39. Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of the Act. 
40. OffencE!'3 by companies. 
41. Offences by Government Departments. 
42. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
43. C'Ognizance of offences. 
44. Members, officers and employees 'Of Board to be public servants. 
45. Reports and returns. 
46. Bar of jurisdiction. 
CHAPTER vn 
MISCELLANEOUS 
47. Power of State Government to supersede State Board. 
48. Special provision in the cBtSeof supersession of the Central Board 
or the StateBoank C'Onstituted under· tbe W~ter (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. 

(iii) 
• 
CLAUSES 
49. Dissolution of state Boards constituted under this Act. 
50. Power to amend the Schedule. 
51. Maintenance of register. 
52. Effect of other laws. 
53. Power of Central Government to make rules. ·' 
54. Power of State Government to make rules. 
THE SCHEDULE. 
I.~,~,r- -..-' •. 

Bill No. 18'1 of 1980 
'. - ---------
THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) BILL, 
1980 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prevention, control . and abatement 01 air poUu-
trion, for the establilhment, with a view to carrying out the aforesa.id 
pUTpOse.~. of Boards, for conferrimg on and assigning to such Bom-ds 
powers and functions relating thereto and fOT matters connected 
ther"with. 
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the 
Human Environment held in Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India 
participated, to take appropriate steps for the preservation of the natural 
resources of the earth which, among other thlngs, include the preserva-
.s tion of the quality of air and control of air pollution; 
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the decisiou 
aforesaid in so far as they relate to the preservation of the quality of 
air and control of air pollution; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
10 ef India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PaELlMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Air (Prevention and Control of .Short 
IS 
Pollution) Act. 1980. title, 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
extent 
and 
CODlDleJI-
oement. 

DeftnI-
... 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "air pollutant" means any solid, liquid or gaseo\1l3 substance 
present in the atmosphere in such concentration as may be or tend 
ttl be injurious to human beings or other living creatures or plants 
or property or environment; 5 
(b) "air pollution" means the presence in the atmosphere of 
any air pollutant; 
(c) "approved appliance" means any eqUipment or gadget used 
for the burning of any combustible material or for generating or 
consuming any fume, gas or particulate matter and approved by the 10 
State Board for the purposes Of this Act; 
(d) "approved fuel" means any fuel approved by the State 
Board for the purposes of this Act; 
(e) "automobile" means any vehicle powered either by internal 
combustion engine or by any method of generating power to drive 15 
sucli Vebicte by burning fuel; 
(f) ''Board'' means the Central Board or a State Board; 
(g) "Central Board" means the Central Board for the Preven-
tion and Control Of Water Pollution constituted under section 3 of 
the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; 20 6 of 197'-
(n) "chimney" includes any structure with an opening or outlet 
from 'or through which any air pollutant may be emitted; 
(i) "control equipment" means any apparatus, device, equipment 
or system to control the quality and manner of emission of any air 
pollutant and includes any device used for securing the efficient 25 
ope:'ation of tIDy industrial ,plant; 
(j) "eUlission" means any solid Qr liquid or gaseous substance 
coming OOt of any chtmney, duct or Uue or any other outlet; 
(k) "industrial .plant" rums Bay ;plant .sed for say industrial 
0, trade purposes a,nd emitting any air pollutant into the atmos- 30 
phere; . " 
(l) "member" means a member 01. the :Central Board or a State 
Board, as the ,case may be, and includes the Chairman thereof; 
(m) "occupier", in relation to any factory «premi-., means 
the person who has coptaQl ~~. ~he affairs of the 'factory or the 35 
premises and where t~ ,B.~d ~~s are entrusted to a managing 
agent, such agent shall 'be deemea to be the occupier of the facttlry 
'Or -the pm't~; 
(n) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act by the Central Govenun.mt 'ar,as the cae maybe, the State 40 
Government; 
(0) "State Bbiarcl" 'trltiItns,-
(i) in relation to a State in which the Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, iii in force and the State 
Government has constituted for that State a State Board tvr 45 
8 of 187'-

• of 1974. 
• of 1974. 
• of 1974. 
s 
,.' 
:5 
the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution under sectfo~ 4 
Of that Act, the' laid State Board; artll . 
. (ii) in relation to any otA .. State, theSWe ~ard ~~. the 
Prevention and Control of Air Pollutio~ .~~t#~ by ~e 
State Government under ,section 5 of thi,; Act... 
CHAPl'ER II 
CENTRAL AND STATE BoARDS J'OR TFIE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF AIR 
PoLI.tJI'lON 
3. The Central Board for the Prevention and Control of ,Water PoIlu-
10 tioD constituted under section 3 of the Water (Pl'twentioa and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1974, shaU,without prejuuct to the exeraSe and 
performance of its powers ancl functions UDder ~t Act, .erci8e the 
powers and perform the functions of tbe Central Board (or ~ i1'reven-
tion and Control of Air Pollutio.n QDder this Act. . 
15 4. In any State in which .the Water (Prevention .. 41 Control, 01 
PollUtion) Act, 1974, is in force and the State Government -has ,eonsti .. 
tuted for that State a State Board for the Prevention and Control of 
Water Pollution under section 4 of that Act, such State Board ~han :~ 
deemed to be the State Board for ,the Prevention aDd Control of -+tt,r 
20 Pollution constituted under section 5 of this Act .and accordin,ly that 
State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution s~~ 
without ·prejudice to the exercise and performance of its powe.r.s ,...ad 
functions under that Act, exercise the .powers and perform the func~o~s 
of the State Board lor the Prevention and Co~trol of A,1r Pollu~ 
2S under this Ad. 
5. (1) In any State in which the Water (Prevention and Control .of 
Pollution) Act, 1974, is not in force, or that Act is in force but the State 
Government has not constituted a State Board for the PreventIOn aDd 
Control of Water Pollution under that Act, the State Government shall, 
30 with effect from such date as it may, by notification in the O~cl~l 
Gazette. appoint, constitute a State Board .for th\' Preventiob lQliCon-
trol of Air Pollution under such name as may be specified in. tbe noti-
fication, to exercise the PUlVers conferred on, and perf~rm the functions 
assigned to, that Board under this Act. 
3S (2) A State Board constituted under this Act shall consist of the 
following ~emb~~, n8lJlttly:-
(a)· a Chairman, being a person having special knowledge. or 
practical expeJ,it!.llcein respect of matters .relating to environqlen-
tal .protection, to be nominated by the state Go,!,emment: 
Provided that the Chairman may be either wh~time or, part-
time as the State ,Government may think . fit; 
(b) su.c:h number of officials, not exceedJngftve, as Ute State 
Government may think fit, to be nominated by the State Govern-
ment to represent that Government; 
Central 
Board for 
the Pre_ 
vention 
and 
Control 
of Air 
Pollution. 
State 
Boards 
for the 
Preven-
tionand 
Controlot 
Water 
Pollution 
to be 
State 
Boards 
tor the 
Preven-
tionanci 
Contro1 
otAir 
Pollutioa. 
Constitu-
tien of . 
State 
Boards. 

Central 
Board. 
to exer-
cisethe 
powers 
and per-
form the 
functions 
of a State 
Board in 
the Union 
terri-
tories. 
Terms 
and con-
ditions 
of ser-
vice of 
members. 
4 
(c) such number of persolll, not exeeeding ftve, as the State 
Government may think ftt, to be nominated bY, the State Govena-
ment from amongst the members of the local authorities funetion-
ing within the State; 
(cI) such number of non-ofticlals, not exceeding three, as the 5 
State Government may think fit, to be nominated by the State 
Government to represent the interests of agriculture, fishery or 
industry or trade or labour or any other interest, which, in the 
opinion of that Government, ought to be represented; 
(e) two persons to represent the companies or corporations. c. 
owned, controlled or managed by the State. Government, to be nomi-
nated by that Government; 
(f) a full-time member-secretary having practical experience 
in respect Of matters relating to environmental protection and 
having administrative experience, to be appointed by the State 15 
Government: 
Provided that the State Government shall ensure that not less than 
two of the members are persons having special knowledge or practical 
experience in respect of matters relating to the improvement of the 
quality of air or the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution. 2:.' 
(3) Every State Bonrd constituted under this Act shall be a body 
corporate with the name specified by the State Government in the 
notification issued under SUb-section (1) , having perpetual succession 
and a ':ommnn seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire and rils!lose of property and to contract, and may by the !laid 25 
name sue or be sued. 
I. No State Board shall be constituted for a Union territory aad i. 
relation to a Union territory, the Central Board shall exercise the 
powers and perform the functions of a State Board under this Act for 
that Union territory: 3') 
Provided that in relation to any Union territory the Central Soanl 
may delellllte all or any of its power and. functions under this 
section to such person or body of persons as the Central Govemmea' 
may specify. 
7. (1) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, a member of 3S 
a State Board constituted under this Act, other than the member-
secretary, shall hold office for a term Of three years trom the date OD. 
which his nomination is notified in the Official Gazette: 
Provided that a member shall, notwith'3tanding the expiration of hia 
term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his oftlt:e. 40 
(2) The term of ofBce of a member of a State Board constituted 
under this Act and nominated under clause (b) or clause (e) of sub-
section (2) df section 5 shall come to an end as soon 8S he ceases te 
hold the office under the State Government or, as the case may be, the 
.ompany or corporation owned, controlled or managed by the State 45 
Govemment, by virtue of which he was nominated. 
(3) A member Of a State Board constituted under this Act, other than 
the member-secretary, may at any time resign his office by writing 
under his hand addressed,-
(0) in the case of the Chairman, to the State Government· and , SO 

S , 
, (b) ... ,&I)y other CQe, to the, Chairman of the ,State BoHd, 
and the seat of the Cha :rman or such other melJlbeT .. ahall theIellp8ll 
become vacant. 
(4) A member of a State Boa!d constitl1ted under this Act, other 
S than the member-secretary, shall be deemed to havev.acated his .seat, 
If he is absent without reason, sufficient in the opinion of the State 
Board, from three consecutive meetings of the State Board or where he 
I~ notnina'ted 'Under clause (c) of E>ub-section (2) of sect ian 5, he ~ 
to be a member of the local authority and such vacation of seatslWl, in 
10 eIther case, take effect from such date as the State Government .-n~y, by 
liotifiestion in the Official Gazette, specify. 
(5) A casual vacancy in a St[lte Board constituted under this Act 
_albbe {WadLby abash nominatictnand the person nominated to· fill the 
'YJDant;y; shalbbold office only for the I'emamder of the term for Which 
15 the member whose place he takes was nominated. 
(6) A member ·of a S~te Board constituteduncier this Act shall be 
e1igiblefor re..nomination ,but .not for more than two· terms. 
(7) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman.;B1ld 
other members (except the member-secretary) of a State Board consti-
20 tuted under this Act shall be such as may be preseribed. 
'8 .. (1) No person shaH be a member of a State Board 
under this Act, who-
constituted DisquaJi-
ficatloa 
{G) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent, or 
(b) is of unsound mind and has been so declared by a compe-
2S tent court, or 
30 
3S 
40 
(c) is, or has been, convicted of an offenee which, in tbeopinion 
of the State Government, invo1ves moral turpitude, or 
~cl)'is, or at any time has been, convicted of an offence under 
this Act, 'or 
(e) has directly or indirectly by himself or by any partner, 
any share or interest in any firm or c()mpany carrying on the 
business of manufacture, sale. or hire of machinery, .industrial 
plant, control equipment or any other apparatus for the improve-
ment of the quality of air or for the prevention, control or abate-
ment of air pollution, or 
<I> is a director or a secretary, manager or other salaried 
.alieer or employee of'any . company or firm having any contract with 
the Board, or with the Government constituting the Board or with 
a local authority in the State. or with a company or corporation 
oWned contrdlled or managed by the Government, for the , carrying 
9\1t ooof"prograrrtmei for the improvement of the quality of air or 
;,for'the prevention, control' or abatement of air pollution, or 
(g) has so abused, in the opinion of the State Government, his 
position as a mem.ber, as to render 'his continuance on' the \State 
Board :detrimental to theiuter~sts of Ute general ,public. 

Vacation 
of seats 
bymem-
bers. 
Meetings 
of Board. 
'(2) The State Government shall, by order in writing, remove any 
member who is, or has become, subject to any di8qualiftcation men-
tioned in sub-section (1): 
Provided that no order of removal shall be made by the State 
Government under this section unless the member concerned has beeQ. s 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1). or sub-
section (6) of section 7, a membH who has been removed under thia 
section shall not be eligible to contin'Ue to hold office until his successor 
enters upon his office, or, as the case may be, for re-nomination as a 10 
member. 
9. If a member of a State Board constituted under this Act becomet 
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in section 8, his seat 
shall become vacant. 
10. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a Board shall meet at least once 15 
in every three months and shall observe such rules of procedure In 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be pres-
cribed: 
Provided that if, in the opinion of the Chairman, any business of an 
urgent nature is to be transacted, he may convene a meeting of the 20 
Board at such time as he thinks fit for the aforesaid purpose. 
(2) Copies of the minutes of the meetings under sub-section (1) 
shall be forwarded to the Centra] Board and to the State Government 
concerned. 
Constitu- 11 .. (1)A Board may constitute as many committees consisting wholly 
tion of of members or partly of members and partly of other persons and for 25 
commit- such purposp- or purposes as it may think fit. tees. 
Tempo-
raryasso-
elation of 
per&ons 
with 
Board 
for par-
ticular 
purposes. 
(2) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at such 
time and at such place, and shall observe such rules of procedure In 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be 30 
prescribed. 
(3) The members of a committee other than the members of the 
Board shall be paid such fees and allowances, for attending its meetings 
and for attending to any other work .of the Board as may be prescribed. 
12. (1)A Board may associate with itself in such manner, and for 3S 
such purposes, as may be pr.escribed, any pel'8OD whose 881i1tance or 
advice it may desire to obtain in performing any of its funeUona _der 
this Act. 
(2) A person associated with the Board under Bub-section (l~ for '-
any purpose shall have a right to take part in the discussions of the 
Board relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a 41) 
meeting Of the Board and shall not be a member of the Board for any other purpose. 
(3) A person associated with a Board under Bub-section (1) ahaU, be 
entitled to receive such fees and allowances as may be prescribed. . . ~$. 

'of 1974. 
J 
U. No act or proceeding of a Board or any committee thereof &ball 
be called 1n question on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or such com-
mittee, as the case may be. 
5 14. (1) The terms and conditions of service of the member-secretary 
of a State Board constituted under this Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The member-secretary of a State Board, whether' constituted 
under this Act or not, shall exercise such powers and perform such 
10 duties as may be prescribed. 
(3) Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Gover"lment 
in this behalf, a State Board, whether constituted under this Act or not. 
may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary 
for the efficient performance of ifs functions under this Act. 
15 (4) The method of appointment, the conditions of service and the 
scales of [,lay of the officers (other than the member-secretarv) and other 
employees of a State Board app"linted under sub-section (3) shall be 
such as may be determined by regulations made by the State Board 
under this Act. 
(5) Subject to such conditiOn<; as may be prescribed. a State Board 
con8tituted under this Act mav from time to time appoint any qualified. 
p .. rson to be a consultant to the Board and pay him such salary and 
allowances or fees, as it think fit. 
Vacancy 
inBoard 
not to 
invalidate 
acts or 
proceed-
ings. 
Member-
secretary 
andofB-
cera and 
other em-
ployeea 
of state 
Boards. 
15. A State Board may, by .~nE'ral or special order, dele~te to the Delesa-
Chairm!'ln or the member-secretary or any other officer of the Board tion of 
subject to sucb conditions and lirnit!ltions if any. as may be specified in powers. 
the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it may 
df'lem necessary. 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND FlJZJCTIONS OF BOARDS 
18 .. (1) Subject to the provisions: of thIs Act, and without prejudice 
to the performance of its function!" under the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the main functions of the Central Board 
shall be to imProve the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate 
~.ir pollution in the country. 
(2) In oarticular and without preiudice to the generality of the 
foregoing functions, the Central Board may-
(a) advise the Central Government on any matte"!' oconcernin~ 
the improvement of the Quality of air and the prevention, control 
or abatement of air pollution; 
(0) plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for 
the prevention, control or ab2tement of air pollution; 
(c) co-ordinate the activities of the St~t~ Boards and resolve 
disputes among them; 
Functions 
of Central 
Board. 

Functions 
of State 
Boards. 
• 8 
(d) provide technical assis~ance .and. guidance to the ~tate 
BoardS carry out and sponsor mvestigatlt'ms and research rel tmg , . t I batement to problems of air pollution and prevention, con ro or a 
of- air pollution; 
(e) plan and organise the training of persons engaged or to be 5 
engaged· in programmes for the prevention, control or abatement of 
air poll'Ution on such terms and conditions as the Central Board may 
speeUy; 
(1) organise through mass media a comprebeBsive ~ .. 
regarding the prevention, control or abatement of air pollutieD: 10 
(g) coHeet, compile and publish teehn!ical and statistieal dJta 
relating to air pollution and the measures cievised for itl fdective 
prevention, control or abatement and prepare manuals, codes .or 
gUides relating to prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; 
(h.) lay down standards for the quality of. air; 
(i) collect and disseminate information in respect of matten' 
relating to air pollution; 
(;) pe'rform such other funct:ons as may be prescribed. 
(a) The Central &lard may establisJa or rttcOgni<;~ a laboratory or 
1.-.,.a6ori_ ~ enaWe th()Central Board to pedoJ:J;Jl its functions UDder 20 
this section efficiently. 
(4) The Central Board may-
(4) delegate any of its tunctions under this Act geaerally or 
speeially to any of the committees appointed by it; 
(b) do such other things ;lnd perform such other acts as it may 25 
think JMCeS8ary for the Pl'oper discharge of its functions aDd. gene-
rally fo!' the purpose of carrying into effect the purpo~es of this. 
Act. 
17. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudiee t.o 
the performance of its functions, ;f any, under the Water (Prevention 3') 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the functions of a State Board shall 6 of 1974. 
be-
(a) to plan a comprehenl':ive programme for the prevention, 
control or abatement of air pollution and to secUl"e the e¥eculien 
thereof; 35 
(b) to advise the State Government on any matter concerning 
the prevp.nt:on, control or abatement of air pollutions; 
(c) to collect and d~s:;eT'linate information relating to air pol-
lution; 
(d) to collaborate with thE' Central Board in organising the 40 
training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes relat-
ing to prevention, control or t:rbatement of air pollution and to 
orgainse mass-education programme relating thereto; 
(e) to illl(lect, at all reasonable times, any ,eontrol eqUipment, 
indust~ial ~lant or manuh-:tnring process and to give, by order, 4~ 
web 4irectlons to such persollE-as it may ~onsld.er Jle.Cesauyto take 
steps for the prevention, cont~ol or abatement .of ail' poUutionj 
I 

• 
9 
(I) to inspect air pollution control areas at S'Ileh intervals u 
it may think neceual-1,' IIIJIeM the qualtty at air' tIalantn 'ad take 
steps for the preveatioD, control or abatemedt of air pollution in 
such areae; 
5 (g) to lay down, in consultation with the Central Board and 
having regard to the s~ndardE for the quality of air laid down by 
the Central Board, s~andards for emission of air pollutants into the 
atmosphere from industri~l plants and automobiles or for the dis-
cha.rge of any air pollutant into the atmosphere from any other 
I 0 ~ource whatsoever not beirig a ship or an aircraft: 
Provided that different standards for .emission may be. laid 
d,Qwn under this clause for different industrial plants having regard 
tQ the quantity and compositinn of emission of air pollutants into 
the a.tm~s.pl:tere 'from such industrial plants; 
IS (h) to. a.dvis.e the State Government with respect to the suit-
ability of any premises or location for carrying on any ind1,lstry 
which is likely to c.ause air pollution; 
(i) to pedorm such otber functions .as may be p,rescribed or as 
may. from time to time, be entrusted to it by the Central Board or 
20 the State Government; 
(i) to.do such other things and to perform SUf;h other acts as it 
may thin.k n.t=cessary. for the proper d\$charge of its functions and 
generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of 
this Act. 
25 (2) A State Board m,ay. estabUs,h or recopise a laboratory or labor. 
tories to en,b~ the S~ate, Q9ard to perform its functions under tid. 
section efficie.ntly. 
18.· In the pedonnaQCi:e of its tunctitms undec this A~ Power.to 
give 
(0) the Central Boa~d shall· be bound by SoU'Ch directioas in writ- :::-
ing a. the Central Government may give to it; and. 
(b) (Wary State Board. s~'l[1l1 be bound by suth diractioJu in 
writing a& the· Central Board or· the State Government. may give t. 
it: 
Provided that where a direction given by the State Government is 
35 inconsistent with the direction g'lven by the, Central Board; ·the matter 
sholl be referred to the CentTal Government for its decision. 
CHAPTER IV 
PREVENTION AND Ct)N'I'IlOL OF AIR POLLUTION 
lt, (1~ The State GoverJUllent may, after consultation, with the State 
40 BQU'd, ·by notjtioat,ioQ in tbe Official. Gazette,. deolare in aw:b manner. 
as'm~, be preaui\)ed. any area or areas within the State u air pollu .. 
tiQD control area o.rareaa for the .purposesof this Act. 
45 
(Z). The State Govern~ent may" after. COllsllltation with the State 
Board. by notification in the Ofticb'll Gazette,-
(a) Alter any air pollution control area whether by WilY of 
extension or reductionj 
Power to 
declare 
air pollu-
tion con-
trol areas. 

Power to 
live ina-
tructions 
fOr en-
surin, 
standards 
for emis-
aion from 
automo-
biles. 
Restric-
tions on 
useot 
certain 
indus-
trial 
plants. 
10 
(b) declare a new air pollution control area in which may be 
merged one or more existing air pollution IOOntrol antas or any ,art 
or parts thereof. 
(3) If the State Government, after consultation with the State 
Board, is of opinion that the use of any fuel, other than an approved S 
fuel, in any air pollution control area or part thereof, may cause or is 
Jikely to cause air pollution, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazettt'", prohibit the use of such fuel in such area or part thereof with 
f!ft'ect from such date (being not IE'SS than three months from the date 
of publication of the notification) ~s may be specified in the notification. 10 
(4) The St$>te Government mav, after conS'Ultation with the State 
Board. by notification in the Official Gazette, dirt>ct that with effect from 
such date as may be specified thp.rein, no appliance, other than an 
apT>roved appliance. shall be used in the premises situated in an air 
pol1ution control area: J 5 
Provided that different dates may be speC'ified for different parts of an 
air pollution control area or for the use of different appliances. 
(5) If the ~hte Government. ~fter consuJtrftion with the State Board, 
i!'1 of opinion that the burning of ::I.nv material (not bein,:! fuel) in any 
air pollution control arp.:t or n!lrt tnerE'Of m!lv cause or is likely to cause 20 
air poIluFon. it mAY. bv notificatioTl in the Oftkial Glizette. !?rohibit 
the l1ul'nin!T of !'ll"h mate .. ;~l in su,..h al'ea or nlin thereof. 
20. With l'I view to pn'lurim' tltat the stannl\rtts for emission of air 
polluhnt" from Rutomohlles laid nown hv t1..p' ~t.,tl> 'Roqro under clAuse 
(0) nf <:t1'h-!'pction (1\ of' !';ectioTl 17 liTQ ('()mn1ip.d ..... ritlt the State Govern- ~5 
ment sh"ll1. i., cOT'lc:nltntion w:th t1..", Stat", BOfl'"<i. give!'luch inlltruction!ll ~ 
11.'1 m'w be rI"'''men ne,.pc:qA~' to +h .. ""n"PrT\erl .,uthol'itv iTl ch"'l'{!'e of "~ 
<"" rerY;c;tl'~tir," nf JYlntnl' vpltirlps un~p.r the ""ot,,1" Vehicle!! Act. 193~. and, 4 of 1&39. 
"'lJrh !lllthorit,· c:h~l1. n,..,t",ithc:taTlrHnIY ",,,yt1..in,, t'o.,t",;ned in that Act or ... 
the rules mane thereunder be bound to comply with su~h instructions, 30 
21. (1\ Sl1biprt to the orovic:ion .. nf this c:ection. no person shall. 
'Without th ... orevlotls cOTlc:;ent of t1.. .. Stilt", R""rti onerAfe anv industrial 
plant for the purpnc:;e of 1'Iny industry specified in the Schedule in an 
Il.ir pollution control area. 
(2) An application for consent of the State Board under sub-sectinn 
(1) sh~ll be AccomnaniP.d h" such fDf!!II II~ mRV N> nrescribed lind "hAn 35 
1..e made in the prescribed form anrl shall contain the particulars of the I! 
industrial plant and such other particulars as mav be prescribed: ~~ . ~.~ 
Provider! that where IInv person. ltnmedliately before the declaration .: 
of any pf'ea as 1'1'1 air pollution cO'1trol are'!. ooerates ;n such area any 40 
initustriaJ plant for th,. "urpo!lle of any industry SDecifted in the Sche-
dulp.. such person sh'an make +J,e application under this sub-geclion 
within such neriod (bein~ not Ipc:q than three months from 'the date of 
su~h decll'lration) as mav he pN'!"~ribed and where such1)el'son makes 
such apolication, he shall be ~~'Tler! to be oneratinQ' such industrial 45 
nlant with the ('onsent of the Shti:e Board until the consent appUed for 
has been refused. 
(3) The State Board may makp. such inQuiry as it may deem fit in 
respect of the application for consent referred to in sub-section (1) and , 

H 
in making any such inquhy, shall follow such proced'Ure as may • be 
prescribed. 
(4) Within a period of four months after the receipt of the applica-
tion for consent referred to in sub-section (1), the State Board shall, by 
S order in writmg, either grant or refuse, for reasons to be recorded in 
the order, the consent applied for. 
10 
15 
20 
(5) Every person to whom consent has been granted by the State 
Board under sub-section (4), shaH comply with the following condi-
tions, namely:-
(i) the control equipment of such specifications as the state 
Board may approve in this behalf shall be iDatalled and operated 
in the premises where the industry is carried on or proposed to be 
carried on; 
(ii) th~ ex:sting control equipment, if any, shall be altered or 
replaced in accordance with the directions of the State Boar d; 
(iii) the control eqUipment referred to in clause (i) or clause 
(ii) shall be kept at all times in good running condition; 
(iv) chimney, wherever 'lecessary, of such specifications as the 
State Board may approve in this behalf shall be erected or 
re-erected in such premises; 
(v) such other conditions as the State Board may specify in 
this behalf; and 
(vi) the conditions referre-d to in clauses (i), (ii) and (iv) 
shall be complied with within such period. as the State Board may 
25 specify in this behalf: 
Provided that in the case of a person operating any industrial plant 
for the purpose of any industry specified in the Schedule in an air pollu-
tion control area immediately before the date of declaration of 8ueh 
area as an air pollution control area, the period so specified shall not 
30 be less than six months: 
Provided further that-
(a) after the installation of any control equipment in accor-
dance with the specifications under clause (i), or 
(b) after the alteration or replacement of any control equip-
35 ment in accordance with the directions of the State Board under 
clause (ii), or 
(c) after the erection or re-erection of any chimney under 
clause (iv) , 
no control equipment or chimney shall be altered or replaced or, as the 
case may be, erected or re-erected except with the previous approval 
40 of the State Board. 
(6) If due to any technological improvement or otherwise the State 
Board is of opinion that all or any of the conditions referred to in sub-
section (5) require or requires variation (including the change of any 

Persons 
carrying 
on indus-
try, etc., 
not to 
allow 
emission 
ofm 
pollutants 
in excess 
of the 
standards 
laid 
down by 
State 
Board. 
Furnish-
ingof 
informa-
tion to 
State 
Board 
and 
other 
ateDcies 
in cer-
tain 
cases. 
Power of 
entry 
and ins-
pection. 
H. 
control equipment, either in whole or in part), the State BGarct"~ 
sfter giving the person to whom consent has been granted an oppor-
W*ty. ofI~gbaaN, .. ry·'aU er.tMy Qf._ch· CIIBdMIIoas aria -thefM1pon 
;Sl1cb·penoa,·tIb.n '. ,bound· to;~p1y ·with fhe'OeldtiemFIS ·,10' .... ..a. 
(1) Where a person to whom consel)t has' been granted by the state S 
Board under sub-section (4), transfers his fnterest in the industry to 
_y, od&er·per.on, sucm 'CH)~t.all,.be ,deemed ~·_ve· been gNnted 
-Ib"'nch Mhel' 'penonllld Be shalJ be bound to «!fJmPly with aU . h 
conditions subject to which it was granted as if the consent -was ~d 
to him originally. 10 
' •. No person' e.rying on any, illduatly speoified'.in the, Sc~e or 
'q,eratillg,;auy inchutrial plau, in ay air, poUuttoft· CIODtrol lI1ea shall 
discharge or cause or permit to be discharged the emisaton ef8lly air 
pollutant in excess of the standards laid down by the State Board under 
~lause (g) of sub-section (7') of section 17. IS 
23. (1) Where in any air pollution control area the emission of any 
air pollutant into the atmosphere in excess of the standards laid down 
by the State, Board occurs or, iso.apprebended to ·occur due to accident or 
~r 'lmiorMeeb act or event, tlleperson in oRarge of the .premises' from 
where such emission occurs or is apprehended to 'octmr shan foftftwith 110 
intimate the fact of such occurrence or the apprehension of such occur-
'MiCe '0' the' State Board and to' S'llch aothortties or agencies as may be 
prreaerlbed. 
(Z) OnNCeipt of infonnation with t.lpect to the fact or the aWte-
hension of any occurrence of the nature referred 'to'in sub-aection' (I'), IS 
whether through intimation under that sub-section or otherwise, the 
State Board and the authorities or agencies shall, as early as practi-
cable, cause such remedial measures to be taken as are n~essary to 
mitigate the erniftion of such air polloutants. 
(3) Expenses, if any, incurred by the State Board, authority or 30 
.gency with reapea::t to the remedial measures referred to ip. sulr.aection 
U,. togeth~r with interest (at such reasonable rate, as the State Govern-
ment may, by order, fix) from ,the date when a demand for the expenses 
is made until it is paid, maybe NCoyereQ -by ·'hat 'Bon, authority or 
agency from the person concerned, as arrears of land revenue, or 'otl pub- 3S 
lie demand. 
24. (1) Subject to theproviaiollS of this section,:U)'.perlOll emp0wer-
ed by a State Board in this behalf shall have a right ·to. eater, at au 
reasonable times with such assistance as he considers necessary, any 
,plaee- 40 
. ,(~) fortbe -piII'pOi8off~pt!!IItormi .. ,.,,! of tOe u..cUons .• oft1lle 
State Board entrusted to himj -

13 ... 
.(b) fC# the pw'pGJe of dp.terminin& wh~tber and if 80 in what 
awmer, any such :functions are to be performed or whether any 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any llQ~ 
order, direction or authorisation served, made, given or granted 
S under this Act is being or has been complied with; 
10 
(c) for the purpose of examining and testing any control eQ.uip-
ment, industrial plant, record, record, register, document or any other 
material object or for conducting a search of any plaoe in which he 
has reason to believe that an offence under thia Act or the rules 
made there-.lOder has been ar is being or is about to be committed 
and for sC"i:z.lng any such control equipment, industrial plant, record, 
register, document or other material object if he has reasons to 
believe that it may furnish evidence of the commission of an 
offence punishable under thi£ Act or the rules made thereunder. 
IS (2) Every person carrying on any industry specified in the Schedule 
and every person t(Jeratingany control equipment or any indu,trial 
plant, in an air pollution control area shall bebaund to render all assis-
tance to the person empowered by the State Board under sub-section 
(1) for carrying out the functions under that sub-section and if he fails 
20 to do so without any reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty of 
an oftence under this Act. 
(3) If any person wilfully delays or obstructs any person empowered 
by the State Board under sub-section (1) in the discharge of his duties, 
he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act. 
2 Qf 197.. 2S (4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or, in 
relation to the State of Jammu ;me Kashmir, or any area in which that 
Code is noi in force, the provisions of any corresponding law in force in 
{hat State or area, shall, so far as may be, awly to any search or seizure 
under this section aos they apply to any search of seizure made under the 
30 authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code or, as the 
case may be, under the correspon.ding provisions of the said law. 
25. For the 'purposes of carrying out the fll.nctio~,s eotrLj,Sted to. it, the 
State Board "r any officer empowered by it in that behalf may call for 
any information (including information regarding the types of air poIlu-
35 tants emitted into the atmosphere and the level of the emission of such 
air pollutants) from the occupier or any other person carrying on qy 
industry or operating any control equipment or industrial plant andfqr 
the ptlrpose of verifying the correctness of such information, the State 
&ard. or such officer shall have the right to ~ect the prem;iMrs 
i40where such inctustry, control equipment or industrial plant is beiaJ 
carried on or operated. 
28. (1) A State Board or any officer empowered by it in this behalf 
ahaD have power to take, for the purpose of analysis, samples of air 
or ~eIIlission trom any chimney, flue or duct or any other outlet in such 
4S maImer as may be prescribed. 
(2) The result of any analysis of a sample of emission taken under 
sub-section (1) shall not be admissible in evidence in any legal pro-
~g.unless thepr.cmsions of sub-seeticlns (3) and (4) are com-
.~.w.itb. 
POWer'te 
obtain 
infOnM-
tion. 
POW",to 
ta. 
sa""', ot_. 
emilliion 
and 
proced&ule 
to be·toJ,. 
lowed. ~ 
Q~­
~ 
~ .,. 

1" (4) whet\ a IUrlple Qf , (I) 18ubject to the provision~ oIsub·sec !~n, tItinI 
'emtuion is taken for analysisl.lnrJer S'llb-sectJOn (1), the perIOD 
the sample shall-
, t notice then and there, (a) serve on the occupier or hIS agen , a , ' h' ·t 'b I f his intention to ave 1 80 5 in such form as may be preserl e(, 0 • 
analysed; 
(b~. in the presence of the occupier or his agent, collect 8 AJD-
.. j)le of emission for analysis; 
(e) cause the sample to he placed in a container o~ containers 
which shall be marked and ~eale(: and shall also be s~gned botn 10 
by the person takmg the sample .:lnd the occupier or hIS agent; 
(d) send, without delay, the container or containers to the 
,laboratory established or recognised by the State Board under 
section 17 or, if a request in that behalf is made by the occupier or 
his agent when the notice is ~.erved on him under clause (a) ,to 15 
the laboratory established or ,pecified under sub-section (1) of 
section 28. 
(4) When a sample of emission is taken for analysis under sub-
section (1) and the person taking the sample serves on the occupier or 
hilS agent, a notice under clause (a) of sub-section (3), then,- 20 
.~ 
(a) in a case where the ('ccupier or his agent wilfully absents 
rurnseif, the person taking the sample shall collect the' sample of 
emission for analysis to be placed in a container or contain61 
which shall be marked and se~led and shall also be signed by the 
person taking the sample, and 
(0) in a case where the occupier or his agent is present at the 
time ·of taking the sample bllt refuses to sign the marked and sealet'l 
container or containers of the sample ot emission as required under 
clause (c) of sub-section (3), the marked and sealed container or 
. containers shall be signed by the person taking the sample, 30 
and ·the container or containers shall be sent without delay by the person 
taking the sample for analysis to the laboratory established or specified 
under sub-section (1) of section 28 and such person shall inform tQe 
Government analyst appointed under sub-section (1') of section 28, JJl 
writing, about the \\rilful absence of the occupier on his agent, or,as tbe<SS 
c"se may be, his refusat to sign the container or containers. 
1:1. (1) Where a sample of emission has been sent for analysis to. the 
1aboratorY established or recognised by the State Board, the BoaN 
analyst appointed ~nder sub-section (2) of section 29 shall anal,.. the 
sample and submit a report in the prescribed form of such analytia.fD '40 
triplicate to the State Board. . . 
Reports 
of the 
reault of 
.~i!l 
onS8l'D-
plea 
taken 
uad8r 
..non .. : 
.. , ., " : 
. (2) On receipt ?f the report under sub-section (1), one eopyof the 
report shall be sent by the State Board to the occupier or hi.s-' ~ 
referred to in section 26, another copy shall be preserved for production 
.".,::' before the court in case any legal proceedings are taken against him aDd 4$ 
.l\!: .... ', the other copy shall be kept by tbp. ,State Board. 
• 
J 

b':;!' ~~) \fb,~e p., .. ~mp~rl4.as pe~ ~nt, ~~, ~Silt~'l~' (d) of 
il~p-~~cti,on.(3) or subcsect\Ol;l -(4) of section.26' to' ~y ·labol'at;~ meP-
tloned therein, the Government analyst referred to in the said, sub-see-
tion (4) shall analyse the sample and submit a report in the prescribed 
S form of the result cJf the analysis fn triplicate to the State Board which 
"shall comply with the provisions of sub-section (2) . 
(4) Any-cost incurred in' getting any sample analysed'at the reqh~t 
Of the occupier or his agent as provIded fn claUtse (d) of sub-SeCtion(a) 
of section 26 or when he wilfully absents himself or refuses to sign 'the 
10 marked and sealed container or containers df sample of emission 1:Inder 
, sub-sectiOn (4) of that section, shall be payable by 9uch occupier or 
his agent and in case of default the same shall be recoverable from b11'n 
as arrears of land revenue or of public demand. " 
~ ~t" .... t 
~; .• ' jr.. ~~. 
... 28. (1) Th~ State Government may, by notification in 
IS Gazette,-
the ~ State 
(a) establish one or more State Air Laboratories; or 
(b) Specify one or more l.aboratories or institutes as State Air 
Laboratories to carry out the functions entrusted to thc State Air 
Laboratory under this Act. 
lZO (2) The State Government may, after consultation with the state 
Board, make rules prescribing--
(a) the functions of the State Air Laboratory; 
(b) the procedure for the submission to the said Laboratory of 
samples Of air or emission for analysis or tests, the form of the 
Laboratory's report thereon and the fee-;; payable in respect of sUcfu 
report; 
(c) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to 
enable that Laboratory to carry out its functions. 
Air Labo-
ratory. 
29. (1) The State Government may. by rtotificationin the OfIldai Analysts. 
30 Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit and having the prescribed 
qualifications to be Government nnalysts for thc purpose of analysis of 
samples of air or emission scnt for analysiR to any Laboratory estab-
lished or specified under sub-section (1) of section 28. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provi'sions of section 14, the State Board 
35 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, a~d with the approva~ of the 
State Government, appoint such persons as It thinks fit and having the 
prerJcribed qualifications to be Board analysts for the purpose of analy-
sis of samples of air or emission sent for analysiS to any laboratory-estab-
lished or recognised under section 17. 

Appeals. 
Contribu· 
tiMUby 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Fund of 
Board. 
,It. _~~at··pu'fptlrti1!l· to be •• rt"'. tioy .• : ~ 
· .. t-.l1Bt;or, as the ase;~ be, a'· State Board· .. nalyit I!\By be ultd 
.. ·mdentle of the facts stated therein in any proeeeding under tbla 
Aret. 
.31. (1) Any person agrie •• a: hy am Orftr m- by thff State SoaN S 
under this Act may, within thirty days from the date on which the 
onIer is COlWDUDicated to him, pNfer aD appeal to such authority (here-
"fter referred to as tbeAppellatc Authority) 8S the State Govern-
ment may think fit to constitute: 
.. Pro.vided that the Appellate Authority may entel'taintbe .,peal after 10 
.t,U e~iry of the said period of thirty days· if such authority is .. Usfted 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filiag the 
appeal in time. " ; 
(2) The Appellate Authority shall consi.:t of a single person or three 
~ns as the State Government may think fit to be appointed by the IS 
State Government. 
(3) The form and t'le .nanner in which an appeal may be preferred 
under sub-section (1), the fees payable 'for such appeal and the proce-
dllre to be followed by the Appellate Authority shall be such as may 
b~ prescribed. 2) 
(4) On receipt of an appeal preferred under sub-section (1), the 
Appellate Authority shall, after .giving the appellant and the State Board 
an opportunity of being heard, disp<>5e 'Of the appeal as expeditiously as 
possible. 
CHAPTER V 2S 
FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
32. The Central Government may. after due appropriation matle by 
'Parliament by law in this behalf. make in each financial year sw:h con-
tributions to the State Boards as it may think necessary to enable the 
State Boards to perform their functions ur:ler thi!'; Act: 30 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any State Board 
for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution constituted under 
section 4 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 6 of 1974. 
wh~ is empoweNti by that . Act to expend money fn)m Its fund· ther-
'udder also for pe!'fol"n1ing ite; fun~tiofts. under aay bw for the ·time beibtf 35 
in ,force relatinrr10 the prevention, ClIOntroi or abatement of air peU1Ition. 
33. (1) Every State Board shall have its own fund for the plirpolMls 
of this Act and all sums which may, from time to time, be paid to it by 
the Central Government and all other receipts (by way df contributions, 
if any, from the State Government, fees, gifts, grants, donations, bene- 40 
factions or otherwise) of that Board 'Shall be carried to the fund of the 
Board and all payments by the Board shall be made therefrom. 
(2) Every State Board may expend such sums as it thinks fit ·for per-
forming its functions under this Act and such sums shall be tredtecFu 
expenditure payable out Of the fund of that Board. 4S 

~I ~i1l" ilIitI-·'eIti ... ball.~ te, *'19 ........ 5._ ... 
JIINvefttt'on.Dd' Co~l ot 'w.ater f't)11utlon' ~ttcl UlldIr ..,1iIIIIIl .. 
of the Water (prevention and Control of PoI:Ia.fiGIl).·Act; _4;'wbIaIl 1tJ 
8 of 1eT4 empowered by that Act to expend money from its fund thereunder also 
lot 1956, 
5 for performing its functions, under any law for the time being in force 
relating to the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution. 
M. The Cenw.! BGrerd or, as the Clie may, be, the.&We Baird .-no 
4uoing eadl,· financial year, prepare, in such form and . at au.· time, at 
DItItY be ,prescribed, a budget in respect of tbe financial y,*, aut 
J 0 .... ing SMW.ing the estimeted receipt and expenditure- under tbi.a ... , 
aad copies thepeo'f shall be forwarlied to the eentral Gevemman' •• 
as the c:B8emay be, the State Government. 
35. (1) 'The Central Board shall, duril'tl each fiaaaoial y .... :-.... , 
in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual ... port 
I 5 Ii~g fUll' aceount at its activities under this .Aet 'dUrb!g the'p:re9loua 
ftnanc1al year and copi~s thereof shall be ftn'Warded to the 'c.entiti 
Government and that GOvernment sh8l1' cauSe eVery' 'Such' 'repOrts 1:o"h 
laid before both Houses of Parliament within six months of the date 'OIl 
which it is received by that Government. 
20 (2) Every State Board shall, during eachftnancial year, prepare, in 
'!1ueh form and at such time as 'may be~presertbed', an "afutual'rWpott'p.ring 
full account of its activities under this Act during the preVious financial 
year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the State Government and 
that Government shall cause every such report to be· laid 'before the 
25 St_ Legislature within a period of nine months of the date'on which it 
is received by that Government. 
36. (1) Every Board shall, in relation to its functions under this Act, 
maint1lin proper accounts and other relevant records anei ~pare an 
am1ul statement of accounbs in such form as may bt prescribect. lly. the 
:3) Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Gowrnmellt. 
(!) The accounts of the :Board' shall be audt~d by an auCltor duly 
Cl.uallfted to act as an auditor df companiesurid~r section;22th;f the"~m­
panfes ~ Act; 1158. 
(3) The said auditor shall be appointed by the Central ~erfiment 
35 or, as the case may be, the State Government on the advice of the Comp-
tllO~' ana. Auditor..General of 'India. 
(4), Ever~ auditor appointed to audit the accounts of the Bo.rd, under 
this Act shall have the right to demaud the production Of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents arid papers and' to inspect any 
40 of the· offices of the Board. 
(5) Every such auditor shall send a copy of bis ~ taa.Maer,with 
all audited copy of the accounts to the Centual G<Wel'ltment or, .' the 
oase maybe; the State Government. 
~f) 'Db.e".Cept.ral. GoYeJ:lllWtDt,sha!4 as soQa.at, m*y ber.wtc..ijw,~~ 
45 cit the audit report __ ,aulJ,.,ction (S), 4Jaue,tIiMt .... t~be laWrbe6ale 
both HOQses of Parliament. 
.A'ell1l8fa 
ID1I 
audit. 

1'ailM' '.~ 
tocumply 
with the 
provisions 
of section 
21(5) or 
aeetion 
22 or with 
ordfltpt· . 
directiQlia. 
issued 
under the 
Act. 
Penalties 
forcer-
tam 
acts. 
Penalty 
for con-
traven-
tion of 
certain 
provisions 
uf the 
Act. 
r:;~:(7.,)-:Tbe~Sta~ Govemment shall, as soon aJ ~Y:'1be ~r:i"" ~ipt 
Of 'the .qditreport 'lInde~ sub-sectioll (5) ,cause the same to, be~,~ 
befd~:·the' St~te LegWatwJe. .,,' i ",i. j--, 
CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES AND PROE'DURE 
, 'i7. (1, 'Whoever fails' to comply with the provisions 01." sub':seKion 
(5)0£ se<!tion21 or section 22 or with any order or direction !~ven 
rider this Act shall. in respect of each SU('r1 failure, be punilhable with 
imPrisonment 'for a term which may extend to three months orwithftne 
wbichmay extend to ten thouosand rupees, or with both, and~ in c.e I" 
the failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to' one 
hundred rupees for every day during which such failure continues after 
tbe 'conviction for the first such failure. ' 
, ;.;,,(2).If Ule failure referred to in sub-section (1) continues beyond"a 
period of one year after the date of conviction, the offender shall be J 5 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
~onths. 
" 
38. Whoever-
(a) destroys, pulls dowq., removes, lnJures or defaces any 
pillar, post or stake fixed in the ground or any notice or other matt .. 2" 
,put up, inscribed or placed, by or under the authority of the Board, 
or 
(b) obstructs any person acting under the orders or directions 
of the Board from exercising his powers and performing his fUnc-
tions under this Act, or 25 
(c) damages any works or property belonging to the Board, or 
(d) fails to furnish to the Board or any officer or other employee 
of the Board any information required by the Board or such oftlcer 
OJ' other employee for the purpose of this Act, or 
(e) fails to intimate the occurre:qce of the emiSsion of air pollu- 30 
,tants into the atmosphere in excess of the standards laid down by 
the State Board or the apprehension of such occurren., to the state 
Board and other prescribed authorities or agencies as required 
, under sub-section (1) df section 23, or 
(I)' in giving any information which he is required to give under 35 
this Act, makes a statement which is false in any material partteula1o, or 
(0) for, the purpose of obtnining any consent under section 21, 
makes a statement which 16 false in any material particular, 
:oball be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred ·rupees or 40 
with both. 
39. WbOe\ter contravenes any of the provisions of this Act; for 'which 
no penalty has been elsewbere provided in this Act, shall bepunilhable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, 'and in the cue (if 
continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to 45 
ODe" h1Ul\lred rupee. fOr ever, day during which web coatraftntion c.U-
nu.''after conVietlon' for the ftrat suCh. contraventtob. 

• 
to. (1) Where an offence Wlder thie Act hal been committed by a 
.company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
)i~tlyin charge of, and was responsible to, the oompany fur the conduct 
ot the busin~s Of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
S to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded agaiIl$t and 
punished accordingly: 
.1 
. Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 14Ul1 
.guc~ ,person liable to any purp.shment provided in, this Act, if he prove. 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exer· 
10 cised all due diligence to prevent the commission df such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub.gectfon (1), where. 
CUl oftence under this Act has been committed by a companya:>ldit i. 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conm~ 
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
IS manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, mana .. 
ger, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accord·· 
ingly. 
E:rplanaticm.-For the purposes of this section,-
2') (a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a fttm 
Or other association Of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
41. (1) Where an offence under thi's Act has been committed by any 
Department of Government, the Hea'd of the Department shall be deemed 
25 to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded agaiIltSt and 
punished accordingly: 
. tt 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head 
of the Department liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence 
. was connnitted without his knowledge elr that he exercised all due diU-
go. gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
. an offence under thfs Act has been commit~d bya Department of Gov-
ernment and it i6 proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part 
35 of, any officer, other than the Head of the Department, such officer -shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and puni'shed accordingly. 
ft. No suit or other legal proceedfng shall' lie against the Govern-
ment « any officer 'of the Government 01' any meniber <>1" any oftlcet' 'or 
40~(ltht;r ell1fJloyeecl the Board·in respect' of anything· which· is' dmte .or 
'''' .. tMencW<otw·-~"fn..good .faith··ia.,mriUanee"ef thi& A:et tYr tl1e)W1es r .,~ .. .l ....... • • .... ." ,'" .. "'."'"'" 
d th under .. -- ... .0: .... ' "oJ", ., ~"I··· ," .--.' 
mae ere. . .. 
otreilllli ! 
byJ~~ 
panr.;).~ 
..: ..... ',': '>I 
ii' : ,· .• '~~i Jr, 
.,~.) ., 
. . .\~ -·ii . .;~". 
.. " b 
." '. ~,j ,'-
.•. 1" 0, '. 
Ofl'encet 
Depart-
ments. 
by Gov-
ernment . 
:.'J~. '. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 

~bers, 
.... 
ad em-
11'107-
f:4Board 
toile 
-.Ue 
...,..,te. 
~o 
&JIfIt-.art shall t.e copizaace of allY 'oft'enC!e "under this ~t «taept 
GIll a .~t made by, 'or with the previolls "anction in wrttiag di'the 
.... I BoRd, ·andno court inferior to that of a MetropeUtan M.,. .... 'e 
.~.·:3uf1tia1 Nagistr.ate (lftAe,firat 'class !hall try any offlftee punWhat.h 
uDder ,'this Act. 5 
M. All the members and all officers and other employees of a Board 
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisiQJls of 
dda Act or the rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be p\1blic 
ferv8l'lts within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860. 
....i"The. Central Board shall, in relation to its functiOllS under this 10 
Ad. f1amiah,to the Central Government, and a State Board shall, in 
NlMion to its functions under this Act, furnish to the State GovemmeJlt 
_d..to .the Central Board such reports, returns, sta ti&1i<:s, accouni8ad 
·otiher;miormation 8S t:lIrat Government, or, 8S the case may be, the·'Central 
Board • ..." fmm time to time, require. 15 
•. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or pro-
ceeding in respect of any matter which an Appellate Authority COnsti-
tuted under this Act is empowered by or under this Act tt> determine, 
aDd no. ..inj.lm.ction shall .be .granted by any court or other authority in 
respect ot any action taken or .lobe taken in pursuance of an.y power 20 
conferred by or under this Act. 
CHAPTER vn 
MISCELLANEOUS 
C. (1) It at any time the State Government is of opinion-:-
( ... ltbat • State . Boaltd comtitutad under· this ·Act chas,J**- g, 
tently made default in tbe perfOl'lll8RCe of the ~ctiona Vnposeid 'iz' 
i't by or under this Act, or 
(b)thM,cirQumatMats eDt which render it IHIC8IU1'f in ·ihe 
·pQ!te ..... so· to do, 
the ..sta~GoveJ;nment ~, ~ noti.6.cation in the 01Bci.a1 ~a~, 3 I 
IUpenede the State Board fur sucllperiod, not exc.eecliq .aix JXW),~ .s . 
may be specified in the notification: 

601'1974, 
• of 1874, 
• 1 • 
(I} Upon the pub11c:8ticm Of a D01:1Icatico '1:adIitr .., ii~ (J) 
_perseding the State Board f-
(CI) all the members shall, as from the da~ of supersessiQn, 
vacate their ofllces as such; 
S (b) all the powers, functions and duties which may" by Or under 
this Act, be exercised, pertoriDied or discharged by the' 'Stde"Board 
shall, until the State Board is reconstituted under sub-sectian (3), 
be exercwed, performed or discharged by such person or persons as 
the State Govei"llment may direct; 
IO (c) all property owned or controlled by the State Board shall, 
until the Board is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the 
State Government. 
(3) On the expiration of the period of auperJel8ion specified in the 
Dotitlcation issued under sub-sectron (1), the State GO\'emment may-
15 (CI) extend the period of supersession for such further term, not 
exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary; or 
(b) reconstitute the State Board by a fresh nomination or 
appointment, as the case may be, and in such case any person who 
vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall also be 
~'O eligible for nomination or appointment: 
Provided that the State Government may at any time before the 
expiration of the period of supersession, whether originally specified 
under sub-section (1) or as extended under this sub .. ection, tab ,ae_on 
under clause (b) of this sub-section. 
25 48. Where the Central Board or any State Board conatituted under the 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974: it IUpereeded by 
the Central Government or the State Government, aa' the cue may be, 
under that Act, all the powers, functions and duties of the Cent.ral Board 
or such State Board under this Act shall be exercised, pet.fonrai or 
30 discharged durine the period of 9Uch superlE!S8ion by the pel'8Dl1 or· 1*-
som, exereising, performing or dischargin, the poWers, functions 'i!ld 
duties of the Central Board or 9ueh State Board under the Water (Pre-
ventioa ad Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, during such perfod. 
•. (1) As and when the Water (Prevention and Control Of Polrlu-
3S tion) Act, 1974, comes into force in any State and the State Government 
constitutes a State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollu-
tion under that Act the State Board constituted by the State Government 
'U'D.der tJi1s Act ebaU staDd dissolVed and th* Bc;atd fttIt.m_~, '4dall 
-.reise the poweil 'and perform 'the funcUona of the Board ~-' 
40 mentioned in that State,' .. , 
Spedal 
provision 
in the 
... 01 
..,...,. 
aiai:i of 
t1WdiDr hlJitard 
or the 
State 
Boa:rda 
eODStitut-
edunder 
the Water 
(PreYen-
tiQR aad 
CODtrol 
of Pal-
lution) 
Act, lin •. 
DiaIolu.. 
tiOD aI. 
Stitt 
Boarda 
C:cm.ti-
tuted 
under 
thtIAeL 

Pbw~rto 
~nd 
ij).I. 
Scbcidule. 
Mainten-
ance of 
register. 
-.ctOf oth.-r . 
laws.. 
;, 
22 
<?)~ .. t#e dis~tiQn Qf.t~ State Boa.rd cons~ituted. jund~r~his~ct,­
(a) all the members shall vacate their oftlC!es as such; 
(b) all moneys and other property of whatever kind (including 
the fund of the State Board) ownerl by. or vested in, the State Board, 
i~ediately before such dissolution, shall stand transferred to and 5 
v.tin the State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water 
Pollution; 
(c) every officer and other employee serving under the State 
Board immediately refore such dissolution o;;ha11 -be transferred to 
and become an otfic--er or othel' c::lployee 'Of the St;)te Board for the 10 
Prevention and Cont:-ol of Wakl' Pollution and hold office by t:1e 
same tenure and at the ':;dlW~ L:::mU:1l':·;l\:';11 and on the same terms 
and ("onditions of service ;1S he w'0uld h~;\c lwld the same if the 
S~ate Board constituted unuer this Act had not been dissolved and 
soall continue to do so unless and until such tpnur~, remuneration 15 
and terms and conditions of service are duly a; '\~l'ed by the State 
Board for the Prevention alld Control of Water Pollution: 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions 
of service of any such officer or other employee shall not be altered 
to his disadvantage without the previous sanction -of the State Gov- 20 
ernment; 
(d) all liabilities and obligations of the State Board of whatever 
kind, immediately before such dissolutiJn shall be deemed to be the 
liabilities or obligations, as the caSe may be, of the State Board fur 
'thePrevention and Control of Water 1-'ollution and tiny proceeding 25 
or cause of action, pending or existing immcdi;)tely before such 
dissolution by or againo;;t the State Boa:'J constituted under tbis Act 
in relation to su~h liability or obligation may be continued and 
enforced by or against the State Board for the Prevention and Con-
trol of Water Pollution. 30 
50. (1) The Central Government may, 'Of its own motion or on the 
recommendation of a Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, add 
to, or omit from, the Schedule any industry or alter the description of 
any industry and thereupon the Schedule shall be deemed to be amended 
accordingly.. 35 
(2) Every notification made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
51. (1) Every State Board shall maintain a register containing parti-
cularos of the persons to whom consent has been g:-anteci. under section 
21, the standards for emission laid down by it in relation to each such 40 
consent and such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) The register maintained under sub-section (1) shall be open to 
inspection at all reasonable hours by any person interested in or affected 
by such standards· for emission or by any ~ther person authorised by 
such person in this behalf. .4S 
j2.Saveaso tberwise provided by or uQ.der the AtomicEn~gy Aot, 
lt02, ' .• ,.eWlon to .1'acliGlllCt.ive, ~ '~p.~ ·tlw :pf.Ovi,tiOlll 0'· thia ,~t 
.. IUR~ '/IfttlCt -wH~ne; .BIlY"" in~~t .,theff!wlUol ."8-
tained in any enactment other than this Act. 
, ..... 
• 
M011_ 

2J 
53. (1) The Central Government may. in consultation with the Central Power of 
Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules in respect of aCentral . overn-the followmg matters, namely:- ment to 
make 
(a) the intervals and the time and place at which meetil)gs of rules. 
5 the Central Board or any committee thereof shall be held and the 
procedure to be followed at such meetings, including the quorum 
necessary for the transaction of business thereat, under sub-section 
(1) of section 10 cwd u!1'ler ~~ub-section (2) of section 11; 
(b). the fees and alluwances to be paid to the members< df a 
10 committee of the Central Board, not being membeI"3 of the Board, 
under sub-section (3) of section 11; 
(r) t~H:' 'll~'n':er in which nnd the )1'lrposes for whi -h persons 
may be associated with the Central Board under 'Sub-section (1) of 
section. 12; 
(d) the fees and allowances to be paid under sub-section (3) of 
section 12 to persons associated with the Central Boarr! under sub-
section (1) of section 12; 
(e) the functions to be performed by the Central Board under 
clause (j) of sub-section (2) of section 16; 
(f) the form in which and the time within which the budget and 
the annual report of the Central Board may be' prepared and for-
warded to the Central Government under sections 34 and 35; 
(g) the form in which the accounts of the Central Board may be 
maintained under sub-section (1) of section 36. 
(2) Ever~! rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
5 be laid, as soon as may be after it is made. before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in seS':;ion. fur a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the se9.Sion or the 
3') successive sessions afore~aid. both Houses agree in making any modifica-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 'form or be of 
no effect, as tl·c C:lSf' may be; so however. that "lny !:'uch modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule. 35 
54. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the State Gov- Power 
ernment may. by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry of State 
out the purposes of this Act in respect of matters not falling within the Govern-
purview of section 53. ment to make 
40 (2) In particular, and without prejudic.e to. the gen~rality of the fore- rules. 
4S 
going pctWer,· such rulei may provide 'for all or any of tl;le !ollowing 
matters, namely:-
(a) the terms and conditions of service of -the Chairman· and 
other members (other than the member-secretary) of the State 
Board constituted under this Act under sub-section (7) ot ~ction 7; 

24 
(b) the intiervals and thetilne and place at which meetings of 
the State Board or any committee thereof shall be held and" the pro-
cedure to be followed at such meetings, including the quorum 
necessary for the transaction of business thereat, under sub-section 
(1) of section 10 and under sub-section (2) of section 11; 5 
(c) the fees and allowances to be paid to the members of a com-
mittee of the State Board, not being members of the Board under 
sub-section (3) of section 11; 
(d) the manner in which and the purposes for which persons 
may be associated with the State Board under sub-section (1) of to 
section 12; 
(e) the fees and allowances to be paid under sub-section (3) of 
section 12 to persons associated with the State Board under sub-
section (1) of section 12; 
(f) the terms and conditions of service of the member-secretary 15 
of a State Board constituted under thios Act under sub-section (1) 
of section 14; 
(g) the powers and duties to be exercised and discharged by the 
member-secretary of a State Board under sub-section (2) of section 
14; ~o 
(h) the conditions subject to which a State Board may appoint 
such oftlcers and other employees as it considers necessary for the 
eftlcient performance of its functions under sub-section (3) of section 
14:; 
(i) the conditions subject to which a State Boan: may appoint a 25 
consultant under sub-section (5) of section 14; 
(j) the functions to be performed by the State Board under 
clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 17; 
(k) the manner in which any area or areas may be declared 
as air pollution control area or areas under sub-section (1) of section 3C: 
19; 
(l) the form of application 'for the consent of the State Board, 
the fees payable therefor, the period within which such applicatf(,D 
ehaU be made and the particulars it may contain, under sub-section 
(2) of section 21; 35 
(m) the procedure to be followed in respect of an inquiry under 
sub-section (3) of sect.ion 21; 
(n) the authorities or agencies to whom information under sub-
section (1) ot section 23 shall be furnished; 
(0) the manner in which samples of air or emission may be 40 
taken under sub-section (1) of section 26; 
(p) the form of the notice referred to in ~ub-sectiOill (3) of 
section 28; 
(q) the form of the report of the State Board analyst under sub-
section (1) rJf section 27; 45 
(r) the form of the report of the Government analyst under 
sub-seetioo (3) of section 2'7; 

• 
(8) the functions of the State Air Laboratory, the procedure !ar 
the submissfon to the said Laboratory of samples of air or emission 
for analysi'3 or tests, the form of Laboratory's report thereon, the 
fees payable in respect of such report and other matters as may be 
5 necessary or expedient to enable that Laboratory to carry out its 
functions, under sulHlection (2) of section 28; 
(t) the qualifications required for Government analysts under 
sub-section (1) of section 29; 
(u) the qualifications required for State Board analysts under 
I (l sub-section (2) of section 29; 
'5 
::lO 
(v) the form and the manner in which appeals may be preferred, 
the fees payable in respect of such appeals and the procedure to b. 
followed by the AppcllrJtc Authorjt~· in clisposhg (If the appeals 
under sub-section (3) of section 31; 
(w) the form in which and the time within which the budget 
and annual report of the state Board may be prepared and forwarjed 
to the State Government under '3cctions 34 and 35; 
(x) the form in which the accounts of the State Board may be 
maintained under sub-section (1) of secfion 36; 
(y) the particulars which the register mafntained under section 
51 may contain; 
(z) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) After the first constitution of the State Board, n'O rule with respect 
to any of the matters referred to in sub-section (2) [other than those 
refe~ed to in clause (a) thereof], shall be made, varied, amended or 
as repealf'd without ('onsulting that Board. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See'seetions 21, 22, 24 Gd 50) 
1. A.beetos and asbestos prIJducts industries. 
2. Cement and cement prod~\C'ts industries. 
3: Ceramic and ceramic prNiucts industries. 
4. Chemical :md allied ind'l.~stries. 
5. Coal and lignite based chemical industries. 
6. Engineering industries. 
7. Ferrous metallurgical innu5tries. 
8. Fertilize!' industries. 
9. Foundries. 
10. Food and agricultural Droducts industries. 
11. Mining industry. 
12. Non-ferrous metnllurgic:ll indust:,ies. 
5 
)' 
13. Ores/mineral processing industries induding L'encfic;1tion, IS 
pelletization, etc. 
14. Power (coal, petroleum and their products) generat·ng plants 
and boiler plants. 
]5. Paper and pulp (including paper product;,;) industries. 
16. Textile processing industry (made wholly or in part of cotton). ~ 
17. Petroleum refineries. 
18. Petroleum products and peLro-dlemical industries. 
19. Plants for recovery £ron-, and disposal of wastes. 
20. Incinerators. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS 'AND REASONS 
With the increasing ind~tria1isation and the tend~~y" O:f ,the majo-
r! ~y of industries to congregate in areas which are already heavily in-
,,~:jal:"eJ, tl12 rroblem of air pollution has begun to be felt in the 
, 'untr.\·, Th::: prn\:;lcrn is more acute i;l tho~e h('?vily indu:::trialised areas 
',~·'"'L~h arc also densely 'p,~pulated.!short-term studiescenciucted by the 
I\11iona] Envirl1nrr.entaIEngj.neeMnf, Researt'h Insti~, Nagpur, have 
:'on!!rmt"i th~t the citie~ of Cc-,Jcutta, Bombay, Delhi, etc .. 'are facing the 
j'npaC't of air pollution on asteadi~y increasing level. 
~. The presence in air, beyond certain limits, of vari'Ous pollutants 
disc;1arged through ialLstri~11 (~mis~;nns and from certain human:lctivi-
ties C'Oll.llO'cted with traffic, heating, use of dOn1cc;tic fuel,refuse incine-
l~iLdn:,;,.~l::., has a '.~e~rin~cntal ('ffed on the h-ealth cf the people a'3al~ 
(;11 :l~l'l,wj Ide, vcgetcl:i,m and property. 
:3. In the Un~:.ed Nation:, Conference '011 the Human Environment 
held in Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, decisions 
we~(' taken to t:ike auprcD1;-iate steps for the prescrvathm of the nutural 
resources of the earth which, among other things, include the preserva-
tion of the quality o'f air and contr'Ol of air pollution. The Government 
ha::; decider! to implement these decisions of the said Conference in so 
br as they relate to the preservation of the quality of air and control of 
:;Ii r 1.))1.II1i.ion. 
4. It is felt that there sh'Ould be an integrated approach for tackling 
the environmental problems relating to pollution. It is, therefore, pro-
posed that the Central Board for the Prevention and Control 'Of Water 
Pilll;.. ,n. co i~tjlutl'i Ulder the \V.,ter (Prevention and Control 'Of 
Pollution) Act, 1974, will also perform the functions of the Central 
Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution and of a State 
Board for tke Prevention and Control of Air Pollu.tion in the Union 
terrioories. It is also proposed that the State Boards constituted under 
the said Act will also perform the functions of State Boards in respect 
of prevention, control and abatement of air pollution. 'However, in,'those 
States in which State Boards for the Prevention and Contr91 of Water 
PolhlUon have not ·been constituted unser ,that Act, separate ,State 
Boards for the Prevention 'and COIltrol of Air Poll~tion are .proposed.~ 
be constituted. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aboveobj-ectives. 
6. The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain in detail the 
various provisions' thereo'f. 
BHIS'HMA N ARAIN 'SINGH. 
NEW DELIU; 
The 5th Novembe'T, 1980. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 1 provides for bringing the proposed legislation into force in 
the whole of India on such date as the Central Go\·emment may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette. appoint. 
Clause 2 seeks to define certain expressions USt'd in the Bill. 
Clause 3 empowers the Central Board for the Prevention and Coo-
trol of Water Pollution constituted under the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 also to exercise the powers and per-
form the functions of the Central Board for the Prevention and Control 
of Air Pollution under this Bill. 
Clause 4 provides that the State Boards for the Prevention and Con-
trol of Water Pollution constituted under the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, shall also exercise the powers and 
perform the functions of the State Boards for the Prevention and Control 
of Air Pollution under this Bill. 
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of a State Board for the Pre-
vention and Control of Air Pollution under this Bill in such a State 
which has not yet constituted a State Board for the Prevention aDd 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. also tn e~:ercise the powers and per-
Pollution) Act, 1974. 
Clause 6 empowers the Central Board to exercise the powers and 
perform the functions of a State Board for a Union territory under this 
Bill. 
Clauses 7 to 10 lay down the t!.!rms and cond:~ivns of service of tm' 
members of a State Board constituted under this Bill, disqualification 
for membership and vacancy arising therefrom and meetings of a Board 
for the purposes of this Bill. 
Clause 11 provides for the constitution ot committees, the proce-
dure for transaction of busmess in such committees and for payment of 
!ees and allowances to the members of the committees. 
ctau.se 12 provides for the temporary aSSOCiation Of persons With a 
Board for purpose& of advice or assistance. 
Clame 13 lays down that a vacancy in a Board or in a COJ'IUDiu. 
ther.of shall not invalidate acts or proceedinlS of such Bqard or com-
mittee. 
Clauae 14: deals with the terms and conditions of service of the mem-
ber-secretary of a State Board constituted under this Bill It also 
vides for the appointment and the terms and conditions· Of servi~ 
oftlc~rs and other employees of a State Board. It allO provida for 
appointment of, and the salary and allowances payable to a COIUltant 
to the State Board. ' 
Clau.ae ~5 provides for the delegation of its powers by a State Board 
to the Chalrman or the member-secreta rv or anv th ftl h reof 
'J 0 er 0 cer t e . 
C'lAv.re 16 provides that the main functions of the Central Board 
aball be to impNve Ule quality Of air and to prevent, control or abate air 
28 

519 
pollution in the country. It also specifies, in particular, certain functionS 
of the Central Board which inter alia relate to laying down the stan-
dards for the quality of air and establishment of laboratories. 
Clause 17 deals with the functions of the State Boards which 
inter alia relate to laying down the standards for emission of air pollu-
tants into the atmo3phere from industrial plants, etc,. or recognition and 
the establishment of laboratories. 
Clause 18 provides that the Central Board shall be bound by such 
directions as the Central Government may give to it and every State 
Board shall be bound by such directions as the Central Board or the 
State Government may give to it. 
Clause 19 empowers the State Governments to declare, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, air pollution control areas and to do cer-
tain other acts in relation thereto. It also empowers the State Gov-
ernments to prohibit, by notification in the Official Gazette, the use of 
any fuel, other than an approved fuel, which is likely to call13e air pollu-
tion, with effect from such date which may not be less than three 
months from the date of publication of the notification in the Official 
Gazette. Under this clause the State Goverments have also been 
empowered to direct that no appliance, other than an approved appli-
ance, shall be used in premises situated in an air pollution control area 
from a specified date. It also empowers the State Government to prohi-
bit the burning of any material (not being fuel), which is likely to cause 
air pollution in any air pollution control area or part thereof. 
Clause 20 empowers the State Governments to give instructions to 
the concerned authorities in charge of registration of motor vehicles 
Wlder the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, for ensuring standards for emission 
from automobiles. 
Clause 21 provides that no person shall operate any industrial plant 
for the purpose of any industry specified in the Schedule to the Bill, 
in an air pollution control area without the previous consent of the 
State Board. The clause also lays down the procedure to be followed 
in respect of such consent. The conditions subject to which such con-
sent shall be granted have also been provided in this clause. 
Clause 22 provides that no person carrying on any industry specified 
in the Schedule to the Bill or operating any industrial plant, in any air 
pollution control area shall allow emission of any air pollutant in excess 
of the standards laid down by the State Board. 
Clause 23 deals with a case wherein any air pollution control area the 
emission of any air pollutant into the atmosphere in excess of the stan-
dards laid down by the State Board occurs or is apprehended to occur for 
any reason. It provides that in such a case the person in charge of such 
premises shall forthwith intimate the fact of such occurrence or appre-
hension thereof to the State Board and to such authorities or agencies as 
may be prescribed. It also provides that the State Board and th~ autho-
rities or agencies can themselves cause to be taken the remedial mea-
sures necessary to mitigate the emi&3ion of such ai'r pollutants and recover 
the expenditure incurred from the industry concerned as arrears of land 
revenue or of public demand. 
Clause 24 empowers persons authorised by a State Board in thijl be-
half to enter and inspect any place for the purpose of performing an)" of 

3) 
~e 'functions of ;,he, State Board and for d,eterminlng as to whether ,the 
provisions 'of t~lis Bill or r_lles frrtmd thereunder 'have' been cotrlpUed 
with. It 1l1so proVides that for any search or -sei'mre, rthe prOYiskms 'of 
;'th-e,.co~ of,-£rim~l Proceqijre,1973, ,or of tilecorl:~,p<Hld~g -law in 
,faroe ,ip a St.ateoran area, shall be applicable. 
elttuse '25 . empowers the ·State Boards aud oftieers empowered in this 
behalf to obtain information relating to air pollution and to inspect the 
~~~ liRmises '. ~tha . view to verUying the, CQii~tn_ of, such in-
~atipJl. 
CZause26 'empowers the State Board or any officer authoIisedby' the 
Board to take samples of air or emission for analysis from anyebimney, 
-iPeor duct ()r ~y ot~er outlet in the prescJi'ibed m~r' and also lays 
down tbe procedW'e to,be follQwed while taking iuch .i8DJPle!; for analyais. 
Clause 27 'deals with the manner of dealing with the reports of 'the 
,result of analysis on samples of emission taken under clause 26. The 
claJlse also prov! :les that any cost incurred in getting an~' s:l,mp1es ~malyscd 
at the request of the occupier or his agent or whel1 he wilfully absents 
himself or refuses to sign the container or containers of samples shall be 
payable by such occupier or his agent. 
Clause·28 provides for the establishment of one or more State Air 
Laboratories. It· also :provides for specifying. one or more laboratories or 
,Dlitutes as State Air Laboratories to carry out . the functions ,entrusted 
to the State Air Laboratory under Lhi·] Bill. The clause abo empowers 
the State Government to make rules to provide for the fu~ctions of the 
laboratory and other matters. 
Clause 29 deals with the appointment of Government analysts and 
the Board analysts. 
Clause 30 provides for the reports of analysts being used /lIS eviBence 
in ~ny proceeding under this Bill. 
:-C1ClUSe 31 mak~s provisjonfor an appeal against the • orders pa~ed :py 
the -State Board. 
Clau"e 32 provides for the contributions by the Central' Governml!nt 
·to·the .state BoJlrds to enable them to perfQrmtheirfunctions under this 
SiU. :Ii also provides that nothing in the clause shall apply to any StAte 
Board for the Prevention and Control of Water PoUu.tion aQnsti~uij!d 
under section 4 of the Water . (Ptevention andCO$ol of ,Pollu~io.n) .ct, 
ln4, which is empowered by that Act to expend ,from its fund thereunder 
for the p~rpo.?es of this Bill alio. 
,C.a.US6S 33 to t'J6contain ·the usual provisions reltltlng,toiund£, bu(:}get, 
ennualfeP<)rt, ~untsand lau.dit ,Of the :Central .BcNtrd. and ,the ~~.1.e 
Boards. . 
-£'klt£8es ,37 ,to 41 'p?OVide jfor 'pemtlties in respect of ,offellees 'committed 
,under this Bill. 
Clause 42 seeks to give protection to the Government or any officer 
Of ' the Government, or any member, officer or other elllployee of a Board 
in respect of acts done or intended to be done in ,good faith in pursuance 
of thi'3 Bill or the rules made thereunder. 
,Cla"se ~ .Jars f,fOwn,Othat no court s~~ take co~ee 'of!~y~~e 
under 'this Bill except on 1l complaint made by,' or with-the pr~6Us 

• 
sanction in writing of the State Board, and also that no court inferior to 
that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class shall try any offence punishable under this Bill. 
Clause. 44 provides that members, officers and other employees of a 
B?ard When acting or purporting to act in pursucance of any of th~pro­
VIsions of this Bill or the rules made' thereunder shall be' deemed to be' 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code. 
C,taUBe 45· lays down' that tl1e Central -Boara, .andthe State Boards: 
shall ftu'rtish ,to the Central Government and the State- Govemraents r .... 
pectively such reports, . returns, . statistics, accounts and other information 
with respect to their activities under this Bill ag may be called for by- the-
reJjeCtlve Governments. 
Clause 46 bars the jurisdiction of courts i'n respect ot' any matter· 
which the Appellate Authority constituted under this Bili is empoweret!' 
to determine under this Bill. 
Clause 47 empowers the State Government teJ' sUJ'ersed~, a StatAl! 
Board constituted under this Bill under certain circuffi'3tances. 
Clause 48 makes aspectal provision to deal with a case of superees-
~;\'ln nf Ih,. C'entr'" BMlrei ,.." tht> ~t!'ltp BOFld ,..""~titllten 'Unopr the Water 
(Prevention anei Control of Po-Uuti-on) Act. ]974. It has been provided 
;n thic::clause that in such A situation the powers, function", and duties of 
the Central BMrd or such Stl'lte Roatrl unnel" thic::Bill sh'ill be exercised;-
performeod or discharged durin~ the period of such supersessiGD by . the 
n"r~O., 0" "prsons r>xprdR;"lf" nf'rfnl"m.;"!1 n, ni"~hnr~in(1 the nowel's. fUnC!-
tion~ anti eiuties of the Central Boarn or such State Board under the 
Water (Prevention and Control of P.ollution) Act, 1974, during such 
period. ~ --'~7f-~ 
.\" 
Clause 49 provides that :15 nnd when the Water (Prevention and Con .. 
trol of Pollution) Act, 1974. comes into force in a State and thp State 
Government constitutes a Rtate Board ff'r the Prevention and Contl'Ql 
of Water Pollutfon under that Act, the State Board constituted bv tile 
State Government under this Bill shall stand dissolved and the Board 
first-mentioned shall exercise the powers 3"ln perform the functions of 
the BOllrd second-mentionerl in' that State. This clause also makes other 
consequential provi'3ions in this behalf. 
Clansr 50 empowe"s t'H' rent.ral Government tn amend the Schedule. 
Clatlse 51 provjdes for the mA;ntenance of a register regarding parti. 
culars as f(~0,'ard" cO'1sents rrnnterl hy a State BOflrd. 
Clau.'Ie 52 lays down that, save 3S otherwtse provided under the 
AtOmic Energy Actl 1962, in relation to radioactive air pollution. the 'Pro-
visions' of this Bill shall have overriding effect in' c8t3e of inconsistency 
with anY'other enactment. 
Clau.ses 53 nnl! E:4 emnower the Centra' GOVernment Rnd thl> StatA 
Governments respectively'· to make rules in consultation with the Central 
Board or, as the case may be, the State Board. 
The Schedule specifies the industries referred to in clauses 21, 22, 
24 and 50. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The scheme of the Bill is to achieve co-ordination in the matter of 
environmental pollution control. Hence, it has been provided that the 
Boards constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollu-
tion) Act, 1974, will also perform the functions relating to prevention, 
control and abatement of air pollution under this Bill (vide clauses 3 and 
4) . In t~ State~ in which the State Boards for the Prevention and 
Control of Water Pullution have not been constituted under that Act, 
separate State Boards for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution will 
be constituted under this Bill (vide clause 5) and the expenditure for the 
same will be borne by the Central Government. However, as and when 
the Water (prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, comes into 
force in any '3uch State .and that State Government consti'tutes a State 
Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution under that Act, 
the State Board constituted under this Bill will stand dissolved and the 
liability of the Central Government to meet the expenditure will also 
cease. 
2. In the 15 States which have so far adopted the Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the intention is that the Boards con-
!'!titntE'~ under that Act should also perform the function!! relating to. 
prevention, control and abatement of a'ir pollution under thb; Bill. The 
Water (Prevention anri Control of Pollution) Act, ] 974. has accordingly 
been amended to enable the Boards constituted under that Act to spend 
al'3D fur the work relating to prevention, control and abatement of air 
pollution under this Bill. 
3. Under clause 32, the Central Government have to. make contribu-
tions to the State Boards to perform their fUnction!! under this Bill. 
However, thls is covered by a proviso that nothing in this clause shall 
apply to nny State Board constituted under section 4 of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, which Is empowered 
by that Act to expand money from its fund thereunder for the purposes 
of this Bill also. 
4. Under c1auo;;e 3, the Central Board for the Prevention and Control 
of Water Pollution constituted under the Water (prevention and Con-
trol of PollutIon) Act, 1974, will also perform the functions of the 
Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution, and of a 
State Board in the Union territories under clause 6 of the Bill. 
5. Under claUSe 28, the State Government may establish or specify 
one or more State Air Laboratories to carry out the functions assfgned 
to it under the Bill. In respect of Union 'territories, it is propOBed to 
specify the Central Water Laboratorv established under section 51 of the 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollutfon) Act, 1974. to perform the 
functions of the State Air Laboratory also under this Bill. 
6. Clause 11 provides for the constitution of committees by a Board. 
Sub-clause (3) thereof p!'ovides for the payment of such fees and allow-
ances a, may be !,reo;cribed to th~ members of a committee, other than 
\' I. . ' 

- " 
'. 
the members of the Boards, for attending the meetings and for attending 
t? any ot;h.er, V'!~k of tM, Board .. ';l1le s:i~ Cell~f~ ~ar4; fQr the ~even­
bon and Control of Water Pollutm, while perfbI'mmg t'h~ functions of the 
Central Board. for the Prevention and Control of. Ail':lPo~wtion and as a 
State BOlrd for the' Prme!lt~'On Rnd COl:it~QI ~of 'AirPollu.tion in the UnioB 
territori~~ under this Bill, .may constitute suchQGmmtttees. for"the "p\lr .. 
poses of this Bill. This mav involve some additinal expenditure. Similarly, 
under sub-clause (3) of clause 12, any person asspciated with the Central 
B03r,i under sub-clause (1) of clau'3e 12, shall be paid su~h fees and 
allowances as may be pre3cribed.·· . . . 
7. The aetnal exptmditure which the Centrlll GO\rernment wbuld be 
required to incur for i'1'l'Plementin~ theprO'\?i!"ions of this Bill cannot"be 
correctly estimated at present. The e~penditul'e on the Central Govern-
ment in iniprementingthe provisions of this BUl is estimated at Rs. 2() 
lakhog. This' will be a recurling expenditure till an the remaining seven 
States adopt the Water (Pnvention and Control of PollutIon) Act, 1974, 
and constitute State Boards under that Act. Besides, there will be certain 
addition to the expenditur~ in respect of the Central Board for the Pre-
vention and Control of Water Pollution as it has to perform the work 
relating to prevention, control and abatement of afr pollution also in the 
Union territories in aridition to its function as t0e Central Board for the 
Prevention and Control of Air Pollution under this Bill. This is esti-
mated at Rs. 10.78 lakhs, out of which Rs. 5.73 lakhs will be recurring 
expenditure and the remaining will be non-recurring. However, this may 
be off-set by the revenues expected from the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Polluti'on) Cess Act, 1977. 

-MEMORANDUM RWAlIDING DELEGATEP.LrotsLA'tION 
'Clwse '83' of rthe&D. emPM'eI'l1 the CeDtnl- Gevenm!leht;' afttr COI1-
MllUdan \'11th tM· .CIutr61 'BOard, to make rules fOr the purpOse' of 
gtVfh«' daet to' tHe: 'prG!rilibm ot" Wsr Bill in. 're8plect . Of ma*,"s' specified 
tNmtn . 
. 2. Likewi'3e" clause 54. empowers the, State Government to make rules, 
after consultatfon with the State Board if that Board h813 been consti-
tuted, in respect of matters not falling within the purview of clause 53. 
3., ~.(l.)_ of dause-53. andtaub.clauae· (2)r ot claw;a 54.-enume-
ratetbe varlDWf m.atter. with ruped to which rules m~· De made 
r.espectivaly- bY' t11a Cellt&al' Gov«nment ·awl the S1at~. ·Governmeut. 
~ maiters ptl1.ain to;·piOcedwe,.fonn. or administrative. detail aIld, 
.. tlUCa,-u. .Qe1e1Mi<a-·o~1egialP.v. ·powe~ -iaJ ,g£., D.Ol'lnal.charMter. 
34 

A 
BILL 
to provide for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution, for 
the establishment, with a view to carrying out the aforesaid pur-
poses, of Boards, for conferring on and, assigning to such Boards powelS 
and functions relating thereto and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri BhiBhma Naraii.n Si.ngh, 
Mini8ter Of Parliamentary Affairs 
and Works and Housing.) 