1
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
THE INTER-STATE RIVER W ATER DISPUTES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment)
Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 2,—
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Inter-State River Water
Disputes Tribunal referred to in section 4B;
(aa) “existing Tribunal” means a Water Disputes Tribunal constituted
prior to the date of commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes
(Amendment) Act, 2019;
33 of 1956.
Bill No. 187-C of 2019
As PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 31.07.2019
5
10

2
(ab) “Member” includes a Judicial Member and Expert Member of the
Tribunal;
(ac) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(ad) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;’;
(ii) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:––
‘(b) “Tribunal” means the Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal
established under section 4;
(ba) “Vice-Chairperson” means the Vice-Chairperson of the Tribunal
referred to in section 4B;’.
3. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘4. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be established a Tribunal, to be called the Inter-State River Water
Disputes Tribunal, for the adjudication of water disputes:
Provided that on and from the date of establishment of the Tribunal, all existing
Tribunals shall stand dissolved and the water disputes pending adjudication before
such existing Tribunals shall stand transferred to the Tribunal:
Provided further that any person holding office as the Chairman or a member of
the existing Tribunals, shall on the dissolution of the existing Tribunals, cease to hold
office as such Chairman or member, as the case may be, from the date of such
dissolution, but shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided also that a dispute which has already been adjudicated and settled by
an existing Tribunal prior to the date of commencement of the Inter-State River Water
Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2019 shall not be re-opened.
4A. (1) As and when any request under section 3 is received from any State
Government in respect of any water dispute, the Central Government shall set up a
Disputes Resolution Committee, for resolving the dispute amicably.
(2) 
The Disputes Resolution Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, who is or has been an officer of the Central Government
of the rank of the Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent having
experience in water sector, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(b) such expert members, as may be considered necessary, who are persons
of ability, integrity and standing and having special qualifications and
professional experience of not less than fifteen years in water sector, agriculture
or such other fields as the Central Government may consider necessary, to be
nominated by the Central Government; and
(c) one member, each to represent the States which are party to the dispute,
to be nominated by the State Government concerned from officers of that
Government not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The Disputes Resolution Committee shall try to resolve a water dispute by
negotiations within a period of one year which may be extended to a further period of
six months and submit its report to the Central Government.
Substitution of
new  sections
4, 4A, 4B, 4C,
4D and 4E for
section 4.
Establishment
of Inter-State
River Water
Disputes
Tribunal.
Disputes
Resolution
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(4) The report submitted by the Disputes Resolution Committee shall contain
details of––
(a) the stand taken by each State which are party to the dispute during
negotiation;
(b) the views of members of the Committee on such stand; and
(c) all relevant facts, information and data relating thereto.
(5) Any water dispute which cannot be settled by negotiations shall be referred
by the Central Government, by notification, to the Tribunal for its adjudication within
a period of three months from the date of receipt of the report under sub-section (3).
4B. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 12, the Tribunal shall consist of a
Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, and not more than three Judicial Members and three
Expert Members to be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation
of the Selection Committee.
(2) The Selection Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of—
(a) the Prime Minister or any other Minister nominated by him—
chairperson;
(b) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated
by him—member;
(c) the Minister in charge of the Ministry dealing with the law and justice—
member; and
(d) the Minister in charge of the Ministry of Jal Shakti—member.
(3) A person shall not be eligible for appointment—
(a) as the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson unless he is, or has been, a
Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of the High Court;
(b) as the Judicial Member unless he is, or has been, a Judge of a High
Court; and
(c) as the Expert Member unless he is a person of ability, integrity and
standing and having experience in water resources and has been an officer of
the Central Government of the rank of Secretary to the Government of India or
equivalent or is or has been a renowned international or national expert having
experience of working in the field of international or inter-State river water
disputes:
Provided that a person who is a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or a
Judge of a High Court shall be appointed in consultation with the Chief Justice
of India.
(4) The Selection Committee shall recommend a person for appointment
as Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Judicial Member or Expert Member in
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.
(5) No appointment of  the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson or a Member
of the Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of
member, or defect in the constitution, of the Selection Committee.
4C. (1) The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall hold office for a period of
five years or till the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(2) The term of office of other Members of the Tribunal shall be
co-terminus with the adjudication of the water dispute and they shall cease to
hold office upon dissolution of the bench under sub-section ( 2) of section 12:
Provided that no Member shall hold office after he has attained the age of
sixty-seven years.
Composition
of Tribunal.
Term of
office.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
4D. The Central Government may remove from office, the Chairperson or
Vice-Chairperson or any Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest:
Provided that no Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson or Member shall be
removed under clause (d) or clause (e) from office unless he has been informed
of the charges against him and given an opportunity of being heard in respect
of those charges:
Provided further that the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson or Judicial
Member who is a sitting Judge shall not be removed from office without
consulting the Chief Justice of India.
4E. (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act,—
(a) the jurisdiction of the Tribunal may be exercised by the Benches
thereof;
(b) the Chairperson may constitute a Bench consisting of the Chairperson
or Vice-Chairperson as the presiding officer, with one Judicial Member and one
Expert Member:
Provided that a Member of a Bench may also be a Member of another
Bench.
(2) The Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi or at
such other places as the Chairperson may decide.’.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) On receipt of a reference in respect of any water dispute from the
Central Government, the Chairperson shall assign such dispute to a Bench of
the Tribunal for its adjudication.
(2) The Bench of the Tribunal shall, before investigating the water dispute
assigned to it under sub-section (1), take into consideration the report submitted
by the Disputes Resolution Committee under sub-section (3) of section 4A on
the water dispute or on any matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant
to, the water dispute.
(2A) The Bench of the Tribunal shall investigate the water dispute
assigned to it under sub-section (1) and forward to the Central Government its
detailed report setting out the facts as found by it including on yield, efficiency
in the use of water and such other matters as may be prescribed, and giving
its decision on such dispute within a period of  two years:
Provided that such report shall also provide for the distribution of water
during distress situations arising from shortage in the availability of water in
such manner as may be prescribed:
Removal of
Members of
Tribunal.
Benches of
Tribunal.
Amendment
of section 5.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Provided further that if the report cannot be given within a period of two
years for any unavoidable reasons, the Central Government may extend such
period to a further period not exceeding one year.”;
(b) in sub-section (3),––
(i) for the words “on such reference, the Tribunal may”, the words “on
such reference, the Bench of the Tribunal concerned may” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that the Central Government may extend the period of
one year to a further period not exceeding six months.”.
5. For section 5A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“5A. (1) The Central Government may appoint two experts serving in the Central
Water Engineering Service not below the rank of Chief Engineer as assessors for each
water dispute to advise the Bench in the proceedings before it:
Provided that the assessor so appointed shall not be a domicile to any of the
States which are party to the dispute.
(2) The term of the assessors appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall be
co-terminus with the adjudication of the dispute and they shall cease to be assessors
after the dispute is adjudicated and the final report is forwarded to the Central
Government.
5B. The Central Government shall appoint an Administrative Officer, not below
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, who shall be responsible for
day-to-day administrative work of the Tribunal and to act as a nodal officer between
the Central Government and the Tribunal.
5C. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, if for any reason, a vacancy (other
than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
or any other Member of the Tribunal, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with
section 4B.
(2) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairperson shall act as the
Chairperson until the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with
the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(3) When any Member of a Bench of  the Tribunal is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Chairperson may assign
the work of such Member to any other Member of  the Tribunal till such Member
resumes his work.”.
6. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“6. The decision of the Bench of the Tribunal shall be final and binding on the
parties to the dispute and shall have the same force as an order or decree of the
Supreme Court.”.
7. In section 6A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word “may” occurring
at both the places, the word “shall” shall be substituted.
Substitution of
new sections
5A, 5B and 5C
for section
5A.
Appointment
of assessors.
Appointment
of
Administrative
Officer.
Filling of
vacancies,
temporary
absence, etc.
Substitution
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 6A.
Decision of
Bench of
Tribunal
binding on
parties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
8. For section 9A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“9A. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of maintaining a data
bank and information system at the national level for each river basin, appoint or
authorise an agency which shall maintain data relating to water resources, land,
agriculture and such other matter, containing such particulars and in such manner, as
may be prescribed.
(2) As and when required by the Central Government, the State Government
shall make available the data relating to any of the matters referred to in sub-section (1)
to the Central Government or to the agency appointed or authorised under that
sub-section.
(3) The Central Government or the agency referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall
have powers to summon and verify any data, record or other relevant information
received from the State Government.”.
9. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“10. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, other Members and assessors shall
be such as may be prescribed.’’.
10. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“12. ( 1) After any water dispute assigned to a Bench of the Tribunal is
adjudicated and it submits its decision or report, the Central Government shall, on the
recommendations of the Chairperson, dissolve that Bench 
within a period of three
months.
(2) Upon dissolution of  the Bench under sub-section (1), the Members of that
Bench (excluding Chairperson  and Vice-Chairperson) shall vacate their respective
offices:
Provided that where a Member of  a Bench is also a Member of another Bench,
such Member shall continue as a Member of such other Bench.
12A. (1) Upon the dissolution of  a Bench of the Tribunal under section 12, the
staff of such dissolved Bench shall be,––
(i) made available to any other Bench, if so required; or
(ii) repatriated to their parent cadre,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The assets and properties of the dissolved Bench shall be transferred to the
Central Government or to the concerned State Government which provided such
assets and properties.”.
11. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for clauses ( a) to ( f), the
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:–––
“(a) the form and the manner in which a complaint as to any water dispute may
be made by any State Government under section 3;
Substitution
of section 9A.
Maintenance
of data bank
and
information.
Substitution of
section 10.
Terms and
conditions of
service of
Members and
assessors.
Substitution
of new
sections 12
and 12A for
section 12.
Dissolution of
Bench.
Staff and
assets of
dissolved
Bench.
Amendment
of section 13.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(b) the procedure for preparation of a list of candidates and making of
recommendations for selection of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of
the Tribunal under sub-section (4) of section 4B;
(c) the other matters, and the manner of providing for distribution of water
during distress situations arising from shortage in the availability of water, under
sub-section (2A) of section 5;
(d) the other matters in respect of which the Tribunal may be vested with the
powers of a civil court under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 9;
(e) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal under sub-section ( 4) of
section 9;
(f) the other matters in respect of which data is to be maintained, the particulars
thereof, and the manner of maintaining such data under sub-section (1) of section 9A;
(g) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, other Members and assessors
under section 10;
(h) the manner in which the staff of the dissolved Bench shall be dealt with
under sub-section (1) of section 12A;
(i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.”.
12. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“14. The Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal constituted prior to the date of
commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2019 shall
stand dissolved and the water disputes pending adjudication before it shall stand
transferred to the Tribunal:
Provided that the concerned Bench shall proceed to deal with such dispute
from the stage at which it was so transferred.”.
13. 
After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“15. (1) Where the States, which are parties to a dispute, reach a settlement
during the period of adjudication of any dispute by the Tribunal, and such States
submit a report in this behalf to the Central Government, the Central Government shall
within a period of one month make a reference to the Chairperson of the Tribunal for
ending the adjudication of the said dispute.
(2) The Chairperson shall, on receipt of the reference under sub-section ( 1),
recommend to dissolve that Bench and the Central Government shall, on such
recommendations, dissolve that Bench of the Tribunal within a period of three months.
(3) The settlement of dispute by parties under this section shall have the same
status and effect as a decision of the Tribunal under section 6.”.
Substitution of
section 14.
Matters
relating to
Ravi and Beas
Waters
Tribunal.
Insertion of new
section 15.
Settlement of
dispute by
parties during
adjudication.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

MGIPMRND—2290LS(S3)—31.07.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)