1
THE USE OF SURNAME (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2016
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of use of surname in order to eradicate caste identities and
the discriminations associated therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Use of Surname (Prohibition) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 187 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "given name" means the first name of an individual which is given to a
person at birth; and
(c) "surname" means a name shared in common to identify the members of a
family, as distinguished from member's given name which may also be based on
individual's occupation or caste or area of residence.
3. (1) The use of surname by any citizen for any personal, legal or official purpose is
hereby prohibited.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent a person from using his father's or mother's
given name along with his given name for any personal, legal or official purpose.
4. Notwithstanding anything in section 3, the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify the purposes for and the circumstances or technical
grounds under which a citizen may use his surname.
5. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Prohibition on
use of
surname.
Circumstances
under which
surname may
be used.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Caste is a mantle or membership we acquire by birth. We not only inherit our genes
from our parents but also our caste. The first thing we learn about a person after greeting him
is his name. Names not only reflect our personality but also give us the first link to the
religion, race or community we belong to. We are named after our ancestors, family members,
after popular icons, clan, occupation, religion or even the locality we are from. There have
been numerous instances in the education and job sectors where examiners and interviewers
have been favourable to candidates of their own community by just glancing at the caste
suffix names or vindictive to candidates whose caste or community they loathe.
To eradicate caste identities and the discriminations associated therewith, use of
surnames should be abolished. This social revolution of eliminating caste names began two
generations ago in Tamil Nadu. The dropping of the caste tags of Mudaliar, Nadar, Gounder,
Thevar, Iyer, Pillai, V anniyar etc. in the last 30 years or so is a great social change that needs
to be acknowledged and followed in all parts  of the country.
It will be naive to assume that dispensing with caste names will lead to a casteless
society. However, adoption of generic names will be a small but definite step towards
eradicating caste from this society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
July 4, 2016.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

GMGIPMRND—1431LS(S3)—25-07-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of use of surname in order to eradicate caste identities and the
discriminations associated therewith.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)