1
THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
 further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. Throughout the Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
for the words and figures “the Companies Act, 1956”, wherever they occur, the words and
figures “the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
reference of
certain
expressions by
certain other
expressions.
36 of 2003.
1 of 1956.
18 of 2013.
Bill No. 187 of 2022
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (31), for the word and figures “section 617”, the words, brackets
and figures “clause ( 45) of section 2” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (50), after sub-clause (j), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(k) energy storage system;”;
(iii) after clause (60), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(60a) “security of payment” means such security of payment as may be
prescribed by the Central Government;’.
4. In section 8 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The Authority shall, after examining the scheme, concur on the scheme in
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.”.
5. In section 14 of the principal Act,—
(a) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) to distribute electricity as a distribution licensee in an area of supply
in accordance with such criteria as may be prescribed by the Central
Government;”;
(b) in the sixth proviso, the words “through their own distribution system”
shall be omitted.
6. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that if the Appropriate Commission fails to grant the licence
or reject the application, as the case may be, within the time so provided, the applicant
shall be deemed to have been granted the licence.”.
7. In section 26 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2),—
(a) the words “and functions” shall be omitted;
(b) in the proviso, after the words “trading in electricity” occurring at the
end, the words “except as mandated by the Central Government for
implementation of any scheme to ensure the stability of the power system”
shall be inserted;
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) The National Load Despatch Centre shall—
(a) be the apex body to ensure integrated operation of the power
system in the country;
(b) be responsible for optimum scheduling and despatch of
electricity in the country across different States and regions in accordance
with the contracts entered into with the licensees or the generating
companies:
Provided that no electricity shall be scheduled or despatched under
such contract unless adequate security of payment, as may be prescribed
by the Central Government, has been made;
Amendment of
section 2.
Amendment of
section 8.
Amendment of
section 14.
Amendment of
section 15.
Amendment of
section 26.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(c) monitor grid operations and ensure security of the electricity
grid and for this purpose give directions as necessary to the Regional
Load Despatch Centre or State Load Despatch Centre, as the case may
be;
(d) exercise supervision and control over the inter-regional and
inter-State transmission network; and
(e) have overall authority for carrying out real time operations of
the electricity grid of the country.
(5) The National Load Despatch Centre shall give such directions and
exercise such supervision and control over the power system as may be required
for the safety and security of the electricity grid of the country, for ensuring the
stability of grid operation and for achieving maximum economy and efficiency
in the operation of the power system throughout the country.
(6) The National Load Despatch Centre shall give such directions to the
State Load Despatch Centre, as may be necessary through the Regional Load
Despatch Centre concerned.
(7) Every Regional Load Despatch Centre, State Load Despatch Centre,
licensee, generating company, generating station, sub-station and any other
person connected with the operation of the power system shall comply with the
directions issued by the National Load Despatch Centre from time to time.”.
8. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (a), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that no electricity shall be scheduled or despatched under such
contract unless adequate security of payment, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, has been made;”.
9. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause (a), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that no electricity shall be scheduled or despatched under such
contract unless adequate security of payment, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, has been made;”.
10. In section 40 of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause (c), in sub-clause (ii), after the fourth proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that a consumer who requires supply of electricity where
the maximum power to be made available at any time exceeds one megawatt
shall be entitled to get open access to inter-State transmission system in
accordance with the regulations made by the Central Commission, on payment
of the transmission charges and a surcharge thereon, as may be specified by
the State Commission.”;
(b) after the fifth proviso as so inserted, the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation. —For the purposes of this section and section 42, the
expression “megawatt” means ten lakh watts.’.
11. In section 42 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) It shall be the duty of all distribution licensees to,—
(a) ensure an efficient, co-ordinated and economic distribution
system in their area of supply:
Amendment
of section 28.
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 40.
Amendment
of section 42.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Provided that a distribution licensee may use the distribution
systems of other licensees in the area of supply for supplying power
through the system of non-discriminatory open access;
(b) give non-discriminatory open access to other distribution
licensees on payment of wheeling charges; and
(c) provide supply of electricity to the consumers,
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder by
the Central Government and the regulations made by the Appropriate
Commission and in accordance with the model regulations laid down by the
Forum of Regulators.”;
(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4A) A distribution licensee shall provide non-discriminatory open access
through its distribution system to all distribution licensees having licence within
the same area of supply, subject to payment of wheeling charges and in
accordance with the regulations specified by the Appropriate Commission.
(4B) In case any complaint is filed before the Appropriate Commission by
any person or if that Commission is satisfied that a distribution licensee has
knowingly failed to provide open access through its distribution system to
another distribution licensee or hindered it in any manner from using its
distribution network, the Appropriate Commission may, after giving the
distribution licensee an opportunity of being heard, issue such directions as it
considers necessary and impose the penalties in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.”.
12. In section 59 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) the status of compliance of the guidelines issued by the Central Government
regarding corporate governance.”.
13. After section 60 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“60A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, on the issuance of
licence to more than one distribution licensee in an area of supply, the power and
associated costs from the existing power purchase agreements with the existing
distribution licensee, as on the date of issuing licence to another distribution licensee,
shall be shared among all the distribution licensees in the area of supply as per such
arrangements as may be specified by the State Commission in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder by the Central Government:
Provided that the State Commission shall periodically review the sharing of
power as provided in the existing power purchase agreements:
Provided further that a distribution licensee may enter into additional power
purchase agreements, after meeting the commitments of the existing power purchase
agreements, to meet any additional requirement of power without sharing with other
distribution licensees.
(2) In case of issuance of licence to more than one distribution licensee in an
area of supply, the State Government shall set up a cross subsidy balancing fund
which shall be managed by a Government company or entity designated by that
Government in accordance with such regulations as the State Commission may make
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder by the
Central Government.
(3) Any surplus with a distribution licensee on account of cross subsidy or
cross subsidy surcharge or additional surcharge shall be deposited into the fund
Amendment
of section 59.
Insertion of new
section 60A.
Management
of power
agreement,
cross subsidy,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

5
referred to in sub-section (2), and the fund shall be utilised to make good deficits in
cross subsidy in the same area or any other area of supply.”.
14. In section 61 of the principal Act, for clause ( g), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(g) the tariff recovers all prudent costs incurred for supply of electricity;
(ga) the tariff reduces cross subsidies in the manner specified by the Appropriate
Commission;”.
15. In section 62 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause (d), for the proviso, the following provisos shall
be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that in case of distribution of electricity in the same area of
supply by two or more distribution licensees, the Appropriate Commission
shall, for promoting competition among such distribution licensees, fix the
maximum ceiling of tariff and the minimum tariff for retail sale of electricity in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder by
the Central Government:
 Provided further that in such ceiling tariff, the cross subsidy, wheeling
charges and adjustment in tariff pertaining to the period prior to the introduction
of ceiling tariff, if any, shall be indicated separately by the Appropriate
Commission.”;
(ii) in sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Appropriate Commission may, by an order and for
reasons to be recorded in writting, allow the licensee to effect the changes due
to amendment in tariff, not exceeding in four stages, during a year in accordance
with the Tariff Policy.".
16. In section 64 of the principal Act,––
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) An application for determination of tariff under section 62 shall be
made by a generating company or licensee at such time and in such manner and
accompanied by such fee, as may be specified by the Appropriate Commission:
Provided that the time specified should be such that the new tariff comes
into effect from the beginning of the following financial year:
Provided further that if an application is not made by a generating company
or licensee on time, the State Commission shall, not later than thirty days of the
last date specified in the regulations, initiate proceedings for determination of
tariff and call for such information, details and documents as may be required
for such determination with the objective of determining the tariff before the
beginning of the financial year:
Provided also that, where two or more distribution licensees operate in
the same area of supply, the State Commission shall fix the maximum ceiling of
tariff and the minimum tariff, suo motu, after calling for requisite information
from such distribution licensees.”;
(ii) in sub-section (3),—
(a) for the words “one hundred and twenty days from receipt of an
application”, the words “ninety days from the date of receipt of the application
or initiation of proceedings” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (a), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if tariff order cannot be issued due to any reasons
which are to be recorded in writing, the Appropriate Commission shall
Amendment
of section 61.
Amendment
of section 62.
Amendment
of section 64.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
issue the order for interim tariff within the said period of ninety days from
the date of receipt of such application or initiation of such proceedings:
Provided further that the interim tariff shall remain in operation till
issue of final tariff order which shall be issued within such period not
exceeding one hundred and fifty days of receipt of such application for
determination of tariff or initiation of such proceedings.".
17. In section 77 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Chairperson of the Central Commission shall be a person of
ability, integrity and standing, who is or has been,—
(i) head of an organisation dealing with generation, transmission or
distribution of electricity; or
(ii) Secretary to the Government of India or its equivalent:
Provided that preference shall be given to a person having adequate
knowledge and experience of not less than two years in the power sector.”;
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The Members, other than the Chairperson of the Central Commission
shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing, having adequate knowledge
of and experience in the fields of engineering, law, economics, commerce, finance,
public policy or public administration or management and shall be appointed as
follows:—
(a) one person having adequate qualifications and experience in
the field of engineering with specialisation in generation, transmission or
distribution of electricity;
(b) one person having adequate qualifications and experience in
the field of finance, economics, commerce, public policy, public
administration or management; and
(c) one person, who is, or has been holding a judicial office or is a
person possessing adequate professional qualifications and experience
in law.”.
18. In section 78 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words “Planning Commission”, the
words “Niti Aayog” shall be substituted;
(ii)  in sub-section (2), for the words, figure and letter  “specified in section 4A”,
the words, brackets and figures “defined in clause ( 72) of section 2” shall be
substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (9),—
(a) for the words “vacancy in the Selection Committee”, the words
“vacancy, other than that of Chairperson, in the Selection Committee” shall be
substituted;
(b) the proviso shall be omitted.
19. In section 79 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) for clause (f), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(f) to adjudicate upon the disputes including those relating to
performance of obligations under a contract related to sale, purchase or
transmission of electricity, involving generating companies or licensees in regard
to matters connected with clauses ( a) to (d);
Amendment
of section 77.
Amendment
of section 78.
Amendment
of section 79.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(fa) to adjudicate upon the disputes involving the National Load Despatch
Centre or the Regional Load Despatch Centre in regard to matters connected
with sections 26, 28 and 29;”;
(b)  after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ja) to grant licence for distributing electricity in more than one State;”;
(c) after clause (k), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Chairperson of the Central Commission shall
constitute a Bench consisting of a Member appointed under clause ( c) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 77 and not more than one Member, as may be
nominated by the Chairperson, who shall discharge the functions as provided
in clauses (f) and (fa).”.
20. In section 82 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) The State Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and three other
Members.”;
(ii)  after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6) If any State Commission is unable to perform its functions on account
of vacancies, the Central Government may, in consultation with the State
Government concerned, entrust its functions to any other State Commission or
Joint Commission, as it deems necessary.”.
21. In section 84 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Chairperson of the State Commission shall be a person of ability,
integrity and standing, who is or has been,—
(i) the head of an organisation dealing with generation, transmission
or distribution of electricity; or
(ii) a Principal Secretary to the State Government or its equivalent:
Provided that preference shall be given to a person having adequate
knowledge and experience of not less than two years in the power sector.”;
(ii)  for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The Members, other than the Chairperson of the State Commission,
shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing having adequate knowledge
of and experience in the fields of engineering, law, economics, commerce, finance,
public policy, public administration or management and shall be appointed as
follows:—
(a) one person having adequate qualifications and experience in
the field of engineering with specialisation in generation, transmission or
distribution of electricity;
(b) one person having adequate qualifications and experience in
the field of finance, economics, commerce, public policy, public
administration or management; and
(c) one person, who is, or has been holding a judicial office or is a
person possessing adequate professional qualifications and experience
in law.”.
22. In section 85 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for clause (
c), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(c)  a nominee of the Central Government not below the rank of Additional
Secretary to the Government of India—Member:”;
Amendment
of section 82.
Amendment
of section 84.
Amendment
of section 85.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(ii) in sub-section (6), for the words “vacancy in the Selection Committee”, the
words “vacancy, other than that of Chairperson, in the Selection Committee” shall be
substituted.
23. In section 86 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) in the proviso to clause ( a), for the words “Provided that”, the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
 “Provided that the tariff recovers all prudent costs incurred for supply of
electricity and also provide reasonable returns on investment and take necessary
steps to ensure financial stability of the licensees:
Provided further that”;
(b) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(e) promote generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy
by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and sale of
electricity to any person, and also specify, for purchase of electricity from such
person, a percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of supply
of a distribution licensee which shall not be less than such percentage as may
be prescribed by the Central Government;”;
(c) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ea) promote co-generation of electricity;”;
(d) for clause (f), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(f) adjudicate upon the disputes including those relating to performance
of obligations under contracts related to sale, purchase or transmission of
electricity involving generating companies or licensees:
 Provided that in case of reneging of Power Purchase Agreement by a
generating company or a licensee, the dispute shall be adjudicated along with
appropriate compensation to the affected party, within ninety days from the
date of submission of petition to the Appropriate Commission;
(fa) adjudicate upon the disputes involving the State Load Despatch
Centre in regard to matters connected with section 32 and section 33;”;
(e) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ja) issue directions or guidelines or specify regulations to secure
consumer choice and an efficient, coordinated and economical use of the
distribution system, where there are more than one distribution licensee in an
area of supply;
(jb) review the resource adequacy at intervals of every six months for
each of the distribution licensees in accordance with the guidelines issued by
the Central Government;”;
(f) in clause ( k), after the words “under this Act”, the words “by the Central
Government or the State Government:” shall be inserted;
(g) after clause (k), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Chairperson of the State Commission shall
constitute a Bench consisting of a Member appointed under clause ( c) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 84 and not more than one Member, as may be
nominated by the Chairperson, who shall discharge the functions provided in
clauses (f) and (fa).”.
Amendment
of section 86.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
24. In section 89 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in the second proviso, for
the words “sixty-five”, the words “sixty-seven” shall be substituted.
25. In section 90 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(g) has wilfully violated or overlooked the provisions of this Act or the
rules or regulations made thereunder; or
(h) has been grossly negligent in performing one or more functions
assigned to him or the Commission under this Act or the rules or regulations
made thereunder:”;
(ii) in the proviso, for the words, brackets and letters “clauses (d), (e) and (f)”,
the words, brackets and letters “clauses (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h)” shall be substituted.
26. In section 94 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) An order made by the Appropriate Commission or its Bench shall be
executable as a decree of a civil court and, for this purpose, such Commission or
Bench shall have all the powers of a civil court including but not limited to powers of
attachment and sale of property and appointment of a receiver.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 4), the Appropriate
Commission or Bench referred to in that sub-section may transmit an order made by it
to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as
if it were a decree made by that court.”.
27. In section 112 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “three other
Members”, the words “such number of other Members, not less than three, as may be
prescribed by the Central Government” shall be substituted.
28. In section 128 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for the word and figures
“section 235”, the word and figures “section 210” shall be substituted.
29. For section 142 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“142. (1) Where the Appropriate Commission is satisfied on a complaint made
to it or otherwise that any person has contravened any of the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder, the Commission may after giving such person an
opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, direct that without prejudice to any
other penalty to which he may be liable under this Act, such person shall be liable to
pay a penalty, which shall not exceed one crore rupees for each contravention and in
case of a continuing failure with an additional penalty which may extend to six lakh
rupees for each day during which the failure continues after contravention of the first
such direction.
(2) Where the Appropriate Commission is satisfied on a complaint made to it or
otherwise that any person has contravened any regulation, direction or order issued
by it, the Commission may after giving such person an opportunity of being heard, by
order in writing, direct that without prejudice to any other penalty to which he may be
liable under this Act, such person shall be liable to pay a penalty, which shall not
exceed ten lakh rupees for each contravention and in case of a continuing failure with
Amendment
of section 89.
Amendment
of section 90.
Amendment
of section 94.
Amendment of
section 112.
Amendment of
section 128.
Substitution of
new section for
section 142.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
an additional penalty which may extend to sixty thousand rupees for each day during
which the failure continues after contravention of the first such direction.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), where the
Appropriate Commission is satisfied on a complaint filed before it or otherwise, that
obligated entity has not purchased power from renewable sources of energy as
specified under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 86, the Commission shall after
giving such entity an opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, direct that,
without prejudice to any other penalty to which he may be liable under this Act, such
person shall be liable to pay a penalty of a sum calculated at a rate of—
(i) not less than twenty-five paisa per kilowatt-hour and not more than
thirty-five paisa per kilowatt-hour for the shortfall in purchase in the first year
of default;
(ii)  not less than thirty-five paisa per kilowatt-hour and not more than
fifty paisa per kilowatt-hour for the shortfall in purchase continuing after the
first year of default.”.
30. In section 146 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words
“shall be punishable” and ending with the words “for every day”, the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one crore rupees, in respect
of each offence and in the case of a continuing failure, with an additional fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees for every day”.
31. In section 152 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “may accept”,
the words “shall accept” shall be substituted.
32. In section 166 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 3), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3A) The Forum of Regulators referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall discharge
the following functions, namely:—
(a) prepare and lay on model regulations for the guidance of State
Commission for the purposes of sub-section ( 1) of section 42, sub-section (1)
of section 43, sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 60A, section 61 and the first
proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 62, in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder;
(b) monitor the status of compliance of the provisions of clause ( e) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 86 by distribution licensees on annual basis and
submit a report to the Central Government; and
(c) any other functions, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.”.
33. In section 176 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) the security of payment under clause ( 60a) of section 2;
(aa) the time within which the objection and suggestions on the draft
National Electricity Plan to be invited by the Authority under the proviso to
sub-section (4) of section 3;
(ab) the manner of concurrence by the Authority under sub-section (1A)
of section 8;
(
ac) the criteria for area of supply under clause (b) of section 14;”;
Amendment of
section 146.
Amendment of
section 152.
Amendment of
section 166.
Amendment of
section 176.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(ii) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ia) the percentage of total consumption of electricity in the area of
supply of distribution licensee under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 86;”;
(iii) after clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(qa) the number of members of the Appellate Tribunal under
sub-section (1) of section 112;”;
(iv) after clause (x), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(xa) any other functions to be discharged by the Forum of Regulators
under clause (c) of sub-section (3A) of section 166;”.
34. In section 178 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (v), for the words
“the manner of making an application”, the words “the time, manner of making an application”
shall be substituted.
35. In section 181 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(la) the payment of transmission charges and a surcharge thereon by
the consumer under proviso to sub-clause ( ii) of clause (c) of section 40;”;
(b) after clause (zb), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(zba) the arrangements for sharing of power and associated costs
amongst the distribution licensees in the area of supply under sub-section ( 1)
of section 60A;
(zbb) the managing of cross subsidy balancing fund by a Government
company under sub-section ( 2) of section 60A;”;
(c) in clause ( zg), for the words “the manner of making an application”, the
words “the time, manner of making an application” shall be substituted;
(d) after clause (zi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(zia) securing the consumer choice under clause (ja) of sub-section (
1)
of section 86;”.
36. In section 183 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 1), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if any difficulty
arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act as amended by the Electricity
(Amendment) Act, 2022, the Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
a period of two years from the date of commencement of the Electricity (Amendment)
Act, 2022.”.
Amendment of
section 178.
Amendment of
section 181.
Amendment of
section 183.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Electricity Act, 2003 (the Act) was enacted  to consolidate the laws relating to
generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity and generally for taking
measures conducive to development of electricity industry, promoting competition therein,
protecting interest of consumers and supply of electricity to all areas, rationalisation of
electricity tariff, ensuring transparent policies regarding subsidies, promotion of efficient
and environmentally benign policies, constitution of Central Electricity Authority, Regulatory
Commissions and establishment of Appellate Tribunal and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
2. The Act has facilitated the development of the power sector.  The investments in all
segments of the electricity sector, that is generation, transmission and distribution have
brought a significant improvement in outcomes.  The transmission grid has been unified into
a "National Grid" and all households have access to grid electricity.  However, the continuing
as well as new challenges of sustainability of the power sector, contract enforcement, payment
security mechanism, energy transition and the need to provide choice to consumers in order
to promote competition and the like, it has become necessary to make certain amendments in
the Act.
3. The amendments  to the Act are also necessary in view of the importance of green
energy for our environment in the context of global climate change concerns and our
international commitments to increase the share of renewable energy.  Further, it has become
necessary to strengthen the regulatory mechanism, adjudicatory mechanism in the Act and
to bring administrative reforms through improved corporate governance of distribution
licensees.
4. The Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2022, inter alia, provides for the following,
namely:—
(i) to amend section 8 of the Act so as to streamline the concurrence of the hydro
generating station by the Authority to facilitate development of the hydro sector in the
country;
(ii) to amend section 14 of the Act in order to facilitate the use of distribution
networks by all licensees under provisions of non-discriminatory open access with
the objective of enabling competition, enhancing efficiency of distribution licensees
for improving services to consumers and ensuring sustainability of the power sector;
(iii) to amend section 26 of the Act so as to strengthen the functioning of the
National Load Despatch Centre for ensuring the safety and security of the grid and for
the economic and efficient operation of the power system in the country;
(iv) to amend section 42 of the Act so as to facilitate non-discriminatory open
access to the distribution network of a distribution licensee;
(v) to insert a new section 60A in the Act so as to enable management of power
purchase and cross-subsidy in case of multiple distribution licensees in the same area
of supply;
(vi) to amend section 62 of the Act so as to make provision regarding graded
revision in tariff over a year and for mandatory fixing of maximum ceiling as well as
minimum tariff by the Appropriate Commission;
(vii) to amend section 142 of the Act so as to enhance the rate of penalty for non-
compliance of the provisions of the Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder;
12

13
(viii) to amend section 146 of the Act so as to convert the rate of punishment
from "imprisonment or with fine" to "fine";
(ix) to amend section 152 of the Act so as to facilitate decriminalisation of offence
as it would be mandatory to accept compounding;
(x) to amend section 166 of the Act so as to strengthen the functions to be
discharged by the Forum of Regulators.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
R. K.  SINGH
NEW DELHI;
The 2nd August, 2022.

NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This clause provides for the "Short Title and commencement" of the
proposed Legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to substitute the reference of certain expressions by
certain other expressions.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the principal Act to amend the
definition of "Power System" by including 'Energy storage system' and to insert the new
definition relating to "security of payment".
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the principal Act to streamline the
concurrence of the hydro-generating station by the Authority so as to facilitate development
of the hydro sector in the country.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to amend section 14 of the principal Act to facilitate the
use of distribution networks of other licensees under provisions of non-discriminatory open
access with the objective of enabling competition, enhancing efficiency of distribution
licensees for improving services to consumers and ensuring sustainability of the power
sector.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to amend section 15 of the principal Act which acts as a
deeming provision to avoid delay in granting license.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to amend section 26 of the principal Act to strengthen
the powers and functions of the National Load Despatch Centre for ensuring the safety and
security of the grid and for the economic and efficient operation of the power system in the
country.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the principal Act to provide for
scheduling and despatch of electricity only if, a payment security mechanism has been
established to ensure timely payment of dues.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to amend section 32 of the principal Act to provide for
scheduling and despatch of electricity only if, a payment security mechanism has been
established to ensure timely payment of dues.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to amend section 40 of the principal Act to enable
access to large  consumers to inter-state transmission system.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to amend section 42 of the principal Act to facilitate
operation of multiple distribution licensee in the same area and to avoid parallel network and
optimise usage of the distribution network.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to amend section 59 of the principal Act to enable
administrative reforms through improved corporate governance of distribution licensees.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to amend section 60 of the principal Act to enable
management of power purchase and cross subsidy in case of multiple distribution licensees
in the same area of supply.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to amend section 61 of the principal Act to ensure cost
reflective tariff, which is important  for financial viability of the power sector.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 62 of the principal Act to provide for
mandatory fixing of maximum ceiling of tariff as well as minimum tariff by the Commission for
retail sale of electricity for promoting competition in the same area of supply by the distribution
14

15
licensees. This clause also seeks to make provision regarding graded revision of tariff in a
year.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 64 of the principal Act to provide for
suo motu determination of tariff by the Appropriate Commission, reduce the time required for
tariff determination and provision for interim tariff.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 77 of the principal Act to improve the
Regulatory mechanism and for this purpose, the qualifications for the post of Chairpersons
and Members in Central Commission is being amended.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to amend section 78 of the principal Act so as to
incorporate consequential change due to change in nomenclature of Planning Commission
and to facilitate timely appointment of Chairperson and Members in the Commission.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to amend section 79 of the principal Act to facilitate
timely disposal of disputes related to contracts, provision for creating separate benches for
adjudication of such matters.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend section 82 of the principal Act by increasing
number of Members so as to ensure smooth and efficient functioning of the State
Commissions, entrusting of work to other Commission under certain conditions.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to amend section 84 of the principal Act mandating the
appointment of the Member from law background so as to improve functioning of the State
Commissions.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to amend section 85 of the principal Act regarding
composition of the Selection Committee for State Commissions.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to amend section 86 of the principal Act to provide for
the Renewable Purchase Obligation, not to be less than the trajectory prescribed by the
Central Government.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to amend section 89 of the principal Act so as to ensure
that the full tenure is availed by Chairperson and Members of the Electricity Regulatory
Commissions.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 90 of the principal Act to provide for
removal of a Member of the Commission in case of gross negligence and non-compliance of
the provisions of the Act and the rules made there under
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to amend section 94 of the principal Act so that the Civil
Court powers can be extended to Regulatory Commissions so as to ensure compliance of the
orders and regulations of the Commission.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to amend section 112 of the principal Act to provide
that the Appellate Tribunal shall consist of such number of other Members, not less than
three as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to amend section 128 of the principal Act so as to
substitute "section 235", with "section 210" under the Companies Act, 2013.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to amend section 142 of the principal Act to introduce
a specific provision for penalties for non-compliance of the Renewable Purchase Obligation.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to amend section 146 of the principal Act to decriminalise
the offence by removing imprisonment provisions for ensuring ease of doing business. The
maximum permissible penalty amount for non-compliance of the provisions of the Act and
the rules, regulations and orders issued under it, is proposed to be enhanced.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to amend section 152 of the principal Act to facilitate
decriminalisation of offence as it would be mandatory to accept compounding.

16
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to amend section 166 of the principal Act to empower
Forum of Regulators to publish model regulations on various matters related to ease of
implementation of the provisions of the Act.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to amend section 176 of the principal Act so as to
empower the Central Government to frame rules on certain matters which have been inserted
by the proposed amendments.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to amend section 178 of the principal Act to empower
the Central Commission to frame regulations on certain matters which have been inserted by
the proposed amendments.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to amend section 181 of the principal Act to empower
the State Commission to frame regulations on certain matters which have been inserted by
the proposed amendments.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to amend section 183 of the principal Act to empower
the Central Government to remove the difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the
Electricity (Amendment)  Act, 2022.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
 The provisions of the proposed Legislation does not involve any expenditure either
recurring or non-recurring from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
17

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 33 of the Bill proposes to amend sub-section (2) of section 176 of the Electricity
Act, 2003 (the Act) relating to the power of the Central Government to make rules. The
proposed amendments to sub-section (2) of the said section, inter alia, are—(a) the security
of payment under clause (60a) of section 2; (b) the manner of concurrence by the Authority
under sub-section (1A) of section 8; ( c) the criteria for area of supply under clause ( b) of
section 14; (d) the percentage of total consumption of electricity in the area of distribution
licensee under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 86; (e) the number of members of the
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) of section 112; and ( f) any other functions to be
discharged by the Forum of Regulators under clause (c) of sub-section (3A) of section 166.
2. Clause 34 of the Bill proposes to amend sub-section ( 2) of section 178 of the
said Act relating to the power of the Central Commission to make regulations.  The
proposed amendment to sub-section (2) of the said section provides for the time, manner of
making an application before the Central Commission and the fee payable therefore under
sub-section (1) of section 64.
3. Clause 35 of the Bill proposes to amend sub-section (2) of section 181 of the said
Act relating to the power of the State Commission to make regulations. The proposed
amendment to sub-section ( 2) of the said section, inter alia , are—( a) the payment of
transmission charges and a surcharge thereon by the consumer under proviso to sub-clause
(ii) of clause ( c) of section 40; ( b) the arrangements for sharing of power and associated
costs amongst the distribution licensees in the area of supply under sub-section ( 1) of
section 60A; (c) the managing of cross subsidy balancing fund by a Government company
under sub-section (2) of section 60A; (d) the time, manner of making an application before
the State Commission and the fee payable therefor under sub-section (1) of section 64; and
(e) securing the consumer choice under clause (ja) of sub-section (1) of section 86.
4. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are matters of procedure and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
18

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
(36 OF 2003)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(31) “Government company” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956;
* * * * *
(50) “power system” means all aspects of generation, transmission, distribution
and supply of electricity and includes one or more of the following, namely:–
* * * * *
(j) works;
* * * * *
(60) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Act;
* * * * *
14. The Appropriate Commission may, on an application made to it under section 15,
grant a licence to any person—
* * * * *
(b) to distribute electricity as a distribution licensee; or
* * * * *
Provided also that the Appropriate Commission may grant a licence to two or more
persons for distribution of electricity through their own distribution system within the same
area, subject to the conditions that the applicant for grant of licence within the same area
shall, without prejudice to the other conditions or requirements under this Act, comply with
the additional requirements relating to the capital adequacy, creditworthiness, or code of
conduct as may be prescribed by the Central Government, and no such applicant, who
complies with all the requirements for grant of licence, shall be refused grant of licence on the
ground that there already exists a licensee in the same area for the same purpose:
* * * * *
15. (1) * * * * *
(6) Where a person makes an application under sub-section (1) of section 14 to act as
a licensee, the Appropriate Commission shall, as far as practicable, within ninety days after
receipt of such application,—
Definitions.
Grant of
licence.
1 of 1956.
Procedure for
grant of
licence.19

20
(a) issue a licence subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and
regulations made thereunder; or
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing if such application
does not conform to the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder or the provisions of any other law for the time being in force:
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an
opportunity of being heard.
* * * * *
26. (1) * * * * *
(2) The constitution and functions of the National Load Despatch Centre shall be such
as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
 Provided that the National Load Despatch Centre shall not engage in the business of
trading in electricity.
* * * * *
28. (1) * * * * *
(3) The Regional Load Despatch Centre shall—
(a) be responsible for optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity within the
region, in accordance with the contracts entered into with the licensees or the generating
companies operating in the region;
* * * * *
32. (1) * * * * *
(2) The State Load Despatch Centre shall—
(a) be responsible for optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity within a
State, in accordance with the contracts entered into with the licensees or the generating
companies operating in that State;
* * * * *
40. It shall be the duty of a transmission licensee—
* * * * *
(c) to provide non-discriminatory open access to its transmission system for use
by—
* * * * *
(ii) any consumer as and when such open access is provided by the State
Commission under sub-section (2) of section 42, on payment of the transmission
charges and a surcharge thereon, as may be specified by the State Commission:
* * * * *
Provided also that such surcharge shall not be leviable in case open access is provided
to a person who has established a captive generating plant for carrying the electricity to the
destination of his own use.
* * * * *
National Load
Despatch
Centre.
Functions of
Regional Load
Despatch
Centre.
Functions of
State Load
Despatch
Centres.
Duties of
transmission
licensees.

21
PART VI
DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRICITY
Provisions with respect to distribution licensees
42. ( 1) It shall be the duty of a distribution licensee to develop and maintain an
efficient, co-ordinated and economical distribution system in his area of supply and to
supply electricity in accordance with the provisions contained in this Act.
* * * * *
59. (1) Every licensee shall, within the period specified by the Appropriate Commission,
furnish to the Commission the following information, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) the number of cases in which compensation was made under sub-section (2)
of section 57 and the aggregate amount of the compensation.
* * * * *
PART VII
T
ARIFF
61. The Appropriate Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, specify
the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff, and in doing so, shall be guided by
the following, namely:—
* * * * *
(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity and also
reduces cross-subsidies in the manner specified by the Appropriate Commission;
* * * * *
62. (1) The Appropriate Commission shall determine the tariff in accordance with the
provisions of this Act for—
* * * * *
(d) retail sale of electricity:
Provided that in case of distribution of electricity in the same area by two or more
distribution licensees, the Appropriate Commission may, for promoting competition among
distribution licensees, fix only maximum ceiling of tariff for retail sale of electricity.
* * * * *
(4) No tariff or part of any tariff may ordinarily be amended, more frequently than once
in any financial year, except in respect of any changes expressly permitted under the terms of
any fuel surcharge formula as may be specified.
* * * * *
Duties of
distribution
licensee and
open access.
Information
with respect
to levels of
performance.
Tariff
regulations.
Determination
of tariff.

22
64. (1) An application for determination of tariff under section 62 shall be made by a
generating company or licensee in such manner and accompanied by such fee, as may be
determined by regulations.
* * * * *
(3) The Appropriate Commission shall, within one hundred and twenty days from
receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1) and after considering all suggestions and
objections received from the public,—
(a) issue a tariff order accepting the application with such modifications or such
conditions as may be specified in that order;
* * * * *
77. (1) The Chairperson and the Members of the Central Commission shall be persons
having adequate knowledge of, or experience in, or shown capacity in, dealing with, problems
relating to engineering, law, economics, commerce, finance or management and shall be
appointed in the following manner, namely:—
(a) one person having qualifications and experience in the field of engineering
with specialisation in generation, transmission or distribution of electricity;
(b) one person having qualifications and experience in the field of finance;
(c) two persons having qualifications and experience in the field of economics,
commerce, law or management:
Provided that not more than one Member shall be appointed under the same category
under clause (c).
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
may appoint any person as the Chairperson from amongst persons who is, or has been, a
Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court:
Provided that no appointment under this sub-section shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
* * * * *
78. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of selecting the Members of the
Appellate Tribunal and the Chairperson and Members of the Central Commission, constitute
a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) Member of the Planning Commission incharge of the energy sector—
Chairperson;
* * * * *
(2) For the purposes of clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall
nominate from amongst persons holding the post of Chairperson or managing director, by
whatever name called, of any public financial institution specified in section 4A of the
Companies Act, 1956.
* * * * *
(9) No appointment of the Chairperson or other Member shall be invalid merely by
reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee:
Procedure for
tariff order.
Qualifications
for
appointment
of Members of
Central
Commission.
Constitution
of Selection
Committee to
recommend
Members.
1 of 1956.

23
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the appointment of a
person as the Chairperson of the Central Commission where such person is, or has been, a
Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court.
* * * * *
79. (1) The Central Commission shall discharge the following functions, namely:—
* * * * *
(f) to adjudicate upon disputes involving generating companies or transmission
licensee in regard to matters connected with clauses (a) to (d) above and to refer any
dispute for arbitration;
* * * * *
(j) to fix the trading margin in the inter-State trading of electricity, if considered,
necessary;
(k) to discharge such other functions as may be assigned under this Act.
* * * * *
Constitution, powers and functions of State Commissions
82. (1) * * * * *
(4) The State Commission shall consist of not more than three Members, including the
Chairperson.
* * * * *
84. (1) The Chairperson and the Members of the State Commission shall be persons of
ability, integrity and standing who have adequate knowledge of, and have shown capacity
in, dealing with problems relating to engineering, finance, commerce, economics, law or
management.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State Government may
appoint any person as the Chairperson from amongst persons who is, or has been, a Judge
of a High Court:
Provided that no appointment under this sub-section shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of that High Court.
* * * * *
85. (1) The State Government shall, for the purposes of selecting the Members of the
State Commission, constitute a Selection Committee consisting of—
* * * * *
(c) the Chairperson of the Authority or the Chairperson of the Central
Commission—Member:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the appointment of a
person as the Chairperson who is or has been a Judge of the High Court.
* * * * *
(6) No appointment of Chairperson or other Member shall be invalid merely by reason
of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
* * * * *
Functions of
Central
Commission.
Constitution
of State
Commission.
Qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and Members
of State
Commission.
Constitution
of Selection
Committee to
select
Members of
State
Commission.

24
86. (1) The State Commission shall discharge the following functions, namely:—
(a) determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of
electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may be, within the State:
Provided that where open access has been permitted to a category of consumers
under section 42, the State Commission shall determine only the wheeling charges and
surcharge thereon, if any, for the said category of consumers;
* * * * *
(e) promote co-generation and generation of electricity from renewable sources
of energy by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and sale of
electricity to any person, and also specify, for purchase of electricity from such sources,
a percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a distribution licensee;
(f) adjudicate upon the disputes between the licensees and generating companies
and to refer any dispute for arbitration;
* * * * *
(j) fix the trading margin in the intra-State trading of electricity, if considered,
necessary;
(k) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it under this Act.
* * * * *
Appropriate Commission—other provisions
89. (1) The Chairperson or other Member shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date he enters upon his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or other Member in the Central Commission or the State
Commission shall not be eligible for re-appointment in the same capacity as the Chairperson
or a Member in that Commission in which he had earlier held office as such:
Provided further that no Chairperson or Member shall hold office as such after he has
attained the age of sixty-five years.
* * * * *
90. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Central Government, in the case of a Member of the Central Commission, and
the State Government, in the case of a Member of the State Commission, may by order
remove from office any Member, if he—
* * * * *
(f) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour:
Provided that no Member shall be removed from his office on any ground specified in
clauses (d), (e) and (f) unless the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal on a reference being
made to him in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be, has, on an inquiry, held by him in accordance with such procedure as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, reported that the Member ought on such ground or
grounds to be removed.
* * * * *
Functions of
State
Commission.
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Members.
Removal of
Member.

25
112. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and three other Members.
* * * * *
128. (1) * * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 235 of the Companies
Act, 1956, the Investigating Authority may, at any time, and shall, on being directed so to do
by the Appropriate Commission, cause an inspection to be made, by one or more of his
officers, of any licensee or generating company and his books of account; and the
Investigating Authority shall supply to the licensee or generating company, as the case may
be, a copy of his report on such inspection.
* * * * *
142. In case any complaint is filed before the Appropriate Commission by any person
or if that Commission is satisfied that any person has contravened any of the provisions of
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, or any direction issued by the Commission,
the Appropriate Commission may after giving such person an opportunity of being heard in
the matter, by order in writing, direct that, without prejudice to any other penalty to which he
may be liable under this Act, such person shall pay, by way of penalty, which shall not exceed
one lakh rupees for each contravention and in case of a continuing failure with an additional
penalty which may extend to six thousand rupees for every day during which the failure
continues after contravention of the first such direction.
* * * * *
146. Whoever, fails to comply with any order or direction given under this Act, within
such time as may be specified in the said order or direction or contravenes or attempts or
abets the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations made
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both in respect of each
offence and in the case of a continuing failure, with an additional fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees for every day during which the failure continues after conviction of the
first such offence:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the orders, instructions
or directions issued under section 121.
* * * * *
152. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
the Appropriate Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf may accept from
any consumer or person who committed or who is reasonably suspected of having committed
an offence of theft of electricity punishable under this Act, a sum of money by way of
compounding of the offence as specified in the Table below:
* * * * *
176. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the time within which the objection and suggestions on the draft National
Electricity Plan to be invited by the Authority under the proviso to sub-section (4) of
section 3;
* * * * *
Composition
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Investigation
of certain
matters.
Punishment
for non-
compliance of
directions by
Appropriate
Commission.
Punishment
for non-
compliance of
orders or
directions.
Compounding
of offences.
2 of 1974.
1 of 1956.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

26
(i) the functions and duties of the Central Electricity Authority under section 73;
* * * * *
(q) the form and the manner of verifying such form, and fee for filing appeal
under sub-section (2) of section 111;
* * * * *
(x) the powers to be exercised and the functions to be performed by the Inspectors
under sub-section (1) of section 162;
* * * * *
178. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the power contained in
sub-section (1), such regulations may provide for all or any of following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(v) the manner of making an application before the Central Commission and the
fee payable therefor under sub-section (1) of section 64;
* * * * *
181. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the power contained in
sub-section (1), such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(l) payment of the transmission charges and a surcharge under sub-clause (ii) of
clause (c) of section 40;
* * * * *
(zb) the period within which information to be furnished by the licensee under
sub-section (1) of section 59;
* * * * *
(zg) the manner of making an application before the State Commission and the
fee payable therefor under sub-section (1) of section 64;
* * * * *
(zi) the manner by which development of market in power including trading
specified under section 66;
* * * * *
Powers of
Central
Commission to
make
regulations.
Powers of
State
Commissions
to make
regulations.

MGIPMRND—801LS(S3)—03-08-2022.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.
————
(Shri R.K. Singh, Minister of Power)