1
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR IMMIGRATION REFORM
BILL, 2018
By
SHRI GAURAV GOGOI, M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute a Commission for Immigration Reforms to check illegal migration and
regulate immigration and related issues in the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Immigration Reform Act,
2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  188 of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Commission" means the National Commission for Immigration Reform
constituted under section 3;
(c) "foreigner" means a person who is not a citizen of India;
(d) "illegal migration" means any movement that takes place outside the scope
of the regulatory norms of sending, transit and receiving country;
(e) "illegal migrants" includes any foreign national who enters the territory of
India devoid of any necessary or valid documents or permits;
(f) "member" means a member of the Commission and includes the member-
Secretary; and
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR IMMIGRATION REFORM
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Immigration Reform to exercise
the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consists of:—
(a) a Chairperson, who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court;
(b) a member-Secretary, who is or has been the Home Secretary, Union Ministry
of Home Affairs;
(c) representatives each from the High Commissions of India's neighbouring
nations (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka);
(d) one representative from the prison or correctional services dealing with
detention of illegal migrants;
(e) one representative from a non-Governmental Organisation dealing with
matters related to immigration;
(f) one representative from the legal fraternity who has special knowledge in
the matters of migration law and policy;
(g) one representative from the Border Security Force;
(h) an officer who is a member of the civil service of the Union or of All India
Service who holds a civil post under the Union with appropriate experience in the field
of foreign policy; and
(i) representatives each from the State Governments from border States.
4. (1) The Chairperson and every member shall hold office for such period, not exceeding
five years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
(2) The Chairperson or a member (other than the member-Secretary) who is a member
of the civil service of the Union or of an All India Service or holds a civil post under the Union
may, by writing and addressed to the Central Government, resign from the office of Chairperson
or, as the case may be, of the Member at any time.
(3)The Central Government shall reserve the right to remove a person from the office of
Chairperson or a Member referred to in sub-section (2) if that person—
Definitions.
Establishment
of a National
Commission
for
Immigration
Reform.
Terms of
Office and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent; or
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude; or
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from
three consecutive meetings of the Commission; or
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused their position as to
render that person's continuance in office detrimental to public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) may be filed by fresh nomination.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with officers and
employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the
Commission under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission
shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members and the
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers
and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred to in
sub-section (1) of  section 10.
7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid on
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the Constitution of the
Commission.
8. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary at such time and place as the
Chairperson may deem fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Member-
Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorized by the Member-Secretary
in this behalf.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION
9. (1) The Commission shall,—
(a) investigate and examine all matters relating to immigration under the
Constitution of India and other laws, in view of preventing illegal migration into India;
(b) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of these laws;
(c) make in such reports, recommendations for the effective implementation of
these laws with emphasis on preventing illegal migration into the country;
Officers and
other
employees of
the
Commission.
Salaries and
Allowances to
be paid out of
grants.
Vacancies
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of the
Commission.
Procedure to
be regulated
by the
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(d) call for investigations to gather information regarding extent of illegal migration
into India and develop a criterion for identification of illegal migrants;
(e) call for special studies or investigations into specific issues or situations that
arise during the process of identification and deportation of illegal migrants;
(f) facilitate dialogue with neighbouring countries to undertake joint action in
matters relating to immigration;
(g) undertake educational research to suggest ways to ensure that the treatment
of illegal migrants is done in accordance to international law and best practice;
(h) undertake education research to ascertain humanitarian concerns involved
in the treatment of illegal migrants and identify the criterion therein;
(i) inspect or cause to be inspected issues such as border patrolling and security
measures at the borders;
(j) inspect or cause to be inspected the facilities where illegal migrants are detained
and take up with the concerned authorities for remedial action, if found necessary;
(k) conduct periodical reviews of the framework surrounding immigration in
the country and assess its efficacy; and
(l) undertake any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central
Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause all reports referred to in clause (b) of the sub-
section (1) to be laid before each House of the Parliament along with a memorandum explaining
the action taken or proposed to be taken on such recommendations relating to the Union and
the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
(3) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of such report or part
to such State Government who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of any
such recommendations.
CHAPTER IV
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
10. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the law in this
behalf, pay to the Commission by the way of grants such sums of money as the Central
Government may deem fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants
referred to in sub-section (1).
11. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant  records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The Accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by them in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Accounts and
Audit.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller
and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the
Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Commission.
12. (1) The Commission shall prepare in such form and at such time for each financial
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving full account of its activities during the
previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2)The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a memorandum
of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in so far as they relate to the
Central Government and the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations and the audit report to be laid as soon as maybe after the reports are
received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCEALLANEOUS
13. The Chairperson, the members, officers and other employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code 1860.
14. The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy decisions
relating to the detection, treatment, engagement and deportation of illegal migrants.
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the OfficialGazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section ( 2) of Section 3 and of
officers and other employees under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(b) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report to be prepared under
section 12; and
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may be, prescribed. (3) Every rule
made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
of the Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Annual
Report.
Chairperson,
members and
Staff of the
Commission
to be public
servants.
Central
Government
to consult
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Illegal migration has emerged as a major international challenge in the recent past.
Illegal migration has numerous socio-political consequences and places stress on public
spending in a country. Countries across the world have realised the need to regulate
immigration into their country and keep illegal migration at the bay. The United States of
America, Canada, the European Union, the United Kindgom have a robust framework in
place that deals with the issue of illegal migration, despite which they continue to face many
hurdles. The growing rise in humanitarian crises around the world has led to an increase in
the number of individuals seeking asylum in foreign countries. It is at this time, that the need
for a strong framework that regulates immigration, while distinguishing between illegal
migrants and refugees, is being felt worldwide.
The issue of illegal migration has been a burning issue for India since its independence.
It has experienced waves of illegal migration from its neighbouring countries such as
Bangladesh, Pakistan, Myanmar and Afghanistan. Illegal migrants take advantage of the
porous border and make their way into the country before moving deeper into the mainland
in search of better opportunities than those available in their country of origin. Despite
facing these issues for years, the framework governing immigration in India comprise of a
host of legislations. Matters concerning immigration, detection of illegal migrants and their
subsequent treatment are dealt with by numerous laws such as the Constitution of India,
The Foreigners Act, the Citizenship Act along with other laws within this sphere. The advent
of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016, which seeks to provide protection to illegal migrants
of certain faiths, the framework would continue to become more complicated. In addition to
complexity of laws, there is also a gross lack of reliable data on illegal migrants. The Census
provides data regarding migrants and not illegal migrants specifically.
Recently, the updation of the National Register of Citizens in the State of Assam,
brought the issue of illegal migration into the limelight once again. The exercise identified
that nearly forty lakh individuals in the State of Assam, which shares a border with Bangladesh,
were residing there without proper documentation. However, the process shed light on
another important aspect. It exposed the inadequacy of the Government with respect to the
treatment and subsequent deportation of illegal migrants once they have been identified by
the State.
There is a lack of a solid framework to initiate swift deportation proceedings or a lack
of coordination with neighbouring governments. There is also a lack of infrastructure to
house illegal migrants, once identified, in the interim. This leads to detention in poor
conditions, on occasion, for indefinite periods. This entire process is sensitive asthere are
numerous humanitarian and legal concerns involved in the process. If done improperly, it
could invite ire from the international community and have ramifications under International
law. As India is taking large strides towards establishing itself as a global power, it is imperative
that the Government assess the current framework of immigration and provide for a better
institutional approach to the illegal migrant issue that is at par with international best practices.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAURAV GOGOI
November 27, 2018.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Commission for
Immigration Reform. It also provides for the appointment of representatives from the prison,
non-Governmental Organisations and legal fraternity. Clause 4 provides for payment of
salaries to Chairperson and members of the Commission. Clause 5 provides for payment of
salaries and allowances to officers and other staff of the Commission. Clause 10 provides
that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the smooth functioning of the
Commission. The Bill therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. However, at this stage the recurring and non-recurring expenditure cannot be
estimated, but has to be worked out by the Central Government while implementing the
provisions of the Bill.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

MGIPMRND—2270LS—14-12-2018.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
 to constitute a Commission for Immigration Reforms to check illegal migration and
regulate immigration and related issues in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
 (Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P .)