LOK SABRA
CORRIGENDA
to
'Y.dEAUROVILLE (EMERGENCY PROVISION S) BILL, 1980
(To be/AsintroducedinLok Sabha)
1. Page4,-
forline14
F.ea9-H(2) Subjecttotheprovisionscontained
in sub-section0) and-'tothe"
2. Page11, line1,-
3. Page 11, line16,-
for rlSocity"read "Soci.ety"
NEW DEIHl;
November20, 1980
Kartika 29, 1902 (Saka)


As INTRODUCED IN LoK SURA ON 
• 
Bill No. 188 of tHO 
THE AUROVILLE (EMERGENCY PROVISIONS) BILL, 1980 
BILL 
0) 
to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the managertU!'At 
of Au.roville for a limited period and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
WHERIIAS Sri Aurobindo Society, a non-governmental organisation had 
been a channel of funds for the setting up of a cultural township known 
as Auroville, where people of different countries are expected to live 
together in harmony in one community and are expected to engage in 
j cultural, educational, scientific and other pursuits aimlng at human 
unity; 
.AND WHEREAS the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organisation (hereinafter referred to as 'UNESCO'), being of the opinion 
that the project aforesaid would contribute to international understand-
10 ing and promotion of peace, by a resolution passed ih 1966, commended 
Auroville to those interested in UNESCO's ideals; 

Shllt 
title and 
com-
mence_ 
rnent. 
Deftni-
tioaa. 
2 
I AND WHEREAS by a further resolution passed in 1968, the UNESCO had 
invited. its member-States and international non-governmental organisa-
tions to participate in the development of Auroville as an i.."1ternational 
cultural township designed to bring together the values of different cul-
tures and civilisations in a harmonious environment with integrated liv- 5 
ing standards which correspond to man's physical and spiritual needs; 
AND WHEREAS by a further resolution passed at its sitting held from the 
12th October to 14th November, 1970, the UNESCO had directed its Dir-
ector-General to take such steps as may be feasible, within the budgetary 
provisions, to promote the development of Auroville as an important in- 10 
ternational cultural progra~me; 
AND WHEREAS Auroville was developed as a cultural township with 
the aid of funds received from difl'prent organisations in and outside India 
as also from the substantial grants received from the Central and State 
Governments; 15 
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the complaints received with regard to the 
misuse of funds by Sri Aurobindo Society, a Committee was set up under 
the chairmanship of the Lieutenant-Governor of Pondicherry with re-
presentatives of the Government of Tamil Nadu and of the Ministry at 
Home Affairs in the Central Government, and the said Committee had, QO 
after a detailed scrutiny of the 3ccounts of Sri Aurobindo Society, found 
instances of serious irregularities in the management of the said Society, 
misutili5ation of its funds and their diversion to other purposes; 
AND WHEREAS in view of the serious difficulties which have arisen 
with regard to the management of Auroville, it is necessary to take over, 25 
.fI:>r a li.n).ited p~iod, the management thereof and any delay in taking 
oller the management of Aurovil1e wO'Uld be highly detrimental to the 
interests apd objectives of Auroville; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - 30 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Auroville (Emergency Pl:oviaions) 
Act, 1980. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the ~Ot,b ,"'~f S5 
~p~~mber, 1980. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator appoiatedunder 
seotiDn 5; 
i(ob) "appointed day" means the 10th ,day of~,!1I8.P; 

• 
(cr "AtirOVi1te" mean's gO much of the undertakings as form 
pe't' 161:' or are relatabh!cto, the cultural townSMp which is ldtcSWD as 
A\ifo'fflI~amI'the chatter of which was proclai~ed by die 'Mother' 
on the 28th day of February, 1968; 
5 (d) "COUl'lctl" means the 'Auroville International Advisory Coun-
cil' 'con'St'it'll~d U'l"fdier sub;.section (1) of section 6; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
A:et; 
West 10 
<f) "Society" means Sri Aurobindo Society being a society as 
defined in the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961, and 
having its registered office at CalC'Utta; Ben,a} 
ActXXVI 
of 1981. 
21 of 1880. 
15 
(g) words and expressiors used hereln and not defln-ed, but 
defined in the Societies Registration Act, 1860, shall have the mean-
ings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
TAKING OVER OF TIlE MANAGEMENT OF AUROVILLE 
, 3. (1) On and from the appointed day and for a period of two years Manage_ 
:th~aftei", the management of Aurovil1e shan vest in the Central GOv- meatrdt"· 
I en'lment: Aulo-" 
ville te'· 
~o Provided that where the Centr~~l Government is of opinion that in! ~-6 
order to secure the proper manugt'ment of AuroviHe, it is expedient tr':; en-
that such management should con~;j1ue to vest in that Government after Govern-
the exPtryof the said perioci of tWG years, it may, from time to time,' ment 
i~ ~ons for the continuance of such management for such periOd, 1 f~r.a 
25 not 'e~~diIl'g 01'r~ year at a time. 3S it m~y think fit; so,. however, that'· ~:~!~~ 
the total period' for which such management shall continue to vest in 
the Central Government shall not, in any case, exceed ~years'rl j£ l..k "" 
. ~ 
. (2) AurovtHe shall be deemed to include all the assets, rights, lealle-- \ 
holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property (movable \ 
30 and immovable), including lands, buildings, works, workshops, projects, 
st.m'eS, fuSftuments, machinery, ~n~omobiles and other vehicles, cash \ 
'. 
balahees, funds, including reservf' funds, investments and book debts 
of the Sodely as form part of. or are relatablj to, Aurovill~ and all other 
I rijf1fsan'd interests arrsmg out of such pro~rties as were immediately 
3~ beft):M' t'heappointed . day in the (lwnership, possession, power or control 
oltne SOciety, whether within 0" without India, and all books of account, 
~st~s, ma'~, plans and all other documents of whatevernatul'e rela-
ting thereto. - ..--
4. (1)' NotWithstanding anyth;n~ contained in any other law for the 
"0 tiWie beffiig iri fotce or in the mlO'!norandum or the rules and regulatiOns 
., of lheSoefety' -. , 
(4) on and from the ap,ointed day, every member of the Gov-
etnlng BOByofthe SoCiety, by whatever name called, shall, cease to 
exercise any powers of management in relation to AuroVllIe; 
I , 
\ 
I' ~ - II 
I 
Applica-
tion of 
Weat 
Bengal 
Act XXVI 
of 1981. 

Ad...,.. tra_ ef 
AuroviUe. 
(b) it shall not be lawful for the members of the Society or any 
other person to nominate or appoint any person as Manager or 
Director of so much of the assets of the Society as form part of, or 
are relatable to, Auroville; 
(0) no resolution in relation to Auroville passed at any meet- 5 
ing of the members of the SOCiety or of the members of Auroville shall 
be given effect to unless it is approved by the Central Government; 
(d) no proceeding for the dissolution of the Socfety or merger of 
the Society with any other society or for the appointment of a re-
ceiver in respect of any asset forming part of, or relatable to, Auro- 10 
ville, the management of which has vested in the Central Govern-
ment under section 3, shall lie in any court except with the consent 
of the Central Government. 
(d) no proceeding for th~ dissolution of the Society or merger of 
other provisions contained in this Act and subject to such other excep- 15 
tions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Gentral Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf for the pur-
pose6 of this Act, the provisions of the West Bengal Societies Registra-
tion Act, 1961, shall continue to apply to the Society in the same manner 
West 
Bengal 
Act XXVI as they applied thereto before the appointed day. 20 of 1961. 
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as from the appointed day, 
awoint a person or a body of persons as the Administrator for the pur-
pose of taking over the management of Auroville and the Administrator 
shall carry on the management of Auroville for and on behalf of the 
Central Government. 
25 
(2) The Administrator may authorise such person as he thinks fit also 
to exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this 
Act and difterent persons may be authorised to exercise different 
powers, and subject to the general or special directions given or imposed 
by the Administrator, the person so authorised to exercise any powers 
of the Administrator may exercise those powers in the same manner and 30 
with the same effect as if they had been conferred on that person directly 
by this Act and not by way of authorisation . 
. (3) If, on the ~pointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding, 
C1f whatever nature, in relation to any property which has vested in the 
Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by or 35 
against the Society is pendh". the same shall not abate, be discontinued 
or be, in any way, prejudicially affected bv reason of the ,taking over of 
the management of Auroville or of anything contained in this Act but 
the suit, appeal or other proc~ding may be pursued, prosecuted or 
enforced by or against the Central Government. 40 
(4) The Central Government may issue such directions (includinA 
directions 8S to initia~nR, defendin~ or continUing Rnv legal 'Droceedin~ 
before any court. tribunal or other authority) to the Administrator, as 
to his powers and duties as that Government may deem desirable Rnd the 
Administrator may apply to the Central Government at anvtime for 45 
instructions as to the manner in which he shall I'!onrll\l~t the manA~ement 
of Auroville or in relat10n to any matter arising in the course ot such 
ma'lagement. ......, 

Welt 
Benpl 
.ActXXVI 
of 1981, 
I 
• (S) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and to the control 
of the Central Government, the Administrator shall be entitled, notwith-
standing anything conta:ned in the West Bengal Societies Registration 
Act, 1961, or in any other law for the time being in force, to exercise, :In 
5 relation to Auroville, the !:.lOwers of the Governing Body or Executive 
Committee or, as the case may be, of the Board of Trustees of the 
Society, including the powers to dispose of any property or assets 
of the SOciety, whether such powers are derived from the West Bengal 
Societies Registration Act, 1961, or from the memorandum and rules and 
10 regulations of the Society or from any other source. 
(6) The Administrator and thr:c other persons authorised by him under 
sub-section (2) shall receive from the funds of the Society relatable to 
Auroville such remuneration a~ the Central Government may fix. 
6. (1) As 80011 as may be after the commencement of this Ad and In Advilor7 
15 any case within one month from such commencement, the Central Gov- CounciL 
ernment shall constitute, by notifi~ation in the Offici,,1 Gazette, a Coun-
cil to bf." ('ailed the (Auroville International Advisory Council'. 
(2) The Council may on its own motion or on a reference made to it 
by the Central Government advise the Central Government on any matter 
20 concerning the management of Auroville, 
(3) In tendering any advice to the Central Government, the Council 
shall endeavour to secure that-
(a) the ideals for which Auroville has been established are en-
couraged, and 
25 (b) the members of Auroville are allowed freedom to grow and 
develop activities and institutions for the fulfilment of the aspira-
tions and programmes envisaged in the Charter of Auroville. 
(4) The Council shan consist of such number of members not exceed-
ing five as may be appointerl by the Central Government from amongst 
30 persons, who in its opinion are devoted to the ideal~ of human unity, 
peace and progress. 
(5) There shall be a Chairman of the Council who shan be elected 
by the members of the Council from among themselves. 
(6) The term of office of, the method of filling casual vacancies among, 
35 and the allowrnces and other remuneration, if any, payable to, the mem-
bers of the Council shall be such as mayf1e prescribed. 
(7) The Council shall, subj~t to any rules that may be made in this 
behalf under section 17, have power to regulate its own procedure. 
7. (1) Every person having, on the ap?ointed day, in his possession, 
40 custody or control any prO';'lerty forming part of, or relatable to, Auroville, 
shall deliver forthwith such property to the Administrator or to . any 
officer or other employee of the Central Government as may be authorised 
by the Central Government in this behal!. 
(2) Any person who has, on the appointed day, in lu"s possession er 
45 under his control any books, papers or other documents relating to 
AuroviUe (including' the minutes books containing resolutions in 
Deliver,. 
of poI8eI-
sion of 
propertieI 
of Auro-
vllle •. 

ReUnquiah.. 
mentof 
manage-
lDent 
before tbe 
specified 
period. 
Tribunal. 
8 
r@ittHm t~'Aurovil1e addpted by-persons in 'charge of theme~eDt at 
th'~fS6efetybefore the 'appointed day), the current cheque bdOb retat;. 
!iiI 'to' 'A\il'drille, any letters, memoranda, notes and other ~ltRml 
l:H.ftiftWA bIin', and the Society, shall, notwithstanding anythitig cOnt~ iiI 
atiyottter la~J fOr the time being in force, be liable to aceouit't; far tile 5 
~, papiM's and other dOcuments (including SUCh minutes books, -cheque 
D'dM; letters, ~oranda, nOtes and other commu:rneations) to' die 
A:!iiiirilstr~tO'r or to such per~on (being an officer or other eriiploy'ee of 
the'Ceiitial QovernmEmt) as may be authorised by the Central GOVern-
ment ill this behalf. 
(9) E-very person in charge o'f the management of AutdViUe i1rir:I\Ie-
diately bftfore the appointed day shaH, within ten days frotn that day 
10 
or within such further period as the Central Government may allow in 
this' behalf, futnish to the Administrator a complete inventory 'of aU the 
p1'operties and assets (including particulars of donations received, book IS 
debts,' investments and belongings) fonning part of, or relatable to, 
Auroville immediately before the appointed' day and all liabilities and 
obligations of the Society in relation to Auroville subsisting immediately 
~ore that day and also of all agteements entered into by tne So"clety in 
relation to Auroville and in force immediately before theappoin~ed day. 20 
8. (1) If at any time it appears to the Central Government that the 
purposes for which the management of Auroville had been taken over 
have been fulfilled or that for any other reason it is not necessary that 
the manageTrient of Auroville should remain vested in that Government, 
it may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 25 
3, by order published in the Officinl Gazette, relinquish the management 
of AurovnIe with effect from such date as may be specified in the order. 
(2) On and from the date specified in the order made under sub-
section (I), the management of the property of the Society forming part 
of, or relatable to, Aurovil1e, shall vest in the Governing Body (by what- 30 
ever name called) of the Society and such management shall be carried 
On in accordance with the provisions of the West Bengal Societies Regis-
tration Act, 1961, so, however, that the steps, if any, in relation to the West 
management of the property of the 'Society forming part of, or relatable Bengal 
to, Auroville, may be taken after the publication of the order made under 35 Act XXVI 
sub-section (1). of 1961. 
9. (1) If any cfispnte or d1ht arises as to whether any asset, right, 
lease-hotd, POWer, authority, rivilege, property (whether movable Or 
immovable) including any land, buikliDg, wol"ks, workaJrop, ~t, 
stores, instruments, machbrery, automobile or other ve'h~es, caBIr 40 
balances, funds (including reserve funds), investments and book debts 
fcmdl'OI' farm ,ran of, or h 'ot are ~IRtJtbte to. Aur~;forS p1iipdses 
of ~"3, sudnt_te or doUbtshliU, at the Tequ~ of 1Jae ~'or' 
tlle 'Atlntfdattal*· or lay other ~Il tntel'istedorat 'tIl~ tfts~ 'of "tile 
deMn1 !~riififtt. be' reterre.t to';a MdtUiI ;eoW81fj~, of'~e, ft!'emW "45 
(being a perIOn who i. or h8llbeell'a ~ 'of a '1BIh COUi't) 't& be 
appointed by the Central Government. 
(2~ The:Tribun8'lshall, for thepu!'f)DSe8 ofey referelleeuncter~' 
section (1), have all the powers of 0 civil court while trying a suit 'Under 

I of 1eoa. 
~ 
.. ~. c.~e ofCiyil ~()qep~J.:e, 1908, in r~t qf the, ~wffii matters, 
~ly;,:"""" 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; ..' .. 
5 (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents pro-
ducible as evidence; 
(c) recording evidence on oath; 
(d) requisitiQ~i~g any public record fromapy cQurt qr Q1!lce; 
(e) iStiuing commissions for the e](amin,atton of wii~es ... or 
~ 0 dpcLIJPents; 
<f) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Tribunal shall have power to regulate Us own pJ"OQed~·in 
all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions (including the 
place or places at which it shall hold its sittings). 
15 (4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be 
defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
10, Any person aggrieved by the decision of the TribWlal Wlder tee- App"1; 
tion 9 may, within thirty days from the date of such decision, prefer an 
appeal to the High Court at Madras and such appeal shall be heard and 
20 disposed of by not less Lhan two Judges of that High Court: 
25 
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after th,e 
expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that *e ap'p'~i­
l~nt had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the p~d 
aforesaid. 
CHAPTER III 
11. The provisions of this Act or any notification, order or rule made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent there-
with contained in any law other than this Act or in any instrument ~-
30 ing effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or in any decree or 
order of any court, 
a, (1) Every contract (ip.cluding any co~apt of ~yment or 
o~ an;ansezp.~nt) entered into by the Society in .r~~~n to 4~ville, 
t~e ;qla~ement of which has vested in the Central GoveJ;DJ.n8Dt under 
35 section 3, and in force immediately before the ~ppoiJl~d .y,~, on 
and from the date of expiry of ninety days from the appOinted day, cease 
to have effect unless such contract or other arrangement has been, before 
the expiry Of that period, ratified, in writing, by the Central Govem-
JIl~t; and in ratifying such contract or other arrangement, t~e Central 
,... Government may make such alterations or modi6cations thereip. as it 
~ . 
45 
may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government shall not omit t~ rat~y any 
contract or othe,r arrangement and shall not make any alteration or modi-
fication therein-
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract or other arrangement 
is undulY onerous or has been entered iDto in bad fai;th or is detri-
mtm.ttl tpthe inweats of Auroville; aDd 
Contra. 
etc., ceue 
to have 
etrectun-
leu ratified 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment 

ExclUSIon 
of perioa 
of opera-
tion of 
Act. 
ProtectiOn 
of action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Penaltle8. 
8 
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract or other 
arrangement a reasonable opportunity of being heard and except 
after recording, in writing, its reasons for refusal to ratify the con-
tract or other arrangement or for making any alteration or modifica-
tion therein. 5 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for ,the time 
being in force, no person in respect of whom any contract or other 
arrangement is terminated, altered or modified under sub-section (1), or 
who ceases to exercise any powers or hold any -office by reason of any 
provision contained in sub-section (1) of section 4, shall be entitled to 10 
claim any compensation for the premature termination of the contract or 
other arrangement or for any alteration or modification therein or for 
the loss of his powers or office. 
13. In computing the period of limitation prescribed by any law for 
the time being in force for any suit or application against any person by IS 
the Society in respect of any matter arising out of any transaction relat-
ing to Auroville, the time during which this Act is in force shall be 
excluded. 
14. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shali lie against 
the Central Government or any officer or other employee of that Govern- 2C 
ment or the Administrator or any person authorised under sub-section 
(2) of section 5 by the Administrator for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any oflicer or other employ~c of that Government or the 2S 
Administrator or any perRon authorised under sub-section (2) of section 
5 by the Administrator for any damage caused or likely to be caused by 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act. 
15. Any person who.-
(a) having in his possession or custody or control any asset or 
property forming part of. or relatable to, Auroville, wrongfully 
withholds such property from the Administrator or any person 
authorised under this Act, or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of any such asset or property 3S 
forming part of, or relatable to, Auroville, or 
(c) wilfully retains any asset or property forming part of, or 
relatable to. Auroville, or removes or destroys it, or 
(d) wilfully withholds or fails to deliver any books, papers or 
other documents relatable to Auroville which may be ~ bis pO&SeB- 40 
sian or custody or under his control to the Adm\nistrator or any 
person authorised under this Act, or 
(e) fails, without any reasonable cause, to furnish any inventory 
of properties and assets as pl'ovided in sub-section .(3) of section 7, 

S 
shall be punishable with impr:isonment for a term which may extenci to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
16. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed. by 
S a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company, 8S well as the company, shall be deemed 
W be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
10 Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offen~ was 
committed Without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any 
15 offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it 
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent ot" con-
nivance of, or i'3 attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager. secretary or other officer of the company, such director, man-
ager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
20 offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Erplanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm 
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlclal 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prej'Udice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
30 matters, namely:-
35 
(a) the term of office of, the method of filling casual vacancies 
among, and the allowances and other remuneration, if any, payable 
to, the members of the Council under sub-section (6) of section 6; 
(b) the additional matters in respect of which the Tribunal shall 
have the powers of a civil court under clause (f) of sub-section (2) 
of section 9; and 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed, or in respect of which rules may be made, under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
40 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be co~prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 01' 
the 8~ccessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
Oftence. 
by cOlD-
paniu. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

Repeal 
and 
saving. 
~o 
·madiftcation'in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter"have effect ol'lly iYl such modified formi'or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any sur.h modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 5 
It. (1) The Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance, 1980 is 
hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any acUon taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 10 
I. of 1980. 

., I 
~, icet, 
STATEMENT OF OBJEcrS·TND REASONS 
, I r I:J L ~. '. 
. In lQti8.~Jl internatiQoa,l Qultl.U'al township knOW{l .~ 'Aqroville' ~. 
set up for people of di'1fer~nt cqWltries· to live together In haf.~ony~d 
in one community, who were expected to engage ill cultufal, educa-
tio~ aod scientific and Qther pUfl'!uit&. aiming at human unity. In ·l966. 
the UNESCO passed a resolutioo commendine AurovUle to thl)ie inter-
ested in UNESCO's ideals. Again in 1968, the UNESCO invited its mem-
ber-States IUld InternatiMtU Gove~ntal Org~isationi ~ participate 
in ~he development of AUfoville lUi an interllJtional cultural townabJp ~ 
bring together the values of different cultur£!13 and civilisations in a 
harmonious environment with integrated living staDdardswhich corres-
pond to man's physical and spfritual needs. Funds for the development 
of Auroville were provided by different organisations in and outside 
India. Substantial grants were also made for the purpose by the Cf'ntral 
and State Governments. The funds were channe}.led through Sri Auro-
bindo Sodty, a non-Governmental organisation.-\,\{ 
'\ '..... \ .. \ I I·. " ..• , ,. .' .. ~" v~" ... L' .: I ".' ~ .. ~ , . I .... "," 
2. \ Complaint.> were received with regard to misuse of funds by Sri 
Aurobindo Society and a Committee was set up under the Chairmanship 
of Lt.-Governor of Pondicherry with representatives of the Government 
of Tamil Nadu and of the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Central Gov-
ernment, to enquire into the same. After a detailed scrutiny of the ac-
counts of Sri Aurobindo Soci'ety, as also a report of the Audit team, the 
Coinmittee found instances of serious irregularities in the management 
of the said Society, misutilisation of its funds and their diversion to other 
purposes. ') 
3'-IAs serious difficulties had arisen with regard to the management 
of Auroville and as any delay in taking the necessary remedial actIon 
would have been highly detrimental to the interests and objectives of 
Auroville, t:1e President promulgated on the 10th November, 1980 the 
Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance, 1980. The Ordinance pro-
vided for the vesting, for a limited period, of the management of Auro-
ville in the Central Government and made the nec£!l3sary ancillary and 
incidental provisions. ~ 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; S. B. CHAVAN. 
The 15th November, 1980. 
. ' \ ," ~ t t r ' .. ~ '.; •• 
'.~ \. .1 
11 

,. 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Advisory 
Council and payment Of allowances and other remuneration to the mem-
bers thereof in accordance with the rules made thereunder. Clause 9 of 
the Bill provides for the appointment of a Tribunal to adjudicate upon 
certain disputes and for defraying of expenses incurred in conneetfon 
therewith, out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. According to a rough estimate, the total expenditure involved on 
these accounts is likely to be of the order of Rs. 3.20 laths per annum. 
3. No other recurrfng or non-recurring expenditure is likely to be 
involved. 
12 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which 
rules may be made relate, inter alia, to the term of office of, the method 
of filling casual vacancies among, and allowances and other remunera-
tion, if any, payable to, the members of the Auroville International Ad-
visory Council and the additional matters in respect of which the Tri-
bunal under section 9 shall have the powers of a civil court. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made pertaitl to details 
and procedure. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, Of a nor-
mal character. 
13 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the management 
of Auroville for a limited period and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
(Shri S. B. Chavan, 
Minister of Education and 
SOcial Welfare) 