THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regional Rural Banks (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In the Regional Rural Banks Act,1976 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 3, in sub-section (3), in clause (c),—
(a) the words ‘‘during the first five years of its functioning’’ shall be omitted;
Amendment
of section 3.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
21 of 1976.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 22 DECEMBER, 2014
Bill No.  188-C of  2014
5

2
(b) the proviso shall be omitted.
3. In the principal Act, in section 5,—
(a) for the words ‘‘five crores of rupees divided into five lakhs of fully paid-up
shares of one hundred rupees each’’, the words ‘‘two thousand crore of rupees, divided
into two hundred crore of fully paid-up shares of ten rupees each’’ shall be substituted;
(b) in the proviso, for the words ‘‘twenty-five lakhs of rupees, and the shares
shall be, in all cases, fully paid-up shares of one hundred rupees each’’, the words
‘‘one crore of rupees, and the shares shall be, in all cases, fully paid-up shares of ten
rupees each’’ shall be substituted.
4. In the principal Act, in section 6,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words ‘‘twenty-five lakhs of rupees or exceed one
crore of rupees’’, the words ‘‘one crore  of rupees’’ shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), the following provisos  shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that in case the Regional Rural Bank raises its capital from
sources other than the Central Government or the State Government or the
Sponsor Bank, the shareholding of the Central Government and the Sponsor
Bank shall not be less than fifty-one per cent.:
Provided further that the Central Government shall consult the concerned
State Government if the level of shareholding in the Regional Rural Bank of
such State Government is reduced below fifteen per cent.’’;
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(2A) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Sponsor
Bank and the State Government, by notification, either raise or reduce the limit
of shareholding of the Central Government, the State Government or the Sponsor
Bank specified in sub-section (2):
Provided that the Central Government shall consult the concerned State
Government before reducing the limit of shareholding of such State
Government.";
(d) in sub-section ( 3), after the words, brackets and figure ‘‘as is specified in
sub-section (2)’’, the words, brackets, figure and letter ‘‘or, as the case may be, notified
by the Central Government under sub-section (2A)" shall be inserted.
5. In the principal Act, in section 9, in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (a), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that no person shall be nominated as a director, if he is already
a director on the Board of any other Regional Rural Bank;’’;
(b) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(f ) such number of directors elected by the shareholders other than the
directors nominated by the Central Government, the State Government, the Spon-
sor Bank and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government
or the State Government, whose names are entered in the register of sharehold-
ers of the Regional Rural Bank at least ninety days before the date of the meeting
in which the election of directors takes place on the following basis, namely:—
(i) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such
shareholders is ten per cent. or less of the total issued equity capital, one
director shall be elected from such shareholders;
(ii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 9.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
shareholders is more than ten per cent. but less than twenty-five per cent.
of the total issued equity capital, two directors shall be elected from the
shareholders including the shareholders referred to in sub-clause (i);
(iii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such
shareholders is twenty-five per cent. or more of the total issued equity
capital, three directors shall be elected from the shareholders including
shareholders referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii).";
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(3) The Central Government may appoint an officer of the Central
Government on the Board of Regional Rural Banks, if it considers necessary for
the purposes of effective functioning of the Regional Rural Banks.".
6. In the principal Act, for section 10, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘‘10. A director nominated under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 9 shall
hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government and for such term, not
exceeding three years, from the date on which he assumes his office, as the Central
Government may specify at the time of his nomination and shall be eligible for
renomination:
Provided that no such director shall hold office either continuously or
intermittently for a period exceeding six years.".
7. In the principal Act, in section 19, in sub-section ( 1), for the figures, letters and
words ‘‘31st day of December’’, the figures, letters and words ‘‘31st day of March’’ shall be
substituted.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 10.
Term of
office of
director.
Amendment
of section 19.
5
10
15
20

loLOK  SABHAL
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—3893LS(S3)—22-12-2014.