THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
    further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
        BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People  (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following section
shall be inserted, namely :—
"16A. Notwithstanding anything in sections 14, 14A and 15, the Election
Commission shall, in consultation with the State Governments, endeavour to conduct
elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of all States
simultaneously.".
Short title
and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
16A.
Bill No. 188 of  2017
Simultaneous
elections to
the House of
the People
and
Legislative
Assemblies of
all States.
43 of 1951. 5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
General Elections to the House of the People and the State Legislative Assemblies are
conducted at varying points of time which invariably involves substantial amount of time,
expenditure and heavy deployment of manpower. Given that, a need has arisen to embark
upon some targeted measure to get the elections to the House of the People and all the State
Assemblies conducted together by making a synergy of time between the tenure of State
Legislative Assemblies with that of the Lok Sabha in consultation with the State Governments.
The concomitant conduct of elections of the House of the People and the State
Legislative Assemblies would lower the amount of expenditure. Besides, the local
administration which get overwhelmingly pre-occupied in the electoral process by
procrastinating all administrative functions, will also receive huge relief and the administrative
work shall not suffer. Not just that, since model code of conduct shall be in effect all through
the country for the same period of time, it would be far easier to monitor and give effect to it.
A huge financial burden arising out of the deployment of para military forces and administrative
personnel shall be fairly alleviated.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951 with a view
to providing that the Election Commission shall endeavour to conduct elections to the
House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of all States simultaneously.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
August 10, 2017.
2

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
       further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
————
(Shri  Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2233LS(S3)—27-10-2017.