13
Bill No. 189-F of  2019
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 26TH JULY, 2019
RAJYA SABHA ON 30TH JULY, 2019)

1
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) The provisions of this Act, except sections 6, 7 and 8, clauses (i), (iii) and clause
(iv) of section 14, sections 20 and 21, section 31, sections 33, 34 and 35, sections 37 and 38
shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of  November, 2018.
(3) The provisions of sections 6, 7 and 8, clauses (i), (iii) and clause (iv) of section 14,
sections 20 and 21, section 31, sections 33, 34 and 35, sections 37 and 38 shall come into force
on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 189-F of  2019

2
and different dates may be appointed for these provisions and any reference in any such
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming
into force of that provision.
2. In section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
in clause (41),––
(a) for the first proviso, the following provisos shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that where a company or body corporate, which is a holding
company or a subsidiary or associate company of a company incorporated
outside India and is required to follow a different financial year for consolidation
of its accounts outside India, the Central Government may, on an application
made by that company or body corporate in such form and manner as may be
prescribed, allow any period as its financial year, whether or not that period is a
year:
Provided further that any application pending before the Tribunal as on
the date of commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019, shall be
disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable to it
before such commencement.”;
(b) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further that”, the words
“Provided also that” shall be substituted.
3. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“10A. (1) A company incorporated after the commencement of the Companies
(Amendment) Act, 2019 and having a share capital shall not commence any business
or exercise any borrowing powers unless—
(a) a declaration is filed by a director within a period of one hundred and
eighty days of the date of incorporation of the company in such form and
verified in such manner as may be prescribed, with the Registrar that every
subscriber to the memorandum has paid the value of the shares agreed to be
taken by him on the date of making of such declaration; and
(b) the company has filed with the Registrar a verification of its registered
office as provided in sub-section (2) of section 12.
(2) If any default is made in complying with the requirements of this section, the
company shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and every officer who is
in default shall be liable to a penalty of one thousand rupees for each day during
which such default continues but not exceeding an amount of one lakh rupees.
(3) Where no declaration has been filed with the Registrar under clause (a) of
sub-section ( 1) within a period of one hundred and eighty days of the date of
incorporation of the company and the Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that
the company is not carrying on any business or operations, he may, without prejudice
to the provisions of sub-section (2), initiate action for the removal of the name of the
company from the register of companies under Chapter XVIII.”.
4. In section 12 of the principal Act, after sub-section (8), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(9) If the Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that the company is not
carrying on any business or operations, he may cause a physical verification of the
registered office of the company in such manner as may be prescribed and if any
default is found to be made in complying with the requirements of sub-section (1), he
may without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 8), initiate action for the
removal of the name of the company from the register of companies under
Chapter XVIII.”.
Amendment
of section 2.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Commencement
of business, etc.
Amendment
of section 12.
18 of 2013.

3
5. In section 14 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the second proviso, the following provisos shall be
substituted, namely:—
“Provided further that any alteration having the effect of conversion of a
public company into a private company shall not be valid unless it is approved
by an order of the Central Government on an application made in such form and
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided also that any application pending before the Tribunal, as on the
date of commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019, shall be
disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable to it
before such commencement.”;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the word “Tribunal”, the words “Central Government”
shall be substituted.
6. In section 26 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-sections (4), (5) and (6), for the word “registration”, the word “filing”
shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-section (7) shall be omitted.
7. In section 29 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause (b), the word “public” shall be omitted;
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) In case of such class or classes of unlisted companies as may be
prescribed, the securities shall be held or transferred only in dematerialised form
in the manner laid down in the Depositories Act, 1996 and the regulations made
thereunder.”.
8. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause (c), for the words
“delivery of a copy of the prospectus for registration”, the words “filing of a copy of the
prospectus with the Registrar” shall be substituted.
9. In section 53 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Where any company fails to comply with the provisions of this section,
such company and every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to an amount equal to the amount raised through the issue of shares at a
discount or five lakh rupees, whichever is less, and the company shall also be liable to
refund all monies received with interest at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum from
the date of issue of such shares to the persons to whom such shares have been
issued.”.
10. In section 64 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) Where any company fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (1),
such company and every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of one
thousand rupees for each day during which such default continues, or five lakh rupees
whichever is less.”.
11. In section 77 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the first and second
provisos, the following provisos shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that the Registrar may, on an application by the company, allow such
registration to be made––
Amendment of
section 14.
Amendment
of section 26.
Amendment
of section 29.
22 of 1996.
Amendment of
section 35.
Amendment
of section 53.
Amendment of
section 64.
Amendment
of section 77.

4
(a) in case of charges created before the commencement of the Companies
(Amendment) Act, 2019, within a period of three hundred days of such creation; or
(b) in case of charges created on or after the commencement of the
Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019, within a period of sixty days of such creation,
on payment of such additional fees as may be prescribed:
Provided further that if the registration is not made within the period specified—
(a) in clause (a) to the first proviso, the registration of the charge shall be
made within six months from the date of commencement of the Companies
(Amendment) Act, 2019, on payment of such additional fees as may be prescribed
and different fees may be prescribed for different classes of companies;
(b) in clause (b) to the first proviso, the Registrar may, on an application,
allow such registration to be made within a further period of sixty days after
payment of such ad valorem fees as may be prescribed.”.
12. Section 86 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) If any person wilfully furnishes any false or incorrect information or
knowingly suppresses any material information, required to be registered in accordance
with the provisions of section 77, he shall be liable for action under section 447.”.
13. For section 87 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“87. The Central Government on being satisfied that—
(a) the omission to give intimation to the Registrar of the payment or
satisfaction of a charge, within the time required under this Chapter; or
(b) the omission or misstatement of any particulars, in any filing previously
made to the Registrar with respect to any charge or modification thereof or with
respect to any memorandum of satisfaction or other entry made in pursuance of
section 82 or section 83,
was accidental or due to inadvertence or some other sufficient cause or it is not of a
nature to prejudice the position of creditors or shareholders of the company, it may, on
the application of the company or any person interested and on such terms and
conditions as it deems just and expedient, direct that the time for the giving of intimation
of payment or satisfaction shall be extended or, as the case may require, that the
omission or misstatement shall be rectified.”.
14. In section 90 of the principal Act,—
(i) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4A) Every company shall take necessary steps to identify an individual
who is a significant beneficial owner in relation to the company and require him
to comply with the provisions of this section.”;
(ii) for sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(9) The company or the person aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal
may make an application to the Tribunal for relaxation or lifting of the restrictions
placed under sub-section (8), within a period of one year from the date of such
order:
Provided that if no such application has been filed within a period of one
year from the date of the order under sub-section ( 8), such shares shall be
Amendment
of section 86.
Substitution of
new section for
section 87.
Rectification
by Central
Government
in Register of
charges.
Amendment
of section 90.

5
transferred, without any restrictions, to the authority constituted under
sub-section (5) of section 125, in such manner as may be prescribed.”;
(iii) after sub-section (9), as so substituted, the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(9A) The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of this
section.”;
(iv) in sub-section (11), after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section ( 4)”,
the words, brackets, figure and letter “or required to take necessary steps under
sub-section (4A)” shall be inserted.
15. In section 92 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 5), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) If any company fails to file its annual return under sub-section (4), before
the expiry of the period specified therein, such company and its every officer who is in
default shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and in case of continuing
failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during
which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees.”.
16. In section 102 of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 4), if any default is
made in complying with the provisions of this section, every promoter, director, manager
or other key managerial personnel of the company who is in default shall be liable to a
penalty of fifty thousand rupees or five times the amount of benefit accruing to the
promoter, director, manager or other key managerial personnel or any of his relatives,
whichever is higher.”.
17. In section 105 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “punishable
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees”, the words “liable to a penalty of five
thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
18. In section 117 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) If any company fails to file the resolution or the agreement under
sub-section (1) before the expiry of the period specified therein, such company shall
be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further
penalty of five hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such failure
continues, subject to a maximum of twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer of the
company who is in default including liquidator of the company, if any, shall be liable to
a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further
penalty of five hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such failure
continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees.”.
19. In section 121 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) If the company fails to file the report under sub-section (2) before the expiry
of the period specified therein, such company shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh
rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees
for each day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum
of five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to
a penalty which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of
continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day after the
first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees.”.
Amendment
of section 92.
Amendment
of section
102.
Amendment
of section
105.
Amendment
of section
117.
Amendment
of section
121.

6
20. In section 132 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The National Financial Reporting Authority shall perform its functions
through such divisions as may be prescribed.”;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3A) Each division of the National Financial Reporting Authority shall be
presided over by the Chairperson or a full-time Member authorised by the
Chairperson.
(3B) There shall be an executive body of the National Financial Reporting
Authority consisting of the Chairperson and full-time Members of such
Authority for efficient discharge of its functions under sub-section ( 2) [other
than clause (a)] and sub-section (4).”;
(c) in sub-section (4), in clause (c), for sub-clause (B), the following sub-clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(B) debarring the member or the firm from—
I. being appointed as an auditor or internal auditor or undertaking
any audit in respect of financial statements or internal audit of the
functions and activities of any company or body corporate; or
II. performing any valuation as provided under section 247,
for a minimum period of six months or such higher period not exceeding ten
years as may be determined by the National Financial Reporting Authority.”.
21. In section 135 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (5), —
(i) after the words “three immediately preceding financial years,”, the
words “or where the company has not completed the period of three financial
years since its incorporation, during such immediately preceding financial years,”
shall be inserted;
(ii) in the second proviso, after the words “reasons for not spending the
amount” occurring at the end, the words, brackets, figure and letters “and,
unless the unspent amount relates to any ongoing project referred to in
sub-section (6), transfer such unspent amount to a Fund specified in Schedule
VII, within a period of six months of the expiry of the financial year” shall be
inserted;
(b)  after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6) Any amount remaining unspent under sub-section ( 5), pursuant to
any ongoing project,  fulfilling such conditions as may be prescribed, undertaken
by a company in persuance of its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy, shall
be transferred by the company within a period of thirty days from the end of the
financial year to a special account to be opened by the company in that behalf
for that financial year in any scheduled bank to be called the Unspent Corporate
Social Responsibility Account, and such amount shall be spent by the company
in pursuance of its obligation towards the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy
within a period of three financial years from the date of such transfer, failing
which, the company shall transfer the same to a Fund specified in Schedule VII,
within a period of thirty days from the date of completion of the third financial year.
(7) If a company contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 5) or
sub-section (6), the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be
less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees
Amendment
of section
132.
Amendment
of section
135.

7
and every officer of such company who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which shall
not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees,
or with both.
(8) The Central Government may give such general or special directions
to a company or class of companies as it considers necessary to ensure compliance
of provisions of this section and such company or class of companies shall
comply with such directions.”.
22. In section 137 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),—
(a) for the words “punishable with fine”, the words “liable to a penalty” shall be
substituted;
(b) for the portion beginning with the words “punishable with imprisonment”,
and ending with the words “five lakh rupees or with both”, the words “shall be liable
to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty
of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such failure continues,
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
23. In section 140 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) If the auditor does not comply with the provisions of sub-section (2), he or
it shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees or an amount equal to the
remuneration of the auditor, whichever is less, and in case of continuing failure, with
a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such
failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees.”.
24. In section 157 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) If any company fails to furnish the Director Identification Number under
sub-section (1), such company shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand
rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees
for each day after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum
of one lakh rupees, and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to
a penalty of not less than twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing
failure, with a further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day after the first during
which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees.”.
25. For section 159 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“159. If any individual or director of a company makes any default in complying
with any of the provisions of section 152, section 155 and section 156, such individual
or director of the company shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees and where the default is a continuing one, with a further penalty
which may extend to five hundred rupees for each day after the first during which such
default continues.”.
26. In section 164 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (h), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(i) he has not complied with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 165.”.
27. In section 165 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 6), for the portion beginning
with the words “punishable with fine” and ending with the words “contravention continues”,
the words “liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees for each day after the first during
which such contravention continues” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
137.
Amendment
of section
140.
Amendment
of section
157.
Substitution of
new section for
section 159.
Penalty for
default of
certain
provisions.
Amendment
of section
164.
Amendment
of section
165.

8
28. In section 191 of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) If a director of the company makes any default in complying with the
provisions of this section, such director shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees.”.
29. In section 197 of the principal Act,—
(a) sub-section (7) shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section (15), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(15) If any person makes any default in complying with the provisions of
this section, he shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and where any
default has been made by a company, the company shall be liable to a penalty of
five lakh rupees.”.
30. In section 203 of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) If any company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this
section, such company shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees and every
director and key managerial personnel of the company who is in default shall be liable
to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and where the default is a continuing one, with
a further penalty of one thousand rupees for each day after the first during which such
default continues but not exceeding five lakh rupees.”.
31. In section 212 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 8), for the words “If the Director, Additional Director or
Assistant Director”, the words “If any officer not below the rank of Assistant Director”
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (9), for the portion beginning with the words “The Director”
and ending with the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (8)”, the words, brackets
and figure “The officer authorised under sub-section (8) shall, immediately after arrest
of such person under such sub-section” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (10),—
(i) for the words “Judicial Magistrate”, the words “Special Court or Judicial
Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the proviso, for the words “Magistrate’s court”, the words “Special
Court or Magistrate’s court” shall be substituted;
(d) after sub-section (14), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(14A) Where the report under sub-section (11) or sub-section (12) states
that fraud has taken place in a company and due to such fraud any director, key
managerial personnel, other officer of the company or any other person or entity,
has taken undue advantage or benefit, whether in the form of any asset, property
or cash or in any other manner, the Central Government may file an application
before the Tribunal for appropriate orders with regard to disgorgement of such
asset, property or cash and also for holding such director, key managerial
personnel, other officer or any other person liable personally without any limitation
of liability.”.
32. In section 238 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “punishable
with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to
five lakh rupees”, the words “liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
191.
Amendment
of section
197.
Amendment
of section
203.
Amendment
of section
212.
Amendment
of section
238.

9
33. In section 241 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the applications under this sub-section, in respect of such
company or class of companies, as may be prescribed, shall be made before the
Principal Bench of the Tribunal which shall be dealt with by such Bench.”;
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Where in the opinion of the Central Government there exist
circumstances suggesting that––
(a) any person concerned in the conduct and management of the
affairs of a company is or has been in connection therewith guilty of
fraud, misfeasance, persistent negligence or default in carrying out his
obligations and functions under the law or of breach of trust;
(b) the business of a company is not or has not been conducted and
managed by such person in accordance with sound business principles
or prudent commercial practices;
(c) a company is or has been conducted and managed by such
person in a manner which is likely to cause, or has caused, serious injury
or damage to the interest of the trade, industry or business to which such
company pertains; or
(d) the business of a company is or has been conducted and managed
by such person with intent to defraud its creditors, members or any other
person or otherwise for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose or in a manner
prejudicial to public interest,
the Central Government may initiate a case against such person and refer the
same to the Tribunal with a request that the Tribunal may inquire into the case
and record a decision as to whether or not such person is a fit and proper person
to hold the office of director or any other office connected with the conduct and
management of any company.
(4) The person against whom a case is referred to the Tribunal under
sub-section (3), shall be joined as a respondent to the application.
(5) Every application under sub-section (3)––
(a) shall contain a concise statement of such circumstances and
materials as the Central Government may consider necessary for the
purposes of the inquiry; and
(b) shall be signed and verified in the manner laid down in the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, for the signature and verification of a plaint in a
suit by the Central Government.”.
34. In section 242 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:––
“(4A) At the conclusion of the hearing of the case in respect of sub-section (3)
of section 241, the Tribunal shall record its decision stating therein specifically as to
whether or not the respondent is a fit and proper person to hold the office of
director or any other office connected with the conduct and management of any
company.”.
Amendment
of section
242.
5 of 1908.
Amendment
of section
241.

10
35. In section 243 of the principal Act,––
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The person who is not a fit and proper person pursuant to
sub-section (4A) of section 242 shall not hold the office of a director or any
other office connected with the conduct and management of the affairs of any
company for a period of five years from the date of the said decision:
Provided that the Central Government may, with the leave of the Tribunal,
permit such person to hold any such office before the expiry of the said period
of five years.
(1B) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this
Act, or any other law for the time being in force, or any contract, memorandum
or articles, on the removal of a person from the office of a director or any other
office connected with the conduct and management of the affairs of the company,
that person shall not be entitled to, or be paid, any compensation for the loss or
termination of office.”;
(b) in sub-section (2), after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (1)”, the
words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (1A)” shall be inserted.
36. In section 248 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (c), for the word and figures “section 455,”, the words and figures
“section 455; or” shall be substituted;
(b) after clause (c) and before the long line, the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(d) the subscribers to the memorandum have not paid the subscription
which they had undertaken to pay at the time of incorporation of a company and
a declaration to this effect has not been filed within one hundred and eighty
days of its incorporation under sub-section (1) of section 10A; or
(e) the company is not carrying on any business or operations, as revealed
after the physical verification carried out under sub-section (9) of section 12.”.
37. In section 272 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words, brackets and
letter “or clause (e) of that sub-section”, the words “of that section” shall be substituted.
38. In section 398 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( f), the word
“prospectus,” shall be omitted.
39. In section 441 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( b), for the words “does not exceed five lakh
rupees”, the words “does not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(b) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, any offence which is punishable under this Act with
imprisonment only or with imprisonment and also with fine shall not be
compoundable.”.
40. In section 446B of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words
“punishable with fine” and ending with the words “specified in such sections”, the words
“liable to a penalty which shall not be more than one-half of the penalty specified in such
sections” shall be substituted.
41. In section 447 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, for the words “twenty
lakh rupees”, the words “fifty lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
243.
Amendment
of section
248.
Amendment
of section
272.
Amendment
of section
398.
Amendment
of section
441.
Amendment
of section
446B.
Amendment
of section
447.
2 of 1974.

11
42. In section 454 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(3) The adjudicating officer may, by an order—
(a) impose the penalty on the company, the officer who is in default,
or any other person, as the case may be, stating therein any
non-compliance or default under the relevant provisions of this Act; and
(b) direct such company, or officer who is in default, or any other
person, as the case may be, to rectify the default, wherever he considers
fit.”;
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the words “such company and the officer who is in
default”, the words “such company, the officer who is in default or any other person”
shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (8),—
(a) in clause (i), for the words “does not pay the penalty imposed by the
adjudicating officer or the Regional Director”, the words, brackets and figures
“fails to comply with the order made under sub-section (3) or sub-section (7), as
the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (ii)––
(i) for the words “Where an officer of a company”, the words “Where
an officer of a company or any other person” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “does not pay the penalty”, the words, brackets
and figures “fails to comply with the order made under sub-section (3) or
sub-section (7), as the case may be,” shall be substituted.
43. After section 454 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“454A. Where a company or an officer of a company or any other person having
already been subjected to penalty for default under any provisions of this Act, again
commits such default within a period of three years from the date of order imposing
such penalty passed by the adjudicating officer or the Regional Director, as the case
may be, it or he shall be liable for the second or subsequent defaults for an amount
equal to twice the amount of penalty provided for such default under the relevant
provisions of this Act.”.
44. (1) The Companies (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2019 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.
Amendment
of section
454.
Insertion of
new section
454A.
Penalty for
repeated
default.
Repeal and
savings.
Ord. 6 of 2019.
————
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
Dated the Chairman.
————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—2222RS(S3)—30-07-2019.