Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE MENTAL HEALTH (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Health Act, 1987.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Health (Amendment)  Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 189 of 2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2.  In section 4 of the Mental Health Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Every State Government shall, within a period of six months from the date
of coming into force of the Mental Health (Amendment) Act, 2016, by notification in
the Official Gazette, establish an Authority to be known as the State Mental Health
Authority.".
3. In Chapter III of the principal Act, after section 5, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
"5A. Every district hospital shall, within a period of six months from the date of
coming into force of the Mental Health (Amendment) Act, 2016, establish or maintain
a fully resourced psychiatric unit for admission, treatment and care of mentally ill
persons.".
4. In section 6 of the principal Act, the proviso to sub-section (1) shall be omitted.
5. In the principal Act, after Chapter III, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
"Chapter IIIA
MENTALLY ILL PERSONS—RIGHTS AND OTHER
WELFARE MEASURES
14A. Every mentally ill person shall have the right to—
(a) live in, be part of and not be segregated from society;
(b) live with dignity;
(c) live in safe and hygienic environment;
(d) privacy;
(e) be protected from all forms of physical, verbal, emotional and sexual abuse;
(f) adequate provision for wholesome and nutritious food;
(g) access to good quality emergency facilities and emergency services;
(h) access to mental health care services and treatment run or funded by the
State Government; and
(i) access to all such health care services as are available to persons with physical
illness including health insurance for treatment of mental illness.
14B. For the purposes of section 14A, every State Government shall—
(a) designate a Health Officer in every district to compile the details of mentally
ill persons residing in that district;
(b) integrate mental health services into general health care services at all
levels of primary, secondary and tertiary health care and in all health programs run
by the Government;
(c) make provision of community based rehabilitation of, and establishments of
shelter homes for mentally ill persons;
(d) ensure that every district hospital is equipped with mental health unit; and
(e) meet, if minimum health services are not available in the district where a
mentally ill person resides, all costs of treatment in some other district.
Amendment
of Section 4.
2
Insertion of
new
section 5A.
Establishment
or mainte-
nance of
psychiatric
unit by every
district
hospital.
Amendment
of Section 6.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIIA.
Rights of
mentally ill
persons.
State
Government
to designate a
health officer.
5
14 of 1987.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
14C. Every State Government shall establish a Mental Health Review Board in every
district to safeguard the rights of mentally ill persons.".
6.  In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the words "if
the medical officer certifies" the words "if the medical board certifies" shall be substituted.
3
State
Government
to establish
Mental
Health
Review Board
in every
district.
Amendment
of section 24.

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,  which was
ratified by the Government of India in October, 2007, made it obligatory on the Government
to align the policies and laws of the country with the Convention. The need for amendments
to the Mental Health Act, 1987 was felt by the fact that the said Act could neither protect the
rights of persons with mental illness nor promote their access to mental health care in the
country. The need is to provide legislative impetus aimed at clearly outlining the rights of the
mentally ill persons and facilities that need to be made available to them.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Mental Health Act, 1987 with a view to, inter
alia,
(a) establish a State Mental Health Authority by every State Government;
(b) establish or maintain a psychiatric unit for the admission, treatment and care
of mentally ill persons in every District hospital;
(c) confer certain rights to mentally ill persons;
(d) designate a Health Officer in every district; and
(e) establish a Mental Health Review Board in every district to safeguard the
rights of mentally ill persons.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
July 1,  2016.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that every State Government shall establish the State
Mental Health Authority. Clause 3 provides that every district hospital shall establish or
maintain a psychiatric unit for the admission, treatment and care of mentally ill persons.
Clause 5 provides that every State Government shall meet the cost of treatment, establishment
of rehabilitation and shelter homes and providing emergency services to mentally ill persons.
It also provides for establishment of a Mental Health Review Board in every district to
safeguard the rights of mentally ill persons. The expenditure relating to States shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Funds of respective States. However, the Central Government
shall bear the expenditure in implementing the provisions of the Act in Union territories.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. Though, at this stage, it is difficult to assess the exact expenditure, it is estimated that
a sum of rupees one thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT, 1987
(14 OF 1987)
* * * * *
4. (1) The State Government shall establish an Authority for mental health with such
designation as it may deem fit.
* * * * *
24. (1) * * * * *
(2) After the completion of the proceedings under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may
pass a reception order authorising the detention of the said person as an inpatient in a
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home,—
(a) if the medical officer certifies such person to be a mentally ill person, and
* * * * *
State
Authority for
Mental
Health
Services.
Procedure on
production of
mentally ill
persons.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Health Act, 1987.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1511LS(S3)—25.07.2016.