5 
10 
As IN'l'RODUcm IN Lolt SABHA 0. 
Bill No. 188 of 1985· 
THE AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS 
EXPORT CESS BILL, 1985 
It. 
BILL 
to p7'ovide for the leVil cmd collection, by W"SI of oeIS, of a duty of 
cultom& em the ezport of certain agricultural ClRd processed food 
proclvdl fo'r the developmeftt and promotion of their upon and for 
matter, connected therewith. 
BE it eaacted by Parliament in the Tbirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follow.:-
1. (l) This Act may be called the Agricultural and Processed Food Sban 
Products Export Cess Act, 1985. title, extent 
and (2) It extends to the whole of India. commen.. 
cement. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
a. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requirelJ,- DeaD!. 
(a) "Authority" means the Apicu1tural and Processed Food 
ProdllCts JCxport Development Authority .tablilbed UDder .ecUon 
, of tho Apicult1lral -' ~ Foocl Pl'OCiuctl IIIti«t De~ 
IMIlt AutborltJ Act, 1-, 
tiona. 

Outl. 
of CUI-
toms on 
Scheduled 
products. 
Credit of 
proceeda 
of duties 
to CoD. 
BOlidateci 
FWId. 
ofIndla. 
(b) "Scheduled product" means any product 1'Vr \&ae time being 
Included in the Schedule to the Agricultural and Procelsed Food 
Produ::1:s Export Development Authority Act, 1985. 
(2) All words and expressions used in this Act and not defined., but 
defined in the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Deve- 5 
lopment Authority Act, 1985 shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in that Act. 
3. (1) There sbaI1 be leviecl aud collected by way of a cess for the 
purposes of the Agricultural lind Processed. Food Productll Export Deve-
lopment Authority Act, 1985, a dut, of customs at lueh rate not exceed- 10 
.iag three per ceDt. ad valo~m as the Central Govenuneot ioay, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify,' on all Seheduled. produdl, 
which Bre exported. 
(2) The dutiM of customs levied u.uder sub-section (1) on the 
Scheduled products shall be in addition to any cess or daty leviable OD. '5 
such Scheduled products under any other law for the time beinc In fofte. 
(3) The llrovisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules and re- 52 of 11182. 
culations mad .. thereunder, including thOSe relating to refuInds and 
exemptions {rom duty. shall, as far as may be, apply in relatiQll to the 
,levy and collection of the!' duty o[ customs leviable under sub-section (1) to 
as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of eustoma 
wuIer that Ad orthOlOC rules and regulations. 
4. The proceeds of the duties of customs levied under sectiQn 3 sJaaJ1 
first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central' Govem-
ment may, if Parliaments b,- appropriation made by law In this behaU, 110 
providetL pay to the Authority, from time to time, from out of lOCh Pr0-
ceeds, after deducting the expeDSeS OD collections, such sums 0( _ODey .. g5 
it may think fit for beil1g utilised for the purposes of the Agricultural and 
P~es~. Food Products :Eltpon DeveloPlll8nt Authority Act, 1M. 

WK StLBHA 
to 
TH~..AND ~RO-CJ?SSE) 100 
BILL 1985 
(TO, be/~s ,f.ntroduoed in L,.{ Sabha) 
1. Page 1, in the Long Title of the Bill,-
after "way of" i.nsert "a" 
2. Page 2, line 25,-
.fi2J:. "Parliament s" ~rui ''Pa.r'l.1a:n.ent, " 
!c.I. "p ro vid ed " ~ "p ro vid e s " 
4. Page 2, line 2?,-
ill "C'J 11 ections II ~"ro.llection " 
5. Page 4, line 18,-
!o.t. "come ir ~ "some" 
,. Page 5, line 2,-
ru "Clause (3)" ~ "Clause 311 
7. }--ige 'J, line 7,-
M"f1n:..:.na e1,a 1" .t..e5!.d "fin.,.n cia 1 " . 
8. PiJ.gE;J -" line 9,-
after "0 f" 1n ~ If rt "i egi,slat 1 ve " 
9. P~ge 5, line 10,-
. ~ "noml n ~ "normal" 
10. In.the docket page,-
3.fter "way nf" insert "a" 
NEw Ii:LHI· , 
No vellber 28, 198'5, 
Agral'llyana 7, 1907 (~kc.1.) 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS & REASONS 
This Bill is complementary to the Agricultural and Processed Food 
Products Export Development Authority Bill, 1985. The Agricultural 
and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Bill, 1985 
seeks to provide for, the establishment of an Authority to be called the 
AgrIcultural and Pl'ocelmed }4"ood Products Export Development Authority 
and empower that Authority to promote export of. agricultural and 
processed food products. In order to ensure that the .said Authority has 
necessary resources to dtscharge its functions, this Bill seeks to provide 
for the levy by way of a cess of a duty of customs on all the Scheduled 
products which are exported. The intention is to make over,' after due 
appropriation by Parliament by law, the proc~ of' the cess to the 
said Authority to enable it ttl discharge its functions effectively. 
2. The Bill seeks t.Q achi~ve the above objectives. 
Nrw·DILm; 
AlUUN SINGH. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
With a , .. iew to ensuring that the Agricultural and Proces&.ed Food 
Products Export Development Authority provided for in the Agricultural 
and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Bill, 1985, 
has necessary resources to discharge its functions, this Bill seeks to 
provide for levying by way of a cess, a duty of customs at such rate not 
exceeding 3 per cent. ad valorem as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify on all Scheduled products 
which are exported (vide clause 3 of the Bill). The proceeds of the 
above-mentioned duty wi~ be paid into the Consolidated Fund of India. 
Under clause 4 of the Bill, the Central Government may, if Parliament, 
by appropriation· made by law in this behalf so provides, pay to the 
Authority from time to time out of such proceeds, after deducting. th¢ 
expenses· .or. collection, such sums of money as it may think fit for 
being utilised for the purposes of the Agricultural and Processed Food 
Products Export Development Authority Act. 
2. The collection of the above~mentioned duty of customs wilt involve 
come expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not 
possible at this stage· to estimate the amount of such expenditures. 
that will depend upon various contingencies such as the actual duty of 
customs levied on the Scheduled produets, the quantity of the Scheduled 
products which may be exported, etc. However, it is tentatively esti~ 
mated that the cost of collection of the duty of customs would be about 
2 per cent. of the proceeds from this duty. Taking the total amount of 
duty of customs collected at Ro;. 100 lakhs per annum on an average, 
the expenl'l~'s of collection of the duty of customs would be about Rs. 2 
lakhs. As only the balance of the proceeds after deducting the cost of 
the collection may be utilised for making payment to the Authority, 
there will, in fact, be no net out~go from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
3. The expenditure on the collection of the duty will be of recurring 
nature and the Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of 
a reeurring or a non~recurring nature . 
. ' ... 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause (3) of the Bill empowers the Central Goverrunent to specify 
the actual rate (not exceeding three per cent. ad tMilorem) of the duty of 
customs which shall be levied and collected on' all Scheduled products 
which are exported .. , 
2. The rate of actual duty depends upon the varying relevant circum-
stances and also on the finanacial requirements, from time to time, of 
the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority. The delegation of power to the 'Cent~l Government is thus 
of a noma} character. 
I 
.',:", 
5 
... ," -~ ........ . 

A 
BIlL 
to provide for the levy and collection, by way of cess, ot a duty of customs 
on the export of certain agricultural and processed food products for 
the development and promotion of their export and for matters 
connected therewith. 
, 
... 
(Bhri A,.;u.tt Singh, Minister of Commerce) 