As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
• 
t' 7 NOV rn80~ 
Bill No. 189 of 1980 
THE ANTI-APARTHEID (UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION) 
BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the International Convention on the SUpp1'ession and 
Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid. 
WHEREAS an International Convention on the Suppression and 
Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid was adopted by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations on the Thirtieth day of November, 1973; 
AND WHEREAS India, having acceded to the said Convention, should 
make provisions for giving effect to it; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anti-Apartheid (United Nations 
Convention) Act, 1980. 
10 (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
2. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law, such of the provisions of the International Convention on 
the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid as are set 
out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India. 
J - (2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification 
) in the Official Gazette, amend the . Schedule in conformity with any 
amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the said 
Convention set out therein. 
Short 
title and 
extenl 
Applica-
tion of the 
InU-rna,. 
tional 
Conven-
tion on 
the Sup-
pression 
and 
Punish_ 
ment of 
the Crime 
of 
Apartheici 

Punish-
mentfor 
interna_ 
tional 
criminal 
responsi-
bility. 
Offences 
bycompa_ 
nies, orga-
nisations 
or institu-
tions. 
Place of 
trial. 
Previous 
sanction 
of the 
Central 
Govern_ 
ment for 
arrest Or 
prosecu-
tion. 
Provision. 
as to Ex-
tradition 
Act. 
2 
3 .. Every person to whom international criminal responsibility applies 
under article m of the said Convention, as set out in the Schedule, shall 
be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section, the reference in 5 
clause (a) of article III of the said Convention to "article II" shall be 
construed as a reference to the provisions of article II of that Convention 
as set out in the Schedule. 
4. Where an offence under th:s Act has been committed by a company 
or an organisation or an institution, every person who, at the time the 10 
offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company, organisation or institution, as the case may be, for the con-
duct of its business or affairs, shflll be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contain~d in this section shall render any IS 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "company" means any 
body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals. 20 
5. Any person committing an offence under section 3 may be tried 
for the offence in any place in which he may be found or in such other 
place as the Central Government may, by general or special order, 
published in the Official Gazette, direct in this behalf. 
6. No person shall be arrested or prosecuted in respect of any offence 25 
under section 3 except with the previous sanction of the Central Gov-
ernment or such omcer or authority as may be authorised by that 
Government by ordp.r in writing in this behalf. 
7. For the purposes of the Extradition Act, 1962, the offence under 34 of 1962. 
section 3 shall not be considered to be an offence of a political character. 30 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2 and 3) 
PROVISIONS OF THt INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON TIlB StlPPIlEi!SION .\ND 
PuNISHMENT OF THE CRIME OF Apa-rtheid WHICH SHALL HAVE FORCE OF LAw 
• • • • • 
Article II 
For the purpose of the present Convention, the term "the crime of 
apartheid", which shall include similar policies and practices of racial 
35 

3 
segregation and discrimination as practised in southern Africa, ~aU 
apply to the following inhuman acts committed for the purpose of 
establishing and maintaining domination by one racial group of persons 
over any other racial group of persons and systematically oppressing 
5 them: 
(a) Denial to a member or members of a racial group or groups 
of the -rt«1rt to life and liberty of person: . 
(i) By murder (jf members of a racial group or groups; 
(li) By the infliction upon the members of a racial group or 
10 groups of serious bodily' or mental harm, by the infringement 
of their freedom or dignity, or by subjecting them to torture or 
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; 
15 
2) 
(iii) By arbitrary arrest and illegal imprisonment of the 
members of a racial group or groups; 
(b) Deliberate imposition on a racial group or groups of living 
conditions calculated to cause its or their physical destructi( ,n in 
whole or in part; 
• • • • • 
(e) Explo!tation of the labour of the members of a racial group 
Ot' groups, in particular by submitting them to forced labour; 
(f) Persecution of organisations and persons, by depriving them 
of fundamental rights and freedoms, because they oppose apartheid. 
Article fII 
International criminal responsibility shall apply, irrespective of the 
25 motive involved, to individuals, members of organizations and institu-
tions and representatives of the State, whether resid:ng in the territory 
of the State in which the acts are perpetrated or in some other State, 
whenever they: 
(a) Commit, participate in. directly incite or conspire in the 
30 commission of the acts mentioned in article II of the present Con-
vention; 
(b) Directly abet, encourage or co-operate in the commission of 
the crime of apartheid. 
• • • • • 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill is to give eff~t to the provisions of the Inter-
national Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime 
of Apartheid, which was adopted by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations on the 30th November, 1073, and to which India became a party 
on the 22nd October, 1977. The purpose of the said Convention is to 
declare that apartheid is a crime against humanity and that inhuman 
acts resulting from the policies and practices of apartheid and similar 
policies and practices of racial ~egregation and discrimination constitute 
a serious threat to internaConal peace and security and to make it 
possible for the States Parties to the ConvenCon to take more effective 
me2sures at the national and international levels with a view to the 
suppression and punishment of H:e crime of apartheid. 
2. The Bill gives effect to the Convention, in particular to Articles II 
and III thereof, as set O'Ut in the Schedule to the Bill which, respectively, 
define the crime of apartheid and apply international criminal responsi-
bility, irrespective of the motives involved, to individuals, members of 
organisations, institutions, etc., who commit the said crime. The Bill 
also seeks to make the commissirm of the said cr:me punishable with 
death or imprisonment and fine. 
P. V. NARASIMHA RAO. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 29th October, 1980. 

" ," 
A. 
BtU 
to give effect to the Intemattonal Convention on the SuppressioD and 
Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid. 
(Ihri P. Y. No.'rarimha Rao, 
*~ of Eztemal Affair,.) 