1
THE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN
(PROHIBITION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Amendment Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 189 of 2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, after Chapter III,
the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER IIIA
CENTRAL AUTHORITY
7A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Central Authority to govern and regulate the manner in which women are represented in
any document published, broadcasted or telecasted.
(2) The Authority shall be headed by the member-Secretary, National Commission
for Women and shall have representatives from Advertising Standards Council of India,
Press Council of India, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and one member
experienced in working on women's issue to be nominated by the National Commission
for Women in such manner as may be prescribed.
7B. (1) The Central Authority shall have the following powers and functions in respect
of complaints,—
(a) to receive appeals or complaints or grievances regarding a programme or an
advertisement broadcast or publication and adjudicate on the same in accordance with
its procedure;
(b) to investigate or take suo moto notice and examine all matters relating to
complaints under sections 292 to 294 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 in so far it
relates to and concerns women and the indecent representation of women as defined
under section 2 or refer the case to the authorized bodies under section 9;
(c) to requisition tapes of any program or advertisement or publication as deemed
necessary;
(d) to consider such complaints and facilitate their settlements by passing a
reasoned decision in writing within sixty days of receipt of the said appeal or complaint;
(e) to function in consonance with the principles of natural justice and give its
decisions based on the written statement filed by a complainant and after providing a
reasonable opportunity of being heard;
(f) recommend to the Central Government, guidelines or norms or amendments
of prescribed guidelines or norms, in the light of its experience in the discharge of its
functions, as well as on such other issues as may be referred to it by the Central
Government;
(g) lay-down the standards of quality of service to be provided by the service
providers, advertisers and publishers and conduct the periodical survey of such service
provided by the service providers so as to protect interest of the consumers of
broadcasting service;
(h) coordinate with the respective State Governments for effective implementation
of the provisions of the Act;
(i) monitor, administer and promote standards of advertising practices  with a
view to ensuring that advertising is not offensive to generally accepted norms and not
indecent as defined in this Act;
(j) promote code for self regulation in advertising, media and publishing.
(2) For the purpose of performing its functions or holding any inquiry under this Act,
the Committee shall have the same powers throughout India as are vested in a civil court
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following
matters, namely:-—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on
oath;
Insertion of
new
Chapter-IIIA.
Power and
functions of the
Central
Authority.
Constitution of
a Central
Authority.
45 of 1860.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office:
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witness or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Every inquiry held by the Central  Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code , 1860.
7C. (1) If the Central Authority comes to a conclusion that the advertiser or the publisher
is at default, it may:
(a) direct it not to telecast or advertise or publish the objectionable programme
or advertisement pending decision;
(b) direct suitable edition to the advertisement or the programme, as the case
may be,
(c) direct that such an advertisement or the programme, as the case may be, shall
not be broadcast;
(d) direct to broadcast or publish an apology, disclaimer or warning in a suitable
manner as may be prescribed by it; and
(e) pass any other orders as it may deem fit.
(2) In cases where the Central Authority does not find any merit in the  complaint, it
may:
(a) dismiss the complaint; and
(b) dismiss the complaint with costs in cases where the Committee finds that the
complaint was with malafides.
(3) The orders passed by the Central Authority shall be sent to the complainant and the
advertiser, publisher or broadcaster.
7D. (1) Any person, group of persons, organization may make a complaint before the
Central Authority about any representation in violation  of section 3 and 4 of the Act after
paying the requisite fee.
(2) The Complaint shall be in writing and indicate clearly the nature of publication
and the manner in which it came to the notice of the complainant.".
45 of 1860.
Penalty on
advertiser.
Complaint by
person and
group of
persons, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 was enacted to prohibit
indecent representation of women through advertisements or in publications, writings,
paintings,  figures or in any other manner.  However, the Act in its present form relates
primarily to the print media. Since the enactment of the Act, technological revolution has
resulted in development of new forms of communication, such as internet and satellite based
communication, multi-media messaging and cable television, etc. It has, thus, become
necessary to widen the scope of the Act so as to cover the above forms of media. Further,
considering that the National Crimes Records Bureau recorded a total number of 845, 895
and 453 cases of violation of the provisions of the Act in the years 2009, 2010 and 2011,
respectively, for the law to be more effective, stringent punishment which acts as deterrent
also becomes essential. It is also felt that a Central Authority which regulates the manner in
which women are represented in any document published, broadcasted or telecasted needs
to be established with several powers vested in it.
It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Act, 1986 to ensure more effective protection to women against their indecent representation.
The Bill, inter alia, provides to—
(a) establish a Central Authority to govern and regulate the manner in which
women are represented in any document published, broadcasted or telecasted;
(b) define powers and functions of the Central Authority; and
(c) make a provision for taking and complaints filed action  on passing appropriate
orders to check indecent representation of women in advertisement.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
November 28, 2018.

MGIPMRND—2319LS(S3)—14.12.2018.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986.
————
(Shri  Rabindra Kumar Jena,  M.P .)