     As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 189 of  2022
THE VICTIMS OF NA TURAL CALAMITIES (REHABILITA TION AND
FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI  D.M. KA THIR ANAND,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and financial assistance to the victims
of natural calamities and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Natural Calamities (Rehabilitation
and Financial Assistance) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner appointed under section 3;
(b) “natural calamity” includes drought, flood, cyclone, hailstorm, cloud burst,
tsunami, landslide or earthquake or such other conditions as may be notified by
the appropriate Government from time to time;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “victim of natural calamity” means a person who suffers physical bodily
harm or whose property, including livestock, crop, orchard, field, machine or
tools, is lost, destroyed or damaged due to natural calamity and includes, in the
case of death of such victim due to natural calamity, his family members.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State
Governments appoint a Commissioner in such manner as may be prescribed
for providing financial assistance and other benefits to the victims of natural
calamities.
(2) The Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1) shall be provided
with such staff as may be necessary for efficient discharge of his duties under
this Act.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Commissioner to ensure provision of food,
adequate shelter and financial assistance to the victims of natural calamity
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The financial assistance to the victims of natural calamity shall be disbursed
as early as possible but not later than three months from the occurrence of the
natural calamity.
4. (1) A claim for receiving financial assistance shall be made in the prescribed
form by the victims of natural calamity to the Commissioner, who shall disburse the
financial assistance to the victims, after making such inquiry and in such manner, as
may be prescribed.
(2) The victim of natural calamity shall be provided with the following
financial assistance and other benefits:—
(a) in case of loss of life,—
(i) financial assistance in the form of a compensation of not less than
ten lakh rupees (tax free) shall be given to the next of the kin of the
deceased; and
(ii) suitable employment shall be provided to one of the dependants
of the deceased;
(b) in case of severe injury,—
(i) medical treatment free of cost; and
5
10
15
20
25
2
30
Definitions.
Appointment of
Commissioner
for providing
financial
assistance and
other benefits to
victims of
natural calamity.
Financial
assistance and
other benefits to
the victims of
natural calamity.
35

(ii) such financial assistance as, in the opinion of the Commissioner,
is necessary for his rehabilitation, subject to a minimum amount of
rupees two lakh and maximum amount of rupees five lakh;
(c) in case of damage to the dwelling unit, victim shall be provided with
such financial assistance as is required for the repair or reconstruction
of the damaged dwelling unit;
(d) in case of irreparable damage to the cultivable land, victim shall be
provided with cultivable land of equal area at a reasonable distance from
the place of his residence;
(e) in case of damage to the standing crops, victim shall be given
compensation in proportion to the losses suffered by him; and
(f) in case of loss of livestock, victim shall be given adequate financial
assistance in proportion to the losses suffered by him.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it
to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Savings.
Power to remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
3

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is prone to various natural calamities such as tsunami, floods,
droughts, storms, hailstorms, cyclones, landslides and earthquakes, which cause
extensive damage to life and property. Floods are frequently occurring in the States
of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Assam, West Bengal, Maharashtra
and other parts of the country. Droughts are also very common and frequent
throughout the country. Tsunami and cyclones cause havoc in the coastal areas
whereas storms and hailstorms cause heavy loss of life and property in hilly areas
as well as in the nearby plain areas. Now frequent earthquakes have also been
causing concern among the people of various regions. The terrible havoc and huge
loss of lives, damages to the public and properties caused by the tsunami in the year
2004 in southern States of the country, Tamil Nadu in particular is still in our memory.
We have also not forgotten the extensive damage caused by earthquakes in the
States of Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra and Gujarat in the year 1991, 1993 and 2001,
respectively. Whenever a natural calamity happens, the nation has to divest its
resources towards rescue and rehabilitation processes and on repairs and construction
of the roads, bridges, fields, buildings, etc. which put a heavy burden on the exchequer.
Fortunately, the entire nation rises to face such calamities but the loss caused thereby
can never be recovered by any means.
Of course, the occurrence of natural calamities cannot be stopped but certainly
with our combined efforts we can minimise the miseries of the victims of such
natural calamities by providing them with timely financial relief and extending the
rehabilitation programmes to them. The Central Government has to play the pivotal
role in this process, as the State Governments are dependent on Centre to be well
equipped to deal with any natural calamities and to provide relief to the victims.
Sometimes, delay is caused in rushing relief to the victims due to procedural wrangles.
Hence, it is felt that a suitable legislation be enacted to set up a mechanism to help
the victims of natural calamities instantly. The Bill seeks to provide for rehabilitation
and financial assistance to the victims of natural calamities instantly in case of
occurrence of any such calamity in the country.
Hence this Bill.
      NEW DELHI;                        D.M. KATHIR ANAND
23 November,  2021.
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND
117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. H-11018/1/2021-DM-I dated 5 August, 2022 from
Shri Nityanand Rai, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs to the
Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Victims of
Natural Calamities (Rehabilitation and Financial Assistance) Bill, 2022 Shri D.M.
Kathir Anand, Member of Parliament, has recommended the introduction and
consideration of the Bill in the House under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117of the
constitution, respectively.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a commissioner for providing
financial assistance and rehabilitation measures to the victims of natural calamities.
Clause 4 provides for financial assistance of rupees ten lakhs to the next of kin of a
person who dies in any natural calamity and medical treatment for injured persons
and other welfare measures for the victims of natural calamities. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this
stage, it is not possible to give an exact estimate of the actual expenditure to be
involved to meet any unpredictable eventuality. However, it is estimated that recurring
expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore per annum would be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and financial assistance to the victims of natural
calamities and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri D.M. Kathir Anand,  M.P .)