As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

23 FEB १७1

Bill No. 189 of 2000.
nad

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Sur HANNAN MoLtan, M.P
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title.
2. In article 200 of the Constitution — [Amendment of
4 eet न article 200, «pst
( the words “or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President”
shall be omitted; and
(ii) the second proviso shall be omitted.

3. Article 201 of the Constitution shall be omitted. Omission of
article 201.7)


STATEMENT OP OBJECTS AND REASONS

Articles 200 and 201 of the Constitution empower the Governor to reserve Bills
passed by the Assembly for President's assent. Over the years in actual practice this has
been a constant igritant in otherwise harmonious Centre-Stateretationship. In fact, Centres
intervention has been an obstacle in bringing ahout social and economic reforms, in particular
land reforms, through progressive legislation passed by the democratically elected State
Assembliesin accordance with the mandate and desire of the people. These provisions have
Proved to be undemocratic and militate against spirit of true federalism,

For progress and development of States, itis necessary that the State Legislatures
‘must have final say in matters falling under their legislative sphere.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewi; HANNAN MOLLAH
November 1, 2000.


ANWNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the
case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the
Legislature of the State, it shall be presented to the Governor ard the Governor shall
declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he
reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President.

Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the preseitation to him of
the Bill for assent, return the Bill if iv is not a Money Bill together with a message
requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bil! or any specified provisions
thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such
amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when 8 Bil! is so returned, the
House or Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly. and if the Bill is passed again by the
House or Houses with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the
Governor shail not withhold assent therefrom.

Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to but shall reserve for the
consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if it
became law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position
which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.

201, When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the President, the
President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom.

Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Billi, the President may direct the
Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the
Legislature of the State together with such 8 message as is mentioned in the first proviso to
article 200 and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider it accord-
ingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is
again passed by the House or Houses with or without amendment, it shail be presented
again to the President for his consideration.

* * * * * *

Assent to
Bills.

Bills reserved
for
consideration


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Hannan Mollah, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5163Ls—29.11.2000,