As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA ON 
2 t FfB t919' 
BiU No. 11 of 1979 
THE SPECIAL COURTS BILL, 1919 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the speedy t1ri4l of G certain class of offences. 
WHEREAS Commissions of Inquiry appointed under the Commissions of 
Inquiry Act, 1952 have rendered reports disclosing the existeace of prima 
facie evidence of offences committed by persons who have held high public 
or political offices in the country and others connected with the cozmnJasiDn 
S of such offences during the operation of the Proelamation of EmergeDq, 
dated the 25th June, 1975, issued under clause (1) of article 352 of the 
Constitution; 
AND WHBBBAS investigations conducted by the Government through its 
agencies have also disclosed. similar offences committed duriDg the period 
10 aforesaid; 
AND WHEBEAS the offences referred to in the recitals aIoresaid were 
committed during the operation of the said ProclamatioD oj Emergency, 
during which a grave emergency was clamped on the whole country, civil 
liberties were withdrawn to a great extent, important fundamental rights 
IS of the people were suspended, strict censorship on the press was placed and 
judicial powers were crippled to a large extent; 
AND WHEREAS it is the constitutional, legal and moral obligation of the 
State to prosecute persons involved in the said od.mces; 
AND WHEREAS the ordinary criminal courts due to congestion of work 
20 and other reasons cannot reasonably be expected to bring those prosecu-
tions to a speedy terminatioD; 

i 
Am WHEREAS it is imperative for the functioning of parliamental1 
democracy and the institutions created by or under the Constitution of 
India that the commission of offences referred to in the recitals aforesaid 
should be judicially determined with the utmost dispatch; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary for the said purpose to establish additional S 
courts presided over by sittiJJ.g Judges of High Courts; 
AND WHEREAS it is expedient to make some procedural changes whereby 
avoidable delay in the final determination of the innocence or guilt of the 
persons to be tried is eliminated without interfering with the right to a 
fair trial; 10 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
Short 1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Courts Act, 1979. 
title and 
extent. 
Defini-
tions. 
Establish-
mentol 
Special 
Courts. 
Cogniz-
anceof 
cases by 
Special 
Courta. 
Declara-
tion by 
Central 
Govern-
mentof 
cases to 
be dealt 
with 
under 
this Act. 
EJfect of 
declara-
tion. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. IS 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 
(b) "declaration", in relation to an offence, means a declaration 
made under section 5 in respect of such offence; 
(c) "Special Court" means a Special Court established under 20 
section 3; . 
(d) words and expressions used but not defined. in this Act but 
defined in the Code shall have the same meanings as in the Code. 
3. (1) The Central Government shan, by DOillieation in the Official 
Gazette, establish an adequate number of courts to be ea1lecI Special 2S 
Courts. 
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a sitting Judge of a High Court, 
nominated by the Central Government with the concurrence of the Chief 
Justice of India. 
4. A Special Court shall take cognizance of or try such cases as are 30 
instituted before it or transferred to it u hereinafter provided. 
5. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that there is prima 
facie evidence of the commission of an offence alleged to have been 
committed during the period mentioned in the preamble hereto by a 
person who held high public or political office in India and that in accord- 35 
once with the guidelines contained in the preamble 'hereto the said offence 
ought to be dealt with under this Act, the Central Government shall 
make a declaration to that effect in every case in which it is of the afore-
said opinion. 
(2) Such declaration ~ not be called in question in any court. 
6. On such declaration being made in respect of any offence, notwith-
standing anything in the Code, any prosecution in respect of such oft'ence 
shall be instituted only in a Special Court designated by the Central Gov-
ernmentand any prosecution in respect of such offence pending in any 
court shall stand transferred to a Special Court designated by the Central 
Government. 45 
2 of 1974. 

7. If at the date of the declaration in respect of any offence an appeal 
or revision against any judgment or order in a prosecution in respect 
of such offence, whether pending or disposed of. is itself pending in 
any court of appeal or revision, the same shall stand transferred for 
S diSPosal to the Supreme Court. 
8. A Special Court shall have jurisdiction to try any person concern-
ed in the offence in respect of which a declaration has been made either , 
as principal, conspirator or abettor and all other offences and accused 
persons as can be j'Ointly tried therewith at one trial in accordance with 
10 the Code. 
9. (1) A Special Court shall in the trial of such cases follow the pro-
cedure prescribed by the Code, for the trial of warrant cases before a 
magistrate. 
(2) A Special Court may, with a view to obtaining evidence of any 
I S person suspected to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or 
privy to an offence, tender a pardon to such person on condition of his 
making full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances within his 
knowledge relating to the offence and to every other person concerned 
whether as principal, conspirator Or abettor in the commission thereof and 
20 any pardon so tendered shall for the purposes of section 308 of the Code 
be deemed to have been tendered under section 307 thereof. 
(3) Save as expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code 
shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act. apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes 
2S of the said provisions of the Code a Special Court shall be deemed to 
be a Court of Session and shall have all the powers of a Court of Session 
and the person conducting a prosecution before a Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Public Prosecutor. 
(4) A Special Court may pass upon any person convicted by it any 
30 sentence authorised by law for the punishment of the offence of which 
such person is convicted. 
10. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that an 
order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct 
that any particular case be transferred from one Special Court to another 
35 Special Court. 
(2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the a.ppli-
cation of the Attorney-General of India or of a party interested, and 
every such application shall be made by motion, which shall, except when 
the applicant is the Attorney-General of India or the Advocate-General 
40 of a State, be. supported by affidavit or affirmation. 
(3) Where. any application for the exerctse of the powers conferred 
hy this section is dismissed, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion 
fhat the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay 
by way of compensation to any person who has opposed the application 
4S such sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it may consider appro-
priate in the circumstances of the case. 
Pending 
appeal or 
revision 
to be 
transfer-
red to 
Supreme 
Court. 
Jurisdic-
tion of 
Special 
Courts as 
to j'Oint 
trials. 
?race-
dureand 
powers of 
Special 
Courts. 
Power of 
Supreme 
Court to 
transfer 
cases. 

Appeal. 
Power to 
make 
rw.. 
4 
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything ill the Code, an appeal shall lie as 
of right from any judgment or order of a Special Court to the Supreme 
Court both on facts and On law. 
(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revilJion shall lie to any court 
from any judgment or order crf a Special Court. 5 
12. The Supreme Court may, by notification in the omeial Guette, 
make such roles, if any, as it may deem necessary for the purposes of 
this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Reports of various Commissions of Inquiry appointed \Utder the 
Comtnfssfons of mquiry Act, 1952, have disclosed the e-xifltlenee of prima 
facie evidence of offences committed by persons who have held high 
public or political office in the country and otheri conneeted with 'the 
'COttlrrri!sion of such offences during the Proclamation of Emergency issued 
under artk:le 352 of the Constitution on 25th June, 1975. Investigations 
conducted by the Govemment through its agencies have also disclosed 
sfmilaroffences committed by holders of high public or political offices 
and others during the aforesaid period. 
2. It is the constitutional, legal and moralobUgation of the State to 
prosecute persons involved in these offences. For ensuring the healthy 
functioning of the institutions of parliamentary demooraey, it is neces-
sary to arrange for their judicial determination with the utmost dispatch. 
The ordinary criminal courts, because of congestion and other reasons, 
cannot reasonably be expected to bring these prosecutions to a speedy 
termination. It is, therefore, considered necessary to create additional 
courts, to be called Special Courts, to deal exclusively with such offences. 
It is also expedient to make some procedural changes whereby avoidable 
delay in the final determination of the innocence or guilt of the persons 
to be tried is eliminated without interfering with the right to a fair 
trial. -, , 
3. With a view to achieving the above objects, a Bill called "The 
Emergency Courts Bill. 1978" (Bill No. 115 of 1978) had been introduced 
by Shri Ram Jethmalani in Lok Sabha in August, 1978. As there were 
some doubts whether all the provisions in Shri Jethmalani's Bill (a 
notice of which had been received by Government earlier) would be 
constitutional, a reference was made to the Supreme Court under article 
143 of the Constitution seeking its advisory opinion on the Special Courts 
Bill the provisions of which were substantially the same as those of 
Shrl Jethmalani's Bill. The opinion of the Supreme Court has been 
received. The Supreme Court has generally endorsed the constitutiona-
!ity of making provision for Special Courts. 
4. Except for modifications aimed at removing the infirmities pointed 
out by the Supreme Court and for certain other modifications relating to 
details such as the powers of the Special Courts, the present Bill is on 
the lines of the BilI considered by the Supreme Court. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 6th February, 1979. H. M. PATEL. 
.. , 6 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM: 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment, by notification, 
of an adequate number of courts to be called Special Courts. The setting 
up of these courts will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India, but it has not been possible to make any precise estimate 
of such expenditure at this stage, as the expenditure will depend upon 
the number of Special Courts required and created. The likely expendi-
ture per court functioning over a period of one year is expected to be 
about RB. 2.00 lakhs of which an expenditure of Rs. 1.5 lakhs is likely 
to be on recurring items and of Rs. 0.5 lakh on non-recurring items. To 
begin with it is expected that two such courts will be established which, 
functioning over a year, will involve an expenditure of about Rs. 4.00 
lakhs. More courts will be established as and when required. The neces-
sary expenditure will be provided in the budget estimates. 
6 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATE!D LEGISLA'I10N 
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to confer power on the Supreme Court 
to make, by notification in the Official Gazette, such rules, if any, as it 
may deem necessary for the purposes of legislation. The rules, if any, 
which may be made under this provision will relate to matters of detail 
which it is not practicable to provide for in the legislation itself. Since 
the power is being conferred on the Supreme Court, no provision has 
been made for the laying of the rules. Reference is invited in this con-
nection to section 643 of the Companies Act, 1956 which confers power 
on the Supreme Court to make rules with respect to certain matters. 
2. In the circumstances explained above, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 
1 

.A. 
BILL 
to provide tor the speedy trial of a certain class of offences. 
(Shri H. M. Patel, 
Min.ister of Home Affairs.) 