AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

we 1 कक

Bill_No. 18 of 1998

_ THE NATIONAL POPULATION POLICY BILL, 1998

By
Suri AMAR Pat Sincx, M.P.

A

BILL,

for a national population policy and for measures to control the population in
‘the country and for matters connected therewith.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
| in the Official Gazette, appoint.

the incentives and disincentives, that are both practicable as well as effective,
ven to the citizens within one year of the commencement of this Act.

Shorttitle,
‘extent and com-

National Popu-
lation Policy.


Insenion of new 3. After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the followi
Act No, 43 of S¢ction shall be inserted, namely:—
1951.

Disqualification “8B. (1) A person shall be disqualified if he procreates more than two livi
ongroundofnot children:

following small

family norm,

Provided that the person shall not be disqualified if he, within a period of one y
from the date of commencement of the National Population Policy Act, 1998, procrea
another living child and thereby the number of living children of that person increases
more than two.

(2) The disqualification referred to in sub-section (1) shall not apply in case of
Persons having more than two living children on the date of commencement of the National
Population Policy Act, 1998.
Small family 4. (1) Any Central Government employee or an employee of a public undertaking
norm for Central who has more than two living children, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and
‘Government em- है ‘ Pra
ployees.ete. (5), shall not be entitled to any increment or promotion in service.

(2) Any Central Government employee or an employee of a public undertaking who
Procreates more than three living children shall be disqualified to continue in service.

(3) Any Central Government employee, who is in occupation of Government
accommodation, if procreates more than two living children, subject to the provisions of
sub-sections (4) and (5), shall have to pay double the normal rent prescribed for the
particular type of Government accommodation allotted to him.

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) shall not apply to those Central Gov:
ernment employees or employees of public undertakings who have more than the pre-
scribed number of living children on the date of commencement of this Act.

(5) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) shall apply to those Central Govern-
ment employees or employees of public undertakings who, after a period of one year of
the coming into force of this Act, procreate another living child and thereby the number
of living children of such employees increases to more than the prescribed number.

Application of 5. The provisions of section 4 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the employees in the
Provisionstoem- private sector.

ployees of pri-

vate sector.

Minimum age 6. (1) No marriage shall be solemnised between a male, who is less than twenty-

formarrisges. four years of age, and a female who is less than twenty years of age.

(2) Any contravention of the provisions of sub-section (7) shall be a cognizable
offence and shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three months or with fine which may extend to rupees one thousand. 7

Penalty for not 7. Any person who, after a period of one year from the date of coming into force of
adopting small this Act, procreates more than two living children, —
family norm.

(a) shall have to pay double the normal charges charged for the supply of

water and electricity in the dwelling unit occupied by such person or his family;

(2) the children of such person shall not be provided with free education or
other facilities like hostel accommodation, etc.;

(c) shall not be allotted any house or land in a housing scheme launched by
either the Union Government or by the State Government; and

(d) shall not be entitled to become a member of any co-operative society
registered under the Cooperative Societies Act, 1912, for the purpose of acquisition
of a house or plot of land for construction of a house.



Bay woman, who has two living children, shall be provided with maternity facil-
Government hospital for the birth of her third child if the woman agrees to
lisation operation after the birth of her third child:

ided that the consent of the husband or any other member of the family or close
the woman shall not be required for the sterilisation operation.

Il be eligible to receive advance from a bank or a society at a ten per cent.
of interest than the normal rate of interest.

or two living daughters, who undergoes sterilisation operation, shail be
e Central Government a bond of the face value of rupees one lakh which
shable after a period of twenty years from the date of issue.

(2) If the person in whose name the bond has been issued dies before its matu-
legal heirs of the person shall be entitled to receive the amount of the bond at

¢ provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything incon-
ewith contained in any other law for the time being in foce.

Maternity fa-

Incentive to
‘women employ-
es.

Eligibility for
receiving ad
vances at a
lower rate of in-
terest.

Bonds to be
given by the
Central Govern-

ment.

Acttohave
effect.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India's population is about 900 millions today. With 2.4 per cent. of the global land
India has about 15 per cent. of the world population, thereby making it one of the
most densely populated nations of the world, Although, family planning has been a national

It is projected that by the turn of the century, India shall have three out of the ten
most populous cities of the world, and half the population of these cities would be living
in slums under squalid conditions. Actualy, without massive Public contributions for sew-
erage, water treatment, air-pollution control and Perspective planning, living conditions
in all urban areas will progressively deteriorate,

An alarming situation is the apathy of the populace to foresee this population ex-
Plosion time-bomb which is so glaringly reflected in the last elections. Nome of the candi-
dates in the recently concluded Parliamentary elections raised this mast valid issue while
campaigning. How can family planning therefore be called a programme with people's
involvement?

The need to accommodate the future needs within the nation's natural capabilities
and resources has given rise to unparal transformation of human values, social institu-
tions and economic structures. The break-down of civic amenities due to over-crowding,
law and order situation, unemployment and widening of the gap between the haves and

have nots has progressively created an explosive situation. Agricultural land holdings are

Environmentally speaking, the destruction of forests, extinction of Species of flora
and fauna, spreading of deserts, over-grazing of grasslands, rapid soil erosion and siltation,
salinity, rapid lowering of water levels, pollution of air and water, phenomenal growth of
slums, food and fire wood shortages and the crises in energy generation and water resources
have awesome implication of devastation and destruction of the life support systems. In
‘some cases these are beyond repair,

In a world moving towards working out an optimum human carrying capacity of
Biven regions, based on a population, resource and development intet-telationship in
already densely populated nation like India can hardly expect to achieve a quality of life
by adding further to her numbers,

The provisions of the Bill are, therefore, the most effective method 10 achieve the
targetted goal.

It is estimated that at the Pace we are moving on we shall reach the goal of “Net
Reproduction Rate” of one not in the year 2000 but in the year 2010. In that case, the
enactment of this Bill shall hasten the process hy 15 years. By so doing, we could reach
zero population growth rate by the 21st century instead of 22nd century and could stabilise
Cur Population at around 1200 millions instead of at 1800 millions. ‘Therefore the enactment
of this Bill will save the country from a burden of 600 millions additional population.

The laudable goals spelt out in the Directive Principles of State Policy in the Con-

the poverty of the people and increses the crime rate also. All round Progress made by the
Country has almost been brought to nought by this single factor, Every additional child

4


m, above the projected rate of population growth, is a liability on the scarce resources
nation. Time has come where taking of some strong measures has become essential
‘such measures are not taken at the earliest the future generations may not forgive
‘this lapse.

Bill offers a comprehensive package deal for facing the challenge and over-

the problem. There is no other effective way of doing so. The aim of this Bill is to

out family and social welfare. Adoption of small family norm is necessary to give

and reasonable standard of living to all concerned irrespective of class, creed,

or race or section to which they may belong. Checking the population growth
ot only the responsibility of the Government but of every Indian citizen.

enable this Bill to have an impact on all sections of the society, the State Govern-

I have to be moved to introduce corresponding legislation, particularly amend-
Panchayat Act, Municipal Act, Co-operative Societies Act, State Civil Service
.) Rules and other related laws in their State Legislatures. ‘

४ Deut; AMAR PAL SINGH.

1 23, 1998.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 9 of the Bill provides that any woman employee of the Central Government
oF of a public undertaking, who undergoes sterilisation Operation after the birth of
her first or second child, shall be given three months additional salary as an incentive.
Clause 11 provides that any person below the age of thirty-two years having no son but
having only one or two living daughters and who undergoes sterilisation operation, shall

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

to provide for a national population policy and for measures to control the population in
the country and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Amar Pal Singh, M.P.)