BID No. 18 of I", 
THE MANIPUR (vILLAGE AUTHORITIES 
IN HILL AREAS) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

45 of 1860. 
8tu No. 18 or 19S6 
THE MANIPUR (VILLAGE AUTHORITIES IN HILL 
AREAS) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN !..oK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law Telating to the constitu.tion and 
. functions of Village Authorities in the hill aTeas of the State of 
ManipuT. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
S 1. (1) This Act maybe call~ the Manipur (Village Authorities Short title • 
. inltil.l Af.. eas) Act, 1956., extent and commence-
(2) It extends to the whole of the hill areas of the State of meDt. 
Mat\lpur. ' 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central .. Govern-
10 ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
IS 
·I.tft this Act, unles\;, thecohtext oflierwise requires,- Definition •. 
(a) "Chief Commissioner" means the Citief ColnuWisioner 
of Manipur; 
(Q)t'Deputy Comrnis~ioo..er:' means the Peputy Commis-
sioner of'Manipur and .' includes the Additional Deputy Com-
missioner thereof; 
, . , 
(c) "Ilej,pous, offence" JXlNDi-
'(llahydl. thefollowiRg offences plmiabable under the 
-·li1diaft· Penal Code,ihat -is-'to say, any otre-n:Ce 'Under Chapter 

Constitu-
tion of • 
Village 
Authori-
tiel. 
j 
VI, rioting, any offence under Chapter XII, murder, culp-
able homicide not amounting to murder, grievous hurt, 
kidnapping or abducting in order to subject a person to 
slavery, buying or disposing of any person as a slave, habi-
tual dealing in slaves, rape, robbery, dacoity, mischief by S 
fire or explosive substance, and house breaking; 
(ii) any offence punishable under the Indian Arms Act, 
1878; 
and includes any attempt, preparation or conspiracy to commit, 
and abetment of, any of the offences specifted in sub-clause (i) 10 
or sub-clause (ii); 
(d) "hill areas" mean such areas in the hill tracts of the 
State of Manipur as the Chief Commissioner may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, declare to be bill areas; 
(e) "legal practitioner" includes a pleader, mukhtar or re- IS 
venue-agent; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
CHAPl'ER :II 
CONSTITUTION AND FUNCTIONS OF VILLAGE AUTHORITIIilS 
3. (1) For every vllloce having' twenty or more tu-paybac- houses 
there shall be a Village Authority eoDSlstlDr of-
(a) five members, where the number of tn-paying houses 
in the vlllage Is not less than twenty but Is not more than sixty; 
20 
(b) seven members, where the number of tu-payiDJ' houses 2S 
in the ,village Is more thaD sixty but Is not more than ODe 
hundred; 
(c) teD. members, where the number of tu-paying houses In 
the vfIlage Is more than one hundred bnt Is 110t more thaD one 
hundred and My; 30 
(d) twelve members, where the number of tu-payinl' 
houses In the village Is more than one hUDdred and fifty. 
II of 1878. 
(2) The Chief Commissioner may, havtnr regard to the paeral 
interests of the people of any vIaaI'e as also to the demand, It any, 
from the people of. that vl.l1age for an elected V11Iap Authority, 3S 
declare, by notification in the Oftletal Gazette, that the village shall 

3 
have an elected Village Authorlty, aDd thereupon the members of 
the Village Authority of that vtllap shall be elected In aceordaDce 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
(3) Where no declaration under sub-section (2) has been made 
S in relation to any village the members of the Village Authority of 
that village shall be nominated by the Chief Commissioner. 
(4) Where there is a Chief or Khallakpa in a village, he shall be 
. the ex of]i.cio chairman of the Village Authority of that village; and 
where there is no such Chief or Khallakpa in the village. the chair-
[0 man of the Village Authority of that village shall be elected by the 
members of the Village Authority from among themselves. 
15 
4. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen as a member of ~::!iftCl-
a Village Authority unless he- for mem-
(a) is a citizen of India; 
(b) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and 
(c) in the case of membership of an elected Village Autho-
rity, is registered in the electoral roll as a voter for the. election 
of a member of the Village Authority. 
bership 
of Villa,e 
Authori-
tici. 
5. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and 
ao being, a member of a Village Authority,-
for Diaqualifica-
tions 
for mcm-
(a) if he is a member of any other Village Authority; 
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent authority. 
benhip 
of ViIlagc 
Authoritie •. 
8. The term of office of members of a Village Authority shall be Term of 
25 three years from the date appointed for its first meeting. ~~bcfl of 
of Village 
Authorities. 
7. The election of members of the Village Authority of a village ElcctioD of 
shall be on the basis of adult suffrage, that is to say, every person ~i~f!::n of 
who is a citizen of India and who is ordinarily resident in the village Authori-
and is not less than twenty-one years of age on such date, as may be tics. 
30 fixed by rules made under this Act, shall be entitled to be registered 
as a voter at any such election. 
Explanation.-A person shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident 
in a village if he ordinarily resides in that village or owns, or is in 
possession of, a dwelling house therein. 
3' 8. (1) The Deputy Commissioner may remove any member of 
Village Authority from his office-
(a) whe is convicted of any non-bailable offence; or 
a Power to 
removc 
members of 
Village 
Authorid~Jo 

Resigna-
tion of 
members. 
4 
-, ""'--l&rWho refUse~rlOairt. l>rbecomel incapa1:t1eofactiug, oris 
----~de&lred' 'tci1:)e insalvent; or' ,. "' " 
... -(~) ;'ho has 'b~n d~cl~r~d by notification to be dlsquallfted 
for employment in the public service; or- " 
'(d) wh!:>~without an excuse 'sufficient' in the Qpin~onof the s 
Deputy Commissioner. absents himself from six consecutive 
meetings-of the Village Authority;' or' 
'" ee) WllO has,been guilty.of IT!isconduct.in the discharge of 
his .d,uties, or of any disgraceful" conduct, if tw~thirds of, the 
totalril,l.Ull.>er 9f thetpe~'bers of the Vi1l~e Authority ata 10 
meeting recommend his removal. 
(2) No Pe~on who has' been ~movedfrom his Qffice uncIer 'clause 
(a) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) shan be eligible for re-nomination 
or re-election. 
9. A member of-a Village Authority .mayresigo .. his office by lS 
writing under his hand addressed to the chairman of the Authority 
bUt sh&lI' cOntinUe in office' untri hIs resignation haS been accepted 
in a meetitlgof the AuthOl'ity. " ' 
PflUg of 10. When the office of a member of a Village Authority becomes 
c:at'Wl1- vacant by his removal, tesignation or death', aneW-member shall be 20 
Vlcancfts. 'nominated or elected to fill theftcancy aftd'shaU"hold office 80 'long 
as the member whose place he fills. would have been, entitled to 
hold office if such vacancy had not occurred. 
Bar to 11. No election of a member of a Village Autllotity shall be c~Iled 
interferenC1e in question in any court, and no court shall grant an injunction,- 25 
by couns ' " , 
~.~~ el . of . matters. (a) to postpone the ectiQn a member of a Village Autho-
rity; or 
(b) to prohibit a person declared to have been duly elect-
ed under this Act. from taking part in the proceedings of a 
Village A.uthority of which he has been eleeted a member; Or 30 
(c) to prohibit members nominated or elected for a Villase 
Auth9,rity from entering upon their duties. 
Ele~ion 12. (1) If a dispute arises as to the election of any member of a 
disputes. Village Authority, the matter shall be referred to the Deputy Com-
missioner who shall decide the same after giving notice to the parties 35 
concerned and after taking such evidence as may be produced. 
(2) The order of the Deputy Commissioner may. within thirty 
days from the date thereof , be' revised by the Chief Commissioner 

S of l86r. 
5 
whose· decision shall be final and shall not be questioned in any 
court. 
13. No act done or proceedings taken by a Village Authority un- Validation 
der this Act shall be questioned on the ground merely of- ~~d a~:o_ 
S th · f . d f . th ceedings. (a) e eXlStence 0 any vacancy m, or any e ect In e con-
stitution of, the Village Authority; 
(b) any defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of 
the case. 
1 14. Every Village Authority shall be a body corporate by the Incorpora-
10 name of the village for which it is constituted and shall have perpe- ~~nag~f 
tual succession and a common seal, and shall 'by the said name sue Autllori-
and be sued, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, ties. 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and do all other 
things necessary for the purposes of this Act. 
IS 15. Subject. to. the general s~~e~intendence and control of the ~il?::lOf 
Deputy ComnusslOner, the sub-dlvlslOn.d ;:L,,,,i.;tnu~ snall have con- Authori-
!ro~ ?v~r all the Village Authorities within the local limits of his !~b-Ji~i-
Jurlsdictlon. sio~l 
magis-
trate. 
16. (1) Every Village Authority constituted under this Act shall, Functions 
20 within the local limits of its jurisdiction, perfonn the following OAf Vhilla.ge ut orJ-
functions, namely: - _ ties. 
25 
35 
(a) it shall, to the best of its ability maintain law and order 
and for that purpose exercise and perfonn the powers and 
duties generally conferred and imposed on the police by or 
under the Police Act, 1861: 
Provided that a Village Authority shall not be deemed to be 
a police officer wi thin the meaning of sections 25 and 26 of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or section 162 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898; 
(b) it shall cause to be arrested without any order from a 
magistrate and without a warrant-
(i) any person who is a vagrant or commits a heinous 
offence or who has been concerned in any such offence or 
against whom a reasona'ble. complaint has been made or 
credible information has been received or a reasonable sus-
picion exists of his having been so concerned, . 
(ii) any person against whom a hue and cry has been 
raised on the ground of his having been concerned in any 
.heinous offence, whether such offence has been or is being 
committed within its jurisdiction or outside it, 

6 
(iii) any person for whose arrest a requisition bas beeD 
received from a police officer; provided that the requisition 
specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other 
cause for which the arrest is to be made or it appears there-
from that the person might lawfully be arrested without a 5 
warrant by the officer who issued the requisition, 
(iv) any person designing to commit any heinous offence 
of which the Village Authority has knowledge, if the com-
mission of offence cannot otherwise be prevented, 
(v) any person who o'bstructs the Village Authority in 10 
the performance of its functions under this Act or rules 
made thereunder or a police officer while in the execution 
of his duty, and 
(vi) any person who has escaped, or attempts to escape, 
from lawful custody: IS 
Provided that where a Village Authority is unable to arrest 
an offender it shall forthwith report the matter to the sub-divi-
sional magistrate who shall provide the Village Authority with 
such assistance as it requires: 
Provided further that the Village Authority may pursue be- 20 
yond the local limits of its jurisdiction any person who has 
committed a heinous offence or is a vagrant or of bad or sus-
picious character, and arrest such person outside the local limits 
of its jurisdiction with the consent of the Village Authority 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the person pursued 25 
. is found; -
(c) it shall give immediate information to the sub-divisional 
magistrate of every unnatural, suspicious or sudden death which 
may occur, and of any heinous offence which may be committed, 
within the local limits of its jurisdiction and shall keep the sub- 30 
divisional magistrate informed of all disputes which are likely 
to lead to a riot or serious affray; and 
(d) it Shall supply any information which any police officer 
or the sub-divisional magistrate Or the Deputy Commissioner 
may require from it. 35 
(2) No person who is arrested under ~his section shall be detain-
ed in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the 
grounds ~f such arrest. 
(3) Every person who is a,rrested and detained in custody shall 
be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty. 40 
four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the 

7 
Journey from the place of atTest to the court of the magistrate and 
DO such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period 
without the authority of a magistrate; 
17. (1) Every person shall be bound to render, to a Village Autho- Obli&,ation 
'rity performing the functions under this Act, dl the assistance t?ill:~~8t 
i', which he is bound to render to a police officer under section 42 of the ~uthol'i-
, ., II,.. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and, every person who refuses or tIes. 
neglects to comply with any requisition for such assistance shall be 
punishaole with fine which may extend to-
o 10 (<<) two hundred rupees, where the sentence is passed by 
~ 4 a village court, or 
(b) five hundred rupees, where the sentence is passed b~ 
the court of a sub-divisional magistrate. 
(2) Against an order passed under sub-section (1) an appeal shall 
IS lie-
(a) to the court of sub-divisional magistrate, where the 
order is passed by a village court; 
(b) to the court of session, where the order is passed by the 
court of the su'b-divisional magistrate, 
20 within a period of thirty days from the date of such order or within 
such longer period as the appellate court may allow: 
Provided that no appeal shall lie in any case in which a village 
court passes a sentence of fine not exceeding twenty rupees or in 
any case in which the court of a sub-divisional magistrate passes a 
25 sentence of fine not exceeding one hundred rupees. 
18. The Chief Commissioner may at any time call for and Power of 
examine the record of any proceeding before a Village Authority, C~ef Com-
'II b-d' "I' DC" mISSIoner VI age court, su IVlSlona magIstrate or eputy ommlsSloner to call for 
under section 17 for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the cor- rVe.c101 rds of 
::,.. 1 1 fi d d I age 
.. 'OJ rectness, ega ity or propriety of any n ing, sentence or or er re- Authori-
corded or passed and after perusing the record set aside, modify or ldi!=s, ~ub-l IVISlona 
confirm such finding, sentence or order: magistrate 
or Deputy 
Provided that where an order has been made by the court of Commis-
session in an appeal preferred under sub-section (2) of section 17, sioner. 
35 the Chief Commissioner shall not interfere with such appellate 
order, 
CHAPT~R III 
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE BY VILLAGE AUTHORITIES 
Con'Jtiu-
19, Whenever a Village Authority has been constituted for any ti~n ° 
40 villB.6e, the Chief Commissioner may. by notification in the Official v~~ 

Jurisdic-
tion of 
village 
a)Urts in 
criminal 
cases. 
How cases 
may be 
instituted. 
Power of 
village 
COUrts to 
dismiss or 
refuse to 
entertain 
complaint. 
Dismis.al 
of case for 
default. 
Proceed-
inls preli-
minary to 
trial. 
8 
Gazette, appoint any two or more of the members of the Village 
Authority to be a village court during their term of office as mem-
bers of the Village Authority. 
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898, the village court shall have jurisdiction concur-
rent with that of the criminal court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the village is situated for the trial of all offences speci-
fied in the Schedule. 
21. (1) A case before a village court may be instituted by a ( -
complaint, made orally or in writing, to a member of the village 10 
court. 
(2) If the complaint is made orally, the member shall record the 
name of the complainant, the name of the person against whom the 
complaint is made, the nature of the off~nce and such other parti-
culars, if any, as may be prescribed, and shall direct the complain- IS 
ant to appear before the village court. 
22. (1) If upon the face of the complaint, or on examining the 
complaint, the village court is of opinion that the complaint is frivo-
lous, vexatious or untrue, it shall dismiss the case by order in 
writing. ~ 
(2) If at any time it- appears to the village court-
(a) that it has no jurisdiction to try the case, or 
(b) that the offence is one for which the sentence which 
the court is competent to pass would be inadequate, or 
(c) that the case is one which should not be tried by the 25 
court, 
i,t shall direct the complainant to the proper court., .... 
23. If in any case before a village. court the complainllnt, fails to 
appear on the day fixed, or if in the opinion of the . court he"~ows 
negligence in prosecuting his case, the court may· dismiss the case 30' 
for default, and such order of dismissal shall operate as an acquittal. 
24. (1) If the complaint is not dismisSedy the vil~ge":co~rt "s~~l; 
subject to the provisions of &E!ction 53;" by summcm.S" ", or otherwise '" 
require the accused to appear and answer the complaint. 
(2) If the accused fails to kppear or cannot be found, the court SS 
shall report I 'the fact to the nearest magistrate, who may issue a 
warrant for the arrest of the accused and when an'eated may for-
ward him for trial to the villag(: court OJ' f~ll'Ue",him on bail to 
appear before i" ' 
'\, . 

5 of 1898 
9 
(3) The village Court shall, if possible, try the case on the day on 
which the accused appears or is brought before it; but if that is not 
possible, the village court shall release him on his executing a bond 
for a sum not exceeding two hundred rupees to appear before the 
5 court on any subsequent day to which the trial may be adjourned. 
25. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Bar to 
Procedure, 1898, there shall be no appeal by a convicted person' in d::~J!~m 
any case tried by a village court: of village 
cOUrt5, but 
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner or the sub-divisional :d:~r r~~rir.J. 
10 magistrate, if satisfied that a failure of justice has occurred, may. of . 
his own motion or on the application of the parties concerned, ca~ 
cel or modify Eny order of conviction or of compensation made by 
a village court or direct the retrial of any case by a court of com-
pet~nt jurisdiction subordinate to him. 
26. (1) A village court shall record its decision in writing and Pilower of .. v lage court~ 
may sentence an offender convIcted by It to pay a fine not exceed- to impose 
15 
ing two hundred rupees or in default to imprisonment for a term fine or to . aWilrd com-
not exceedmg one month. pensatior.. 
(2) When litvillage court imposes &' fine under sub-section (1), 
20 it may, when ,passing the order, direct that whole or any part of the 
fine recovered shall be applied in payment of compensation for any 
loss or injury ·caused by the offence. 
(3) When a person has been sentenced to imprisonment under 
sub-section (1) in default of payment of fine. if such fine be not 
25 paid within ten days of the passing of the sentence or within such 
further time, if any, as the village court may allow, the court may 
cause him to be arrested and may commit him to the nearest jail to 
serve his sentence: 
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
~s of 1860. 30 Penel Code-
35 
(a) the fine imposed by a village court shall not be realised 
from any person who has served his term of imprisonment un-
der this section; 
(b) the person serving his term of imprisonment shall be 
forthwith released. if the fine is paid before the expiry of the 
term of imprisonment: 
Provided further that no woman shall be sentenced to imr-ison-
ment in default of payment of fine. 
I 

l'ower of 
village 
(;<)urt~ to 
rele.eo 
certain 
offenders 
after 
admonition 
or on 
probation 
Of good 
c:ondu( t. 
10 
27. When any person is convicted by a village court of an offen(!8 
punishable under sub-section 26 and no' previous conviction is 
proved against him, if it appears to the said court, regard being 
had to the age, character and antecedents of the offender and the 
circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is ex-
pedient-
(a) that the offender should be released after due admoni-
tion, the village court may instead of sentencing him to any 
punishment, release him after due admonition; or 
(b) that the offender should be released on probation of I:: 
good conduct, the village court may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, instead of 
sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that he be 
released on his executing a· bond for a sum not exceeding two 
hundred rupees to appear Bond receive sentence when called 15 
upon during such period not exceeding one year as the village 
court may direct, and in the meantime to keep the peace and be 
of good behaviour. 
Power of a. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
~~.:~: to Procedure, 1898, the villt.ge court may allow the parties to compound 20 5 of 898. 
permit com- any offence tried by it. 
pounding of 
offences. • 
Power to 
IQnlfer 
,riminal 
caseS. 
Jurisdic-
tion of 
village 
court. in 
civfl calel. 
Cerlain 
luit. Dot to 
be t.ried by 
viii .. 
cout'tl. 
29. The Deputy Commissioner or the sub-divisional magistrate. 
either on application made to him in this behalf or on his own 
motion, may transfer any case from one village court to another or 
to any other court subordinate to him. 
30. Notwithstanding anything contt.ined in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, or in any other law for the time being in force, s of 1908. 
but subject to the provisions of section 31 and section 32, the village 
court and the ordinary civil court, within the local limits of whose 
jUrisdiction the village is situated, shall have concurrent jurisdiction 30 
to try the following classes of suits, namely:-
(a) suits for money due on contracts; 
(b)' suits for the recovery of movable property or the value 
of such property; 
(c) suits for compensation for wrongfully taking or injur- 3' 
ing movable property; and 
(d) suits for damages by cattle trespass, when the value of 
the suit does not exceed five hundred rupees. 
31. No suit shall lie in an.y village court-
(a) on a balance of' partnership account, 
, 
40 

s 
II 
(b) for a share or part of a share under an intestacy or for 
a legacy or part of a legacy under a will, 
(c) by or £gainst the Government or public officers in their 
official capacity, 
(d) by or against minors or persons of unsound mind, 
(e) for the assessment. enhancement, reduction, abetment, 
apportionment, or recovery of Tent of, immovable property, 
(f) for recovery of immovable property, or 
(g) for enforcement or redemption of a mortgage of immov-
10 able property. 
32. No suit shall lie in any village court, unless at least one of ~o~al 
the defendants resides within the local limits of !ts jurisdiction at :~~il:di~: 
tbe time of the institution of the suit, and the cause of action has ti.(Ir of 
arisen wholly or in part within those limits. ~~u~f:' 
15 33. (1) A suit before a village court may be institut~d by a peti- How 8bits 
tion made orally or in writing, and if the petition is made orally. ~:ritut~d. 
the court shall record such particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) The plaintiff on instituting his suit shall state the value of 
the claim. 
34. (1) If at any time the village 
suit is barred by limitation, the court 
dismiss the suit. 
court is of opinion that the Suits barred 
h 11 b d · 't' by limita-sa, y or er 10 wn 109, tion are 
not triable 
b~l 
(2) If c,t any time it appears to the village court that it has no ~~u~f:, 
jurisdiction to entertain the suit, the court shall direct the plaintiff 
25 to t1}e proper court. 
35. If in any suit before a village court the plaintiff fails to Di,mi88al 
h d t fi d 'f' th .. f th rt h h of luits for appear on tea e xe or 1 10 e op1Olon 0 e cou e sows default. 
negligence in prosecuting his suit, the court may dismiss the suit 
for default: 
30 Provided that a village court may restore a suit dismissed for 
deff.ult, if within thirty days from the date of such dismissal the 
plaintiff satisfies the court that he was prevented by sufficient cause. 
from appearing on the date fixed. . 
36. If on receiving the petition the village court is satisfied that Summons 10 
35 the triAl of the suit may be proceeded with. it· shall by summons 01' ~:f:;;::rts 
otherwise require the defendant to appear and answer orally or in and an8-
writing the claim made in the suit. wcr. 

Ex parte 
decision 
No order 
to be set 
aside 
without 
notice to 
opposite 
party. 
Power of 
village 
c:ouru to 
determine 
necessary 
parties. 
Certain 
suits not 
to be . 
tried by 
viIJ.ge 
courts. 
12 
37. If the defendant fails to appear and the village court is 
satisfied that he has received notice of the date fixed for hearing, 
the court may decide the suit e:r parte: 
Provided that any defendant against whom a suit has been decid-
ed ex parte may, within thirty days from the date of executing any 5 
processes for enforcement of the decision, apply orally or in writ-
ing, to the village court to set aside the order; and the court, if 
s£;tisfied, that the defendant did not receive due notice of the date 
of hearing or was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing 
on the date fixed, shall set aside the decision and shall appoint a 10 
day for proceeding with the suit. 
38. No decision or order of a village court shall be set aside under 
section 35 or section 37 unless notice in writing hu. been served by 
the villa~ court on the opposite party in the prescribed manner. 
39. (1) Subject to theprovlslons of clause (c) or clause (d) of 15 
section 31 tbe village court may add as parties to a suit any persons 
whose presence as parties it considers necessary for the proper de-
c:sion thereof, and sh'all enter the names of such parties in the 
register of suits, and the suit shall be tried as between the parties 
whose names are entered in the said register: .. 20 
Provided that when any party is added, notice shall be given to 
him and he shall be given an opportunity of appearing before the 
trial of the suit is proceeded with. 
(2) In all cases where a new party appears under the proviso to 
sub-section (1)' during the trial of a suit, he may require that the 25 
trial shall begin de novo. 
40. No village court shall proceed with the trial of any suit in 
which the matter directly and substantially in dispute is pending for 
decision in the same court or in any other court in a previously insti-
tuted suit between the same parties or between parties under whom 30 
they or any of them claim, or has been heard and finally decided in 
a suit between the same parties, or between parties under whom they 
or any of them claim. 
J?ecision of 41. When the parties or their agents have been heard snd the 
villap COur1II evidence on both sides considered. the village court shall, by writ- 3S 
ten order, pass s4ch decree as may seem just, equitable and accord-
ing to good conscience, stating in ~he decree the amounts payable 
as fees under section 45, and the c:mount, if any, paid to w.itnesses 
under section 51 and the persons by whom such amounts are pay-
able. . 40 

13 
'. U. I). village court·in ordering the payment of a sum of money or Instalments· 
the delivery of any movable property may direct that the money 
be paid or the movable property be delivered, by instalments. 
43. The decision of a village court in any suit shall be final as bet- ~sion of 
S ween the parties to the suits: ~I~r fi:l~ 
. ~~~ 
PrOVIded that the district judge may on application of any party order retrial. 
to the suit made within thirty days from the date of the decree of the . 
village court, cancel or modify the decree or order of the village court 
or direct a retrial of the suit by the same or any other village court 
10 or by any other court subordinate to him if he is satisfied that there 
has been a failure of justice. 
'K If the plaintiff or defendant in any suit dies before the suit Dea~ of 
has been decided. the suit may •. subject to the provisions of clause panICS. 
(d) of section 31. be proceeded with at the instance of or against the 
IS legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff or defendant, as the 
case may be. 
" 
45. (1) In all suits instituted in a village court a fee of one anna Fees. 
in the rupee shall be payable in advance by the plain'tiff on the 
amount of the claim upto fifty rupees, and of half anna for every 
ao .rupee of the claim above fifty rupees, and such fees shall not be 
p~id to either party. 
(2) If the claim in the suit is decreed in full, the amount equal 
to the fee shall be realised from the judgment-debtor together with 
the amount decreed. 
2S (3) If the claim in a suit is decreed in part, an amount. equal to 
a proportionate part of the fee shall be realised from the judgment-
pebtor together with the amount decreed. 
(4) Any amount realised under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) 
shall be paid to the decree-holder. 
30 • oM;' (-1) If th~, village' eour.t passing a decree is unable to effect ExecutiOQ," 
satisfaction thereof; it shall grant the decree-holder a certificate to de~ce. 
that effect stating the amount que to him on account of the decree 
and the amount 'due on account of fees under section 45. 
(2) 'Any decree-holder WIshing toexecute.8;. decree of a village 
35 court may apply to t~e cour~ of the munsiff within the local limits of 
whose~ jurisdiction the village' is' situated and shall present with his 
applicaticin a certified copy of the decree of the village court; butnb 
application for execution shall be entertained by the court o{ the 
munsiff,-
(a) unless the village court has certified that it is unable to 
effect satisfaction of the decree, and 

14 
(b) unless the application is made after the expiry of three 
months from the date of the decree. 
(3) In executing a decree of the village court the court of the 
munsiff shall have the- same powers and shall follow the same pro-
cedure as if it were executing a decree passed by itself. 
LimitatiOD "7 An l' t' f t' f d f '11 rt for execution .. • app lca Ion or execu Ion 0 a ecree 0 a VI age cou 
of decree or made after the expiry of three years from the date of the decree or 
order. of any order under section 43 modifying any such decree, shall be 
Procedure 
before 
village 
courts. 
dismissed, although limitation has not been pleaded: 
Provided tha~ where the application is made for execution of It 
decree or order to enforce payment of a sum of money or delivery of 
any movable property which the decree or order directs to be made 
at a certain date, the application may be made within three years from 
that date. ~ 
48. (1) The :provisions of-
(a) the Court Fees Act. 1870, 
(b) the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and 
(c) the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
shall not apply to any trial or any criminal case or civil Buit before 
7 of 1170e 
5 of 1898. 
5 of I90L 
5 
10 
15 
a village court. 20 
PersODS 
who are 
to preside 
ovel village 
courts. 
(2) The procedure to be followed by a village court in any crimi-
nal case or civil suit and in the enforcement of its decisions, sentences, 
decrees and orders, and in the method of forming a quorum shall be 
prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
(3) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 shall not apply in the trial oft of 117. 25 
any case or suit by a village court but the village court shall obsen"e 
as far as possible the principles underlying that Act. 
49. (1) The village court shall be presided over by the chairman 
of the Village Authority if he is a member of the court. 
(2) If the chairman of the Village "Authority is absent from a sit-
ting of the village court or if he is not a member of the court the 
court shall elect its own President. 
(3) In the case of difterence of opinions among the members of 
the court the opinion of the majority shall prevail and the decisiON! 
and orders of the court shall be expressed in terms of the views of the 
majority. 
(4) In the case of an equality of votes the person presiding over th~ 
court shall have a second or casting vote. 
35 

i:~ 
10. !to viiiage court sH:all try any criminal case or 8uy civil suit to Viilage . 
or in wbich the Village Authority or any member thereof is a party courts not • to try any or 181nterested. case or 
• suit in 
which the 
Village 
Authority 
or any 
member 
thereof is 
, interested 
SL (1) Subject to the provisions of section 53 a village court may Attendance 
by summons or otherwise send for any person to appear and give of Witnel-
evidence or to produce or cause the production of any document. lei • 
. (2) A village court shall refuse to swpmon a witness or to enforce 
a summons already issued against a witness, where in the opinion of 
the court the attendance of the witness, cannot be procured without 
10 an amount of delay, expense, or inconvenience which under the cir-
cumstances of the case would be unreasonable. 
(3) A village court shall not require any person living at a distance 
of five miles or more from the seat of the village court to give evidence 
or produce any document unless such sum of money be paid to him 
15 as appears to the court to be sufficient to defray his travelling and 
other expenses in passing to and from the court and for one day's 
attendance. 
(4) If any person whom. a village court summons by written order 
to appear or give evidence or to produce any document before it, 
20 fails to obey such summons, such person shall be guilty of an offence 
and the village court may take cognizance of such offence and may 
sentence any person convicted thereof to a fine not exceeding twenty-
five rupees. 
52. (1) The parties to criminal cases triable by a village court shall Alperl!lcc 
25 appear personally before the court: ~~es 
Provided that the village court, if it sees reason so to do, may dis- vlUa,e 
ed .. courts. pense with the personal attendance of the accus and permIt him to 
appear by agen,t. 
(2) The parties to civil suits triable by a village court may appear 
30 by agent. 
Explanation.-In sub-section (1) and sub-section (2), "agent" 
means a full-time servant or a partner or a relative of the party 
whom the village court may admit as a fit person to represent that 
party and who is authorised to appealf and plead for such party. 
35 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, legal practi-
tioners shall not be permitted to practise before a village court. 
53. No woman shall, against her will, be compelled to appear in :t,pearance 
person before a village court as an accused or as a party or as a 0 women. 
wim~ , 

lealls.doli 
of fees, 
fines, etC'. 
Registers 
and re-
cord •. 
Lanpa,e 
of viUa,e 
court •• 
t& 
54. All fees and Snes imposed, all sums decreed or conipensatfoll 
awarded and all sums due on bonds under this Act may be realised 
under orders of the village court in such manner as may be prescribed. 
55. Every village court shall maintain such registers and records 
and submit such returns as may be prescribed. 5 
56. All proceedings before a village court shall be in Manipuri. 
CHAPTER IV 
\ 
MIsCJI:l.LANEOUS 
Power to 5'7. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the 
mate rule •. Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 10 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely :-
(a) the preparation, revision and final publication of IS 
electoral rolls for election of members of a Village Authority 
and the particulars to be entered in such rolls; 
(b) the preliminary publication of electoral rolls in the 
village to which they relate; 
(e) the manner in which and the time within which 'claims 20 
and objections as to entries in electoral rolls may be preferred 
and the authority by whom such claims and objections may be 
decided ; 
(d) the nomination of candidates, the time and manner of 
holding elections and the manner in which votes shall be given; 25 
(e) any other matter relating to elections to Village Autho-
rities or election disputes arising therefrom; 
<f) the regulation of the conduct of business of the Village 
Authorities and the number of members necessary to form a 
quorum; 30 
(g) the registers and records to be maintained and the re-
turos to be submitted by Village Authorities and vilkge courts 
and the particulars to be entered in such registers, records and ': 
returns; 
(h) the procedure to be followed by a village court in the 35 
institution, trial and disposal of criminal cases and civil suits 

17 
and the number of members necessary to form a quorum of a 
village court ; 
(i) the issue, serviceo~_executionof summons and other 
processes by village courts and the issue and service of notice 
S by Village Authorities; , __ 
(j)1 the procedure for the transfer of criminal cases and 
civil suits froHf-one- v.i1Jagecourt toanotner Village court or to 
, any __ other. court ; 
(k) the procedure for the execution of decrees, orcien; and 
10 - sentences of village courts; 
OCt) the lees to be' leVied by village -courts for copies of 
documents and the procedure to be followed in furnishing 
JRIdleGPies; and 
(m) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed 
15 under this Act. 
58. The Manipur State Hill Peoples (Administration) Regu~- Repeal IUld 
tion, 1947, in so far as it relates to the constitution and functions of laving •. 
V.i!l!age Authorities and the administration of jUstfce, both civil and 
criminal, by courts of Village Authorities, is hereby repealed : 
20 Provided that the said repeal shall not affect-
(a) the previous operation of the said Regulation, or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, 
accrued or incurred under the said Regulation, or 
(c) any penalty, ·forfeiture or punishment in respect of any 
25 offence committed under the said Regulation, or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect 
of any right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture 
or punishment as aforesaid, 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be 
30 instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture 
or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed: 
Provided further that subject to the above provisions, anything 
. done or any action taken (including any appointment or delegation 
made or any notification, instruction or direction issued or any rule, 
35 regulation or form made or framed) under the said Regulation shall 
in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the pro-
visions of this Act, continue in force, and be deemed to have been 
done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act, 
unless and until it is superseded by anything done or any action 
.fO taken under the provisions of this Act. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 20] 
OFFENCES TRIABLE BY A VILLAGE COURT 
1. Offences under sections 24, 26, and 27 of the Cattle TrespU8 I of 1871. 
Act, 1871. S 
2. Offences under enactments (other than the Indian Penal Code 
and this Act) or any rules and bye-laws made thereunder which 
are punishable with fine only upto a limit of two hundred rupees. 
3. Offences under section 34 of the Police Act, 1861. , of 1861. 
I . 
4. Offences under the following sections of the Indian Penal 10 ., .... of 1860. 
Code, namely :-
sections 160, 178, 179, 269, 277, 289, 290, 294, 323, 334, 341, 
352, 358, 426, 447, 448, 504 and 510; and when the value of the 
property in the opinion of the village court is not over two 
hundred rupees, sections 379 and 411. IS 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The constitutiDn and functions of Village Authorities in the hill 
areas of Manipur are at present governed by the Manipur State 
Hill Peoples (Administration) Regulation, 1947, enacted during the 
regime of the Maharaja of Manipur. The provisions of this Regula-
tion are outmoded, and it is considered desirable to have legislation 
on more modern lines. The present Bill seeks to do this while at the 
same time keeping in view the peculiar conditions obtaining in these 
areas. The principal features of the Bill are:-
(1) election of village authorities on the basis of adult suf-
frage in suitable cases in place of nomination under the exist-
ing Regulation; 
(2) the rationalisation of the existing provisions· and their 
simplification as far as possible; 
(3) the omission of all references to trials by ordeal; 
.. 
(4) the enlargement of the list of cases which village courts 
can try. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 3Td February, 1956. 

FIN:.U4'ClAL MEMORANDUM 
The Manipur (Vill~ge Authorities ,in Hili Areas) Bill. 1956, 
provides for the constitution and functions of the Village Autho-
rities and for holding elections in suitable cases.' As. reswt of 
this Bill, it will be necessary to :incur certain initial additional ex-
penditure. The minimum additional expen<iitureis estimated to be 
Rs. 60,000/- worked out asfollows:-
Section of the Act Purpoao for which it is required Total expenditw'C 
Section '3 1. ~ of eloctionl for the ViUap Audlo-
rltles .....• RI. 4,os61-
2. Provision of Registers etc. for maintenance 
by,tbe riJlagcAthorities • • • 
3. Provision of furniture 
TetIl 
or 
RI. 300420/-
RI. 25.012/-
RI. S9..488/-
RI. 60,0001-
2. Some small recurring expenditure will also be necessary for 
repairs and replacements from year to year, but, this cannot be 
estimated at present. 

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION 
The object of the Bill is to provide for the constitution, powers, 
and functions of Village Authorities in the hill areas of Manipur. 
Clause 57 of the Bill empowers the Chief Commissioner to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the proposed enactment. The 
several matters in relation to which such rules may be made have 
been detailed in the various items of sub-clause (2) of that clause 
and. relate,princip~l1y to the procedure to be followed in: the pre-
paration. revision and. publication of electoral rolls for election of 
members of Village Authorities, the nomination of candid~tes and 
the settlement of disputes relating to such elections as also to the 
procedure to be followed in the institution, trial and disposal of 
criminal cases and civil suits by the village courts. These matters 
are thus matters of procedure and detail which are usually delegated 
to the Executive to be provided for by rules. The delegation of 
legislative power is thus of the normal type. 
• 
• 

LOt<. SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the constitution and 
functions of Village Authorities in the hill areas of the State 
of Manipur. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
GIPD-LAD-2I38 L8-9-3-S6-I600 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri G .. B. Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 