As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
, " 
Bll1 No. 18 of 1970 
THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL 
UNIVERSITIES BILL, 1fJ70 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAuSI'S 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF CORRESPONDING UN!VERSITIJJ:S 
3. Dissolution of the existing University and establishment of 
Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities. 
4. Incorparation. 
5. Territorial limits. 
6. Headquarters. 
7. Objects of a corresponding University. 
8. Admission to a corresponding University. 
9. Powers of a corresponding University. 
10. Visitations. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF A CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITY 
11. Authorities and officers (If a corresponding University. 
12. Chancellor. 
13. Constitution, powers and dutip.s of the Board of a corresponding 
University. 
14. Powers and duties of the Board. 
1!5: The Vice-Chancellor. 
16. Powers and duties of the Vice-ChanceIlOT. 
17. The Registrar. 
18. Comptroller. 
19. The Estate Officer. 
20. Director of Student Welfare. 
21. Deans of colleges. 
22. The Librarian . 
. '23..' • Academic Council . 
. ", ..: 

CLAUSES 
24. The colleges. 
(U) 
CHAPTER IV 
COLLEGES 
21. ®xperiment Stations for research. 
26. Agrieultural )ktensicm Education. 
CHAPTER V 
SERVlCBS 
27. Retirement and other conditions <1f service. 
28. Provident fund. 
29. Appointment of salaried officers. 
30. Temporary arrangements. 
CHAPTER VI 
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS 
31. Statutes. 
32. Statutes how made. 
33. Regulations. 
CHAPTER VII 
AcCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
34. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPrE'R vm 
MISCELLANEOUS 
35. Division of assets and liabilities. 
36. Legal proceedings. 
37. Transfer of employees. 
38. Memhersllip Of ~rrespOftding Universityboates. 
39. Ann~l ae,srt. 
40. Construction of references to existing University .. ·-v docu-
mtm.f;. etc. 
41. Obligations to be discharged by the Punjab J\cric.ultUral Uni-
versity. 
42. Proportion of cost to be borne by the Gevel'D.-eElt·d lUtnachal 
Pradesh. 
43. Settlement of unresolved disputes. 
44. Power to remove difficulties. 
45. Repeals and saving. 

" .$ .. -4U 
Lot SABRA 
CORP1GENDA 
to 
THE HARYANA AND Pu;~Jf\B AGRICULiURAL U!ITVEBSITIES 
BILL, 1970 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, -
fer ":9ill No .lSof" re 9.d I!P;ilJ. No. 13 of 1970" 
2. Page 5, for the existing marg~nal h9ading to clause 11,-
read "Authorities and officers of a corresponding 
University." 
3. Page 7, line 15,-
aft ar "of" ins '?r t "tha til 
4. Page 13, line 10,-
after "rna tters" for n tI read " 
It . , 
5. Page 14, line 34,-
after "belt for It th" read " the" -;;--
6. Page 20, lines 21 and 22,-
for "secu tty" reHd " s scur i tyrt 

5 
aWMo. 1801 (9ro 
TRE·HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL 
UNIVERSITIES BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
to provide fOT the establishment of two i_~mUmt ~ ... d .' Uni-
versities in place of the Punjab Agricultural Univ~si'y constitutecil 
by the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961, ami jOJr 71JQ.tters 
consequential on, or corrmected with, the establi8hment of those inde· 
pendent AgrtC'/Lltural' 'l1mV'eTSities. 
WHEREAS, for the development of agriculture in the States of Haryana 
and .P~ab, it is expedient to provide for the utablishmeat of two in3e-
~Q.dent. A8"icultural Universiti.e& in place of the PU$b Agrieultural 
University constituted by the Punjab A$icultural Universi\Y Act, 1961; 
AND w~ the· LegBlatures ·of the States of Haryana and Punjab 
have passed resolutions in terms of clause (1) of ariiele 20% of1ibe Consti· 
tution in relation to the above-mentioned matter and matters ancillary 
thereto in so far as such matters are ma(ters enumerated in List II in the 
Sewnth Sch.weto the COIlStUUtioe; 
BE it enaeted. by ParUameJlt in the Tweot¥-fi.I'et. Yeat' of the Republic .. 
of lnd.1a as folloW1l:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMDfAllY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Haryana and Punjab Agricultural :=,t ~ 
Universities Act, 1970. ~r::;IIt. 

(2) It shall be deemed to' have come into force on the 2nd day of 
February, 1970. 
Deftnitior. Z. In this Act, and in all Statutes made thereunder, unless the context 
otuOI'ollllD 
of the 
exiatilltot 
UDivenity 
aDd esta~ 
liahment C'C 
Huyana 
and Punjab 
~lmral 
UDlveatdes 
otherwise requires,-
(4) "Academic Council" means, in relation to a corresponding S 
University, the Academic Council of that University; 
(b) "agriculture" includes the basic and applied science of lIOil 
and water management, crop and live-stock production and manage-
ment, home sciences and the betterment of rural people; 10 
(c) "appropriate Government" means.-
(i) in relation to the Haryana Agricultural University. the 
Government of the State of Haryana; 
(ii) in relation to the Punjab Agricultural University. the 
Government of the State of Punjab; 
(d) "Board", in relation to a corresponding University, means the IS 
Boe.: If Management of that University; 
(e) "college" means a constituent college of a corresponding Uni-
versity; 
(n "corresponding University" means,-
(i) in relation to the territories to which the functions of the 20 
Haryana Agricultural University extend. that University; 
(it) in relation to the territories to which the functions of the 
Punjab Agricultural University extend, that University; 
(g) "existing University" means the Punjab Agricultural Univer-
litv constituted by section 3 of the Punjab Agricultural University 25 
Act, 1961; 
(h) "library" means a library established or maintained by a 
corresponding UniverSity; 
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by the Statutes of a correspond-
ing University; 30 
(j) "Statutes" and "Regulations" mean. respectively. the Statutes 
and Regulations made by a corresponding University under this 
Act; 
(k) "transferred territories" means the territories added to the 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh by SUb-section (1) of section 5 35 
of the Punjab ReorganilHltinn Act, 1966; JI of 1966 
(1) "Vice-Chancellor" means the Vice-Chancellor of a corres-
ponding University. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABl.ISHMENT OF CORR!:SPONDING UNIVDSITIES 40 
3. As from the commencement of this Act, the existing Univer-
sity shall stand dissolved and there shall be established in its place two 
independent Agricultural Universities, to be known respectively as the 
Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University. 

4. (1) Each of the Agricultural Universities mentioned in section 3 Incorpora. 
shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal lion. 
with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and to contract, and 
may, by its name, sue and be sued. 
S (2) Each body corporate referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of 
the Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor of that University, the members 
01 the Board, the Academic Council and all persons, who may hereafter 
become or be appointed as such officers or members, so long as they con-
tinue to hold such office or membership. 
10 5. (1) The Haryana Agricultural University shall function within the Territorial 
territories of the State of Haryana and the Punjab Agricultural University limits. 
shall function within such other territories to which the functions of the 
existing University extended immediately before the commencement of 
this Act. 
IS (2) Until a University is established in the Union territory of Hima-
chal Pradesh, the Agricultural College at Palampur in the transferred 
territories shall, notwithstanding the dissolution of the existing University, 
continue to be a college of the Punjab Agricultural University and shall 
cease to be such college on the establishment of a University in thO'se 
20 territories. 
(3) On the establishment of a University in the transferred territories, 
the assets and liabilities of the Punjab Agricultural University pertaining 
to the Agricultural College at Palampur shall stand transferred to, and 
shall vest in, such University. 
2S 6. (1) The headquarters of the Haryana Agricultural University shall Head-
b. at Hissar, and the headquarters of the Punjab Agricultural University quarters. 
shall be at Ludhiana, or at such other place as the appropriate Government 
may direct. 
(2) Each corresponding University shall establish an office at the place 
30 at which the seat of the appropriate Government is located. 
7. Each corresponding University shall be deemed to be established and Objecu Ctf 
incorporated for the following objects, namely: - a correl' 
pondilll 
Uninniry. 
(a) making prOVision for imparting education in difterent bran-
ches of study, particularly agriculture, veterinary and animal science, 
3S agricultural engineering, home sciences and other allied sciences; 
(b) furthering the advancement of learning and prosecution of 
research, particularly in agriculture and other allied sciences; 
(c) undertaking the extension of such sciences to the rural people 
of the territories within which the University is required by this 
40 Act to function; 
(d) such other purposes as the appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, direct. 

Adttilltfetl 
to n cot<-
reepondiDa 
University. 
4 
f, <r) Each corresponding University shall, subject to the provisions 
of '~9 Act and the Statutes, be open to all persons: 
Provided that nothing herein shall require any such University to 
admit to any course of study a number of students larger than the pres-
eriied rrunlber. S 
(2.) The appropriate Govemrnent may direct the correspondifl'l ant-
Vel/sity to reserve in any college seats for women, Scheduled Caste&l 8ehe--
duled Tribes or such educationally backward classes of ctti&ens at; Mey 
be specified by that Government in this behaU, and where such direction 
has been given, the cOI'responding University shall make the reservations 10 
accordingly: 
Provided that no such person shall be entitled to be admittea toa 
corresponding University unless he meets the standards laid down 
by the corresponding University. 
Powers 01 u t. Each correspondina University shall have the followmc- POWlel8, 15 
CO!'reepond- namely:-iDa Uoivcr-
lity. 
(4) to provide for graduate and post-graduate inJtructians m 
agriculture, veterinary and animal sciences, agricultural e~ 
home sciences and other allied sciences and in such other branches of 
learning as the University may deem fit; 
(b) to make provision for instructions in applied fields,research 
and the dissemination of the findings of reaearch and tecbllieal infor-
mation through an extension education programme; 
(c) to institute degrees, diplomas and other ,academic ~ 
:0 
tiona; 25 
(d) to hold examinations and to grant and confer degrees, diplo-
mas and other academic distinctions to and on persons who .hall 
hav.-
(i) pursued a prescribed course of study; or 
(ii) carried out research in the University, or in an institu- 30 
tion recognised in this behalf by the University, under the pres-
cribed conditions; 
(e) to confer honorary degrees or ot1ler distil'lctions in the pres-
cribed manner and under the preSCribed conditions; 
(f) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers, village 35 
leaders and other persons not enrolled as regular students of the 
University and to grant certificates to them when deemed desirable; 
(g) to co-operate with other Universities and authorities Mauch 
manner and for such purposes as the University may determine; 
(h) to institute teachini. research and extension education posts 40 
required by the University and to apPoint.persdns to such posts; 

5 
(i) to create administrative, ministerial and otaer pofts and to 
make appointments thereto; 
(j) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships and prizes in 
'Il(!cordaaee 'With tfte Statutes; 
5 (k) to institute and maintain residential accommodatiGD for stu-
dents of the University; 
(1) to supervise and control the residential accommodation and 
to regulate the discipline of the students of the University and to 
make arrangements for 'promoting their health and welfare; 
10 (m) to institute and receive such fees and other char.,es as may 
be prescribed; and 
(on) to do all such acts and things, whether incldemal to the 
powers aforesaid or not. as may be requisite in order to further the 
objects of the University. 
IS 10. (1) The Chancellor of a corresponding University may cause an 
inspection to be made by such person as he may direct, of the correspond-
ing University, its buildings, laboratories, and equipment and of any lnst!-
tution.maintained by that University, and may cause an inquiry to be 
made in 1'espect of any matter connected with the administration and the 
20 finances of that University. 
(2) The Chancellor.of a oorresponding Univel'Siiy shall, in every case, 
give notice to the University of his intention to cause an inspection or 
inquiry to be made, and, on receipt of such notice, that University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to be 
25 preHllt, and hear-d, at such inspection or inquiry. 
(3) The Chancellor of a corresponding University may address the 
:Soard ;of tllle University w:th reference to the reault of suehinspection 
or inquiry with -sueh advice as he may offer r.egardtng the action to be 
taken. 
30 (~ The Board shall communicate to the Chancellor sueh action as it 
propaMS .. take or has taken 8S the result of such inspection or inquiry. 
(5) If the Board dor:s not, within a reasonable time, take action to 
the satisfaction of the Cllancellor, he may, after considering any expla-
nation furnished or representation made by the Board, issue such direc-
31 tions as he may deem fit. and the Board shall comply with such 
directions. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGF.:MJ'.NT 0[,' A CORRF.RPONDING UNIVERSITY 
11. The following shall be thl: authorities :-Ind officers of each corres-
40 pODding University, Damely:-
(4) Authorities of a corresponding University-
(i) Bo .. rd; 
AutthDritiu 
.Dd omcr 
Of • cor· 
rclpoDdln. 
Uaiverslry. 

6 
(ii) Academic CouncU; 
(iii) Board of Studies; and 
(iv) Such other authorities as may be declared by the 
Statutes to be authorities of the University. 
(b) Oftlcers of the corresponding University-
(i) Chancellor; 
(ii) Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) Dean of Post-Graduate Studies; 
(iv) Deans of the colleges; 
'"'-
(v) Director of Research; 
(vi) Direct:>r of Agricultural Extension Education; 
('Jii) Director of Students Welfare; 
(viii) Registrar; 
(ix) Comptroller; 
(x) Estate Officer; 
(xi) Librarian; and 
(xii) Such other persons in the service of the Unlversity as 
may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University. 
S 
10 
15 
Chancellor. 12. (1) The Governor of the State of Haryana shall be the Chancellor 
CODititution 
powers IDd 
duties of 
the Board 
of. cor-
relpoading 
UDivmlty. 
of the Haryana Agricultural University and the Governor of the State of 20 
Punjab shall be the Chancellor of the Punjab Agricultural University. 
(2) The Chancellor of a corresponding University shall, by virtue of 
his office, be the Head of that University and shall, when present, preside 
at a convocation of that University. 
(3) The Chancellor of a corresponding University shall have such 2S 
other powers as are specified in this Act or as may be prescribed. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within a period of one year 
from the commencement of this Act, establish a Board for the manage-
ment of the corresponding University. 
(2) The Board of the Haryana Agricultural University shall cons1st 3(1 
of-
(a) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(b) the Chief Secretary to the Government of the State of Har-
yana; 
(c) the Secretaries to the Government of the State of Haryan. 3S 
tn the Departments of-
(i) Agriculture; 
(ii) Finance: ana 
(iii) Community Development; 

5 
10 
1 
(d) persons, not being officials, appointed by the Government 01 
the State of Haryana from amongst the followin'g categories of per. 
sons, namely:-
(i) one from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that 
Government, eminent agricultural scientists with a background of 
,agricultural research or education; 
(ii) two from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that 
Government, progreSsive fanners or live-stock breeders having 
experience of, and interest in, scientific farming and live-stock 
improvement; 
(iii) one from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of 
that Government, distinguished industrialists, businessmen, 
manufacturers or live-stock breeders, associated with agricultural 
development; and 
IS (iv) one from amongst women who are, in the opinion n( 
Government, outstanding social workers, preferably with a back-
ground of rural advancement. 
(3) The Board of the Punjab Agricultural University shall consist elf--
(a) the Vice-Chancellor; 
20 (b) the Chief Secretary to the Government of the State ot 
30 
35 
Punjab; 
(e) the Secretaries to the Government of the State of Punjab in 
the Departments of--
(i) Agriculture; and 
(ti) nnance; 
(d) the Director of Agriculture. Punjab; 
(e) the Director of Animal Husbandry, Punjab; 
(1) one nominee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research; 
(!7) two nominees cf the Government of the Union territory of 
Himachal Pradesh; 
(h) persons not being otftcials, appointed by the Government ot 
the State of Punjab from amongst the following categories of per-
sons, namely:-
(1' two from amor.gst persons who are, in the opinion of that 
Government, eminent agricultural scientists with a background of 
agricultural research or education;. 
(ii) two from amongst persons who are, in the OpInion of 
that Government, progressive farmers or 1ive-srock breeders hav-
Ing experience of. and interest in! scien1ific farming and l~ve­
~ock IfTlprov~m~nt: 

8 
(iii) one from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of 
that Government, distinguished industrialists, businessmen, 
manufacturers or liv~-stock breeders, associated with agrkultural 
development; and 
(iv) one from amongst women who arc, in the opinion of S 
that Government, outstanding social workers, preferably with a 
background of rural advancement. 
(4) The Board of the Haryana Agricultural University shall associate 
with its meeting the following persons as technical advisers, but the per-
sons so associated shall not be entitled to vote at any such meeting:- 10 
(a) the Director of Agriculture, Haryana; 
(b) the Director of Animal Husbandry, Haryana; and 
(c) two officers appointed by the Board of that University from 
amongst the Deans or Directors of that University. 
(5) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than the IS 
official members, shall be three years: 
Provided that two members of the Board, not being offiCial members, 
shall retire at the end of each year. 
(6) The members of the Board, other than the official members, shall 
determine, by lots, the member!i! who shall retire at the end of each year. 20 
(7) A member of the Board may resign his office by a notice in writ-
ing, addressed to the Chancellor of the corresponding University.' 
(8) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the oftice of a member of 
the Board, the appropriate Government may fiU the vacancy by appoint-
ing another person thereto in accordance with the provisions <1f this see- 25 
tion. 
(9) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely OD 
the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution 
of, such Board. 
(10) Four members of the Board, in the case of the Haryana Agric1Jl- 30 
tural University, and five members of the Board, in the case of the Pun-
jab Agricultural University, shall be a quorum for a meeting of the 
Board: 
Provided that if a meeting of the Board is adjourned for want of a 
quorum, no quorum shall be necessary at the next meeting for the 3S 
transaction of the same business. 
(11) The Chancellor shall be the Honorary Chairman of the Board and 
the Vice-Chancellor, the Working Chairman. 
(12) The members of the Board shall not be entitled to receiVe any 
remuneration for the perfonnance of their functions under this Act" Q 
~~cept such daily and travelling allowances as may be prescribed~ 

9 
Provided that nothing herein shall affect the emolumertts or other 
conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor. 
(13) On the commencement of this Act, the members of the 
Board of Management of the existing University shall be deemed to have 
S vacated their offices as such. 
If. The powers and duties of the Board shall be as follows:-
(a) to approve the budget submitted by the Vice-Chancellor; 
(b) to hold and control the property and funds of the University 
and issue any general directive on behalf of the University; 
10 (c) to accept or transfer any property on behalf of the University; 
IS 
20 
(d) to administer funds placed at the disposal of the University 
for specific purposes; 
(e) to invest moneys belonging to the University; 
<I) to appoint the officers, teachers and other employees of the 
University in the prescribed manner; 
(g) to direct the form and use of the common seal of the 
University; 
(h) to appoint such committees as it may deem necessary for its 
proper functioning; 
(i) to borrow money for capital improvements and make suitable 
arrangements for its repayment; 
(j) to appoint the Vice-Chancellor subject to the provisions of 
section 15; 
(Ie) to meet at such times and as often as the Board may deem 
25 necessary: 
30 
Provided that regular meetings of the Board shall be held at le-tst 
once in every two months; 
(l) to regulate and determine all matters concerning the Univer. 
sity in accordance with this Act and the Statutes, and to exercise 
such powers and to discharge such duties as may be conferred on or 
imposed upon the Board by this Act or the Statutes. 
Powen aDd 
duties ofthe 
BOard. 
15. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time officer of the corres- The Vlce-
ponding University and shall bf' appointed by the Board in the prescribed ChaDCeUor. 
manner: 
3S Provided that where the members of the Board are not unanimous with 
regard to the selection of the person proposed to be appointed as the 
Vice-Chancellor, the appointment shall be made by the Chancellor of the 
concerned corresponding University: 
Provided further that the first Vice-Chancellor of the Haryana Agri-
40 cultural University shall be appointed by the Government of the State of 
Haryana: 

Powen and 
duties of 
the Vice-
Chancellor. 
10 
Provided al80 that the person holding office immediately before the 
commencement of this Act as the Vice·ChanceUo'l' of the existing 
University shall be deemed to be the first Vice-Chancellor of the Punjab 
Agricultural University and shall hold such office for the unexpired 
portion of his term of office as the Vice-Chancellor of the existing Uni~ 5 
versity. 
(2) The term of office of the Vice-Chancellor shall be four years and 
he shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
(3) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-
Chancellor shall be such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to 10 
his disadvantage after his apPointment. 
(4) When a vacancy occurs, or is likely to occur, in the office of the 
Vice~Chancellor by reason of leave taken by the holder of such office or 
any cause other than the expiry of the term of office, the Registrar shall 
report the fact forthwith to the Board, and such vacancy shall be filled in 15 
accordance with the provi!'lons of sub-section (1). 
(5) Until the vacancy· is filled under sub-section (4) or until such time 
as the Board deSignates an acting Vice-Chancellor, the senior-most Dean, 
in the case of the Haryana Agricultural University, or the Registrar, in 
the case of the Punjab Agricultural University, as the case may be, shall 20 
carryon the current duties of the office of the Vice-Chancellor. 
(6) The Vice-Chancellor may relinquish office by reSignation in writing 
addressed to the Board and ordinarily delivered to the Secretary of the 
Board at least two months prior to the date on which the Vice-Chancellor 
wishes to be relieved. 2S 
16. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and 
academic officer of the corresponding University and the Chairman of the 
Academic Council and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at 
a convocation of the corresponding University and shall confer degrees 
on persons entitled to receive them. 30 
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the 
corresponding University and shall be responsible for the due maintenance 
of diSCipline at that University. 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall convene meetings of the Academic 
Council unless he temporarily delegates this power to some other otBcer 35 
of the corresponding University. 
(4) Without prejudice to the powers conferred by this Act on 
the appropriate Government, the Vice-Chancellor shall ensure the faithful 
observance of the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and he shall 
exercise all such powers as may be necessary in that behalf. 40 
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the presentation of 
the budget and the statement of accounts to the Board. 
(6) Tn any emergency, which, in the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor, 
requires immediate action to be taken, he shall take such action as he 
deems necessary and shall, at the earliest opportunity, report the action 45 
taken to the officer, authority or other body for confirmation who or which 
in the ordinary course would have dealt with the matter, but nothing 
in this sub-section shall be deemed to empower the Vice-Chancellor to 
incur any expenditure not duly authorised and provided for in the budllet 

11 
l7) Where any action by the Vice-Chancellor under sub-section (6) 
affects any person in the service of the corresponding University to his 
disadvantage, such action shall not be taken unless the person concerned 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and the person 
5 against whom any action is proposed to be taken may prefer lm appeal 
to the Board within thirty days of the date on which the action proposed 
to be taken against him is communicated to him. 
(8) Subject as aforesaid, the Vice-Chancellor shall give effect to the 
orders of the Board regarding the appointment, suspension and dismissal 
10 of officer:;, teachers and other employees of the correspondmg Univer-
~y. -
(9) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the close co-ordina-
tion and integration of teaching, research and extension education. 
(10) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers as may be 
'5 prescribed. 
(11) Tile salary and allowances payable to the officers, teachers and 
other employees of the corresponding University shall be determined by 
the VicE:-Chancellor with the approval of the Board. 
17. (1) The Registrar of a corresp'D'nding University shall be a whole The Relit-
20 time officer of that University and shall be appoint.ed by the Vice-Chan- trar. 
cellor of that University Vvith the approval of the Board. 
(2) The Registrar of a corresponding University shall receive such 
remuneration and other emoluments as may be prescribed and shall not, 
during the tenure of his office, accept any remuneration or emolument 
25 other than the prescribed remuneration or emolument. 
30 
35 
(3) The powers and duties of the Registrar of a corresponding Cni-
versity shall be as follows :-
(a) to be responsible for the custody of the records and the 
common seal of the University; 
(b) to be the. ex otfi.cio Secretary to the Academic Council and to 
the Board and to place before such Council and Board all such in-
formation as may be necessary for the transaction of business of the 
Council or the Board, as the case may be; 
(c) to receive applications for admission into the University; 
(d) to keep a permanent record of all syllabi, curricula and in-
formati01l1l connected therewith; 
(e) to make arrangements for the conduct of such examinations 
as may be prescribed and to be responsible for the due execution of 
all processes connected therewith; 
(I> to perform such other duties as may be prescribed or required, 
from time to time, by the Vice-Cbancellor. 
18. (1) The Comptroller of a corresponding University shall be a COmprroUer. 
whole-time officer of that University and shall be appointed by the Vice-
Chancellor of that University with the approval of the Board. 
4S (2) The Comptroller shall manage the property and investmt:~lts of 
the corresponding University and advise it in regard to its ftnanelll 
policy. 

The Eatate 
Officer. 
UircctOr of 
Student 
We1fafll. 
The Lib-
rBrian. 
12 
(3) The Comptroller shall be responsible to the v ice~Chancellor for 
all accounting matters of the corresponding University including the 
preparation and presentation of its Budget and statement of accounts. 
(4) The Comptroller shall receive such remuneration as may be prea-
cribed and shall not, during the tenure of his office, receive any remune- S 
ration or other emolument other than the prescribed remuneration. 
(5) The Comptroller shall-
(a) ensure that expenditure, not authorised in the budget, is 
not incurred by the corresponding University except by way of in-
vestment; and 10 
(b) disallow any expenditure not warranted by the terms of any 
Statute or for which provision is required to be made by the Statute 
but has not been so made. 
(G) Ali moneys belonging to the corresponding University shall be 
kept in a Scheduled Bank approved by the Board. 
19. The Estate Officer of a corresponding University, who shall be 
appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board, shall 
be responsible for the custody, maintenance and management of all the 
buildings, lawns, gardens and other properties of the University. 
15 
20. (1) The Director of Student Welfare of a corresponding University 20 
shall be a whole-time officer of that University and shall be appOinted 
by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board. 
(2) The Director of Student Welfare shall have the following duties, 
namely:-
(a) to make arrangements for the housing of students; 
(b) to direct a programme of student-counselling; 
(c) to arrange for the employment of students in accordance with 
the plans approved by the Vice-Chancellor; 
(d) to supervise the extra-curricular activities of students; 
(e) to assist in the placement of graduates of the University; and 30 
(f) to organise and maintain contact with the Alumni Association 
of the University. 
21. (1) Each college shall have a Dean who shall be a whole-time offi-
cer and shall be appOinted by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of 
the Board. 3S 
(2) The Dean shall be responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for all mat-
ters concerning his college. 
(3) The Dean shall be responsible for the organisation and the con-
duct of resident instruction of the Departments of the college. 
22. (l) The Librarian of a corresponding University shall be appoint- 40 
ed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board and shall be 
in charge of the library. 
(2) The Librarian shall be responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for all 
matters concerning the library. 

23. (1) The Academic Council shall be in charge of the academic affairs Academic 
of the University and shall, subject to the prOVlSlOnI of COUncil. 
this Act and the Statutes, superintend, direct and control, and be 
responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education 
S and examinations and other matters connected with the obtaining of 
degrees and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other 
duties as may be prescribed. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the f.oregoing power, the 
Academic Council shall have power-
10 (a) to advise the Vice-Chancellor on all academic matters. in-
cluding the control and management of the libraries; 
(b) to co-opt at its meetings such Heads of Departments as it 
may consider necessary; 
(c) to make recommendations to the Vice-Chancellor for the in-
IS stitution of the Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant 
Professorships and teacherships and other teaching posts and in re-
gard to the duties and emoluments thereof; 
(d) to formulate, modify or revise schemes for the constitution 
or reconstitution of departments of teaching, research and extenSion; 
20 (e) to make regulations regarding the admission of students to 
the University; 
(1) to make regulations regarding examinations conducted by 
the University and the condit.kms on which students shall be admitted 
to such examinations; 
2S (g) to make regulations relating to courses of study leading to 
degrees, diplomas and certificates; 
(h) to make recommendations relarding post-graduate teaching, 
research and extension; 
(i) to make recommendations regarding the q'lalifications to be 
30 prescribed for teachers in the University; 
(j) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties 
as may be conferred or imposed on it by or under the provisions of 
this Act. 
(3) The Academic Council shall consist of-
35 (a) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(b) the Deans of the colleges of the University; 
(e) the Dean of Post-Graduate Studies; 
(d) the Director of Extension Education; 
(e) the Director of Research; 
40 <I> the Head of one Department from eaeh college, to be select-
ed by the respective college. 
(4) The term of oftlce of the members specified in clause (f) of sub-
section (3) shall be two years. 

14 
CHAPTER IV 
COLlJ!:GES 
I'hecolletts• 24. (1) The following colleges shall be th~ constituent colleae. 01 
the Haryana Agricultural University, namely:-
(a) the College of Agriculture at Hissar; 
(b) the College of Veterinary Medicine at Hissar; 
(c) the College of Animal Sciences at Hissar; 
(d) the College of Basic Sciences and the HUmanities and such 
other colleges as may be established by the University after the 
5 
cpmmencement of this Actj and 10 
(e) such Central Government institutions of agricultural re-
search, technical and extension education in the State of Haryana as 
may desire to be int~grated as colleges of the Haryana Agricultural 
University. 
(2) The following colleges shall be the constituent colleges of the 15 
Punjab Agricultural University, namely:-
(a) the College of Agriculture at Ludhiana; 
(b) the College of Agricultural Engineering at Ludhiana; 
(c) the College of Basic Sciences and the Humanities at 
Ludhiana; 20 
(d) the College of Home Scienc~s at Ludhianll; 
(e) the College of Veterinary Medicine at Ludhiana; 
(I) the Agricultural College at Palampur and such other colleges 
as may be established by the University after the commencement of 
this Act; and 2S 
(q) such Central Government institutions of agricultural re-
search, technical and extens;on education in the State of Punjab as 
may desire to be integrated as colleges of the Punj.,b Agricultural 
University. 
(3) (a) There shall be a Board of Studies for each college ofa corres- 30 
ponding University and where there is more than one coPege in a branch 
of learning. there may be one Board I:'If Studies for all the eoneges in' that 
branch of learning. 
(h) The Deans of various colleges :,hall be thr Chairmen of the respec-
tive B01rds (If Studies and the Heads of Departments of the colleges shall 35 
he members thereof. 
(c) Where there is a Board of Studies for more than one college in a 
branch of learning, the Deans shall Act as Chairmen of the Board of 
Studies by rotation according to seniority for a period of one year each. 
(d) The ViCf>-ChanceHor may nO"'inate to the Board of Studies such 40 
other teachers of relat"d subject' or sciences from the same or other 
colleges, as he may deem tit. 

15 
(e) The duties of such Boards of Studies shall be to prescribe syllabi 
80 a8 to ensure integrated and weU-balancedlCOurses of study. 
(4) Every college shall comprise such Departments as may be pres-
cri~ and. each Dep~rtment.shall be assigned such subj~cJ;s of st~~ __ 
5 the~4r,ademic COuncil may deem fit. 
(5) There shall be a Head of each Department who shall be responsi. 
ble to the Dean. for resi~ent instp.1ction. to the Director Qf R~awA,. f~ 
research~ and to the.Di:rector of Extensioll.Ed\lcatioll, for: ex.tens~~.~~:. 
tion. 
10 (6) The Head of each Department shall be selected by the Vice-
Chancellor and, SP,PO'inted by him with the approval. of the Board. . 
(,~). The· duties; pGwers andlfunctions of the Heads oIl~ 
shall; be ,such I as.may. be prescribed. 
25. (1) Subject to ~ prDvisions, of· this 4ct, and. the ~~ 
IS Experiment Stations shall be established under each corresponding Uni-
versitt. which: shall be responsible for research, both. fundamentall aDd 
applied, and 1 research activities shall be concentmtedi as far. 88 poMlble, at-. 
the; Central' Research Stations. and) other Regional Research andt 'Pleating. 
Stations in the different agro-climatic zones of the State. 
20 (2) There shall be a Director of Research in each corresponding Uni-
versity. who shall be responsible tp the ~,i~hancellor and who shall 
be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor in consultation with the Deans and 
Wiith the approval of the Boucl: 
(3)} Th&: ~iJ!ector. a.f ~rch shaH· b~ a,.. who~tirQ:o~er tr~ fa 
2S Agri~lture 8Ad.:~I. injtiate, guide.and.c.o~~. tbe,l')e~ ~. 
gramme of the corresponding University and'i*"outl~g,l\lb.,lt,tions . 
IbpcrimCllt 
StatiOlll for 
research. 
., (~hIqrel~on,tp tpe ter-ritories to,which u.,fqnctia,na,Qf ~corres- Mric:u1tUr1l 
ponding University extend, such University shall be respon~.~ =:. 
(a.). the .gJ;iwltlU'~, extaQsiQn. functions whic4. ~ prbnarlly 
30 ed~tional in naturei and . 
(~), iJnParting trainiIlg. to the future ~~jon ~cers for the 
NlltiQIl411 ~tension Blocks and instructors for. the Ex.ten~ion ~n­
Ing Centres. 
~, All Exte~n, Speci~ists. in r~atio~ to any subject-Ill,tter., shall 
35 be the members of the stat! of· their re~tjv:e. s~bjec;t-mattel' aeqtjQns 
in each corresponding University and work in close co-ordination with 
the r>~partments of· Agriculture, Development and, Co-operatives. 
(3) 'nle Dil:ector of Extension EdJlca~on shall b~ a whQle-tim~ offtcer 
technically trained in agriculture and shall be appojnted by the Vlce-
40 Chancellor in consultation; wtith the; Deana: ani: with- the, IQ)~* of the 
Board. . 
(4~; The PJ,r.ectpr of·Extension EduoatJon shall. be lle8POll,ibJe, to the 
Vice-Chancellor and shall develop programmes for assi;ltbJiriAI;meqJ ~d 
housewives in applying results of scientific investigations to the solution 
45 of their proMems. 

• 
Retirement 
and other 
conditions 
ofaervicc. 
Provident 
fWld. 
Appointment 
of,a1aricd 
oflicCl'll. 
Tcmperary 
arranac-mcDta. 
Statutes. 
16 
CHAPTER V 
SERVICES 
27. The age of retirement and other conditions of service of every 
officer, teacher or other employee of a corresponding University shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 5 
28. Each corresponding University shall constitute gratuity and pro-
vident fund for the benefit of its officers, teachers and other employees in 
such manner, and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed. 
29. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the members of the 
technical staff of a corresponding University shall be selected by the 10 
Head of the Department in consultation with the members of the Depart-
ment concerned, recommended by the Dean or the Director of Research 
or the Director of Extension Education, as the case may be, and appointed 
by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board. 
SO. The Vice-Chancellor may, until such time as the authorities of the 15 
corresponding University are duly constituted, temporarily appoint any 
such officer of that University as such University is authorised by this 
Act W appoint. 
CHAPTER VI 
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS 
31. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes of a 
corresponding University may provide for any matter and shall, in par-
ticular, provide for the following:-
(a) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the 
20 
University; 25 
(b) the election, appointment, and continuance in office of the 
members of the authorities of the University and of the officers, 
teachers and other employees of the University including the filling 
up of vacancies and all other matters relating to these authorities and 
.ffieers, teachers and other employees for which it may be necessary 30 
or desirable to provide; 
(e) the designation, the manner of appointment, the powen, 
and the duties of the officers of the University; 
(d) the classification and the manner of appointment of teachen; 
(e) the constitution of gratuity or provident fund or both for the 35 
benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the University; 
(f) the institution of degrees and diplomas; 
(g) the conferment of honorary degrees; 
(h) the establishment, amalgamation, sub-division and abolition 
of Departments; 40 
(i) the establishment, and the abolition of hostels maintained by 
the University; 

u) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes; 
(k) the maintenance of a register of graduates; 
(1) the admission of students to the University and their enrol-
ment and continuance as such; 
S (m) the courses of study to be laid down for degrees and 
diplomas of the University; 
(n) the conditions under which students 'shall be admitted to the 
degree, diploma or other courses and the manner in which the exa-
minations are to be held and the eligibility for the award of degrees 
10 and diplomas; 
(0) the conditions of residence of the students of the University 
and the levy of fees for residence in hostels maintained by the Univer-
sity; 
(p) the recognition and supervfsion of hostels not maintained by 
. 15 the University; 
(q) the number, qualifications, emoluments, and other conditions 
of service of officers, teachers and other employees of the University 
and the preparation and the maintenance of record of their aervices 
and activities; 
20 (r) the fees which may be charged by the University; 
(s) the remuneration and allowances, including travelling and 
daily allowances, to be paid to persons employed on the business of 
University; 
(t) the conditions for the award of fellowships, scholarships, 
25 medals and prizes, stipends and fee concessions; 
(u) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be 
provided for by the Statutes. 
32. (1) The Statutes made by the existing University under section 30 
of the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961, and in force· immediately 
30 before the commencement of this Act shall, in so far as they are 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and subject to 
such adaptations and modifications as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government, be the first Statutes of a corresponding University. 
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statu-
35 tes and may amend or repeal the Statutes in the manner hereinafter 
provided in this section. 
(3) TIle Academic Council may propose to the Board the draft of 
Statutes and such draft shall be considered by the Board at its next 
meeting: 
4- Provided that the Academic Council shall not propose the draft of any 
Statute or any amendment of a Statute affecting the status, powers or 
c:o~titution of any allthority of the University until such authority bas 
been given an opportunity to express its opinion upon the proposal, and 
any opinion 80 expressed shall be considered by the Board. 
45 (4) The Board, may consider any such draft as is referred to in sub-
section (3) and pass the proposed Statute or reject or retum it to the 
StlllUtee 
bow mlCle. 

lS 
;~~ic eouhcll·for're.:.cOnsffieritlOn, either' in'whMe-6r'ih" part, togethet' 
with any amencimentlwhich it1 may su.ggest. 
(5) (a) Any member of the Boani:may pr.opGIIe :to tile Baald. the 
draft of any Statute and the Board may either accept or rt;ject the pro-
'pasar if 'It' relates to a matter not falling within the purview of, the Aca-:'5 
demic Council. 
{b) IDlcaae IIUeil1Himt relatescto 'S'matter withill<tAe:puPliewrDf the 
,A.demic CouncU,! the Board ,shall refer it ifbr' cOllsid.eration \ -. ,the Aca-
demic Council, which may either report to the Board .. that,tt :deles not 
approve the proposal, which, then, shall be deemed to have been rejected 10 
~lBoard or submit the draft to: the Board in Such' 'form Iis'the Acade-
1'Dte tC:::orincU' may 'approve,clIl'd ' the 'proViSions of this 'sectiOn Shan; apply 
in the case of the draft submitted by any member of the Board Jas they 
... J}P1y. in ,the case of a draft presented to the Board QY the Academic Coun-
, r.U. 115 
RIplItiOlll. ,.. \:(1) 'Any 'alttltOrity' 'df'. :~nespmKli!ig''Unlvemlfymay make Regu-
';tt1foils'conlMtentwith~this '!\ct ami 'the "Statutesifer-
'(a) laying down the procedure to be observed atits;meetlngs and 
the number of members required to form a quorum; 
(b) ,providing for all matters which by this Act and the Statutes 20 
aate tolbe provtdeci' £.or' by the "Regtilations; and 
(c) providing for any other matter selely concemifigittle-'autho-
,~y' andn.et ,provided for by this Act 'and the Statutes. 
(2) Every authority of the corresponding University shall make Regu-
r.J.a~ proViding fOr the' giving of'notit!e'to the' members of;luch autho- 25 
rity of the dates of meetings and of'titebusiness 'tolbe 'traDsaeted at' 
meetings and for keeping of records of the proceedings of .. the meetings. 
;~) 'lfte~ad4!ll\te ;CouncU'may,fsf1bj~t to '-\+lIe ';.f'fo¥iilens :J6f. l1be 
'8ta'&tltes,' make;;Regulations prOYidtng for courses of ·litUdy, sy81llem oN!Ka-, 
'm1rIatltMs,1Mid degrees 'an.d-diplomas, of a carrespomiirig"Ufdvei'ilty·'after 3 0 
'j.~ 1IMfts oftthe)iame','frGmthe'tBOard'6f!S~es"~. 
,,(4) The Academic Council may not alter a draft received from the 
"Boatd'Of'StUtlies,\but may reject or return Uto 'the 'Soard of ~tudies 
i16r Lttirther ccmSider~tion together with' the suggestlbns (;f"the 'Academic 
~ouncil. 
~~) 'Tlae',Board may direct the ,amendment,.in 811Chmanner,.88.1t •• ay 
tpeCify, of any Regulation made under this section or the annulment of 
any Regulation made under sub-section (1). 
3S 
l'(f) ''NotWftllAtaUding'Bnything , eoilttiiled 'lJnthis'Becti<m, Itbe JRega1a-
i\ifllfill,,'1Mi8.e 1'1;y"theexistfng·Univemty' tmder seetwn 31 6f.ithe JPUa3ab 0 
,~~t11ti1ul ~tJniversi'ty :AC!t, : 1961 and' in foree; immeliiately '''Igefb're' the 4 PlUljab Act 
commencement of this 'Act 'sball,inso 'farasthey'are'llet"UicOn.!ii!tent 32 or 1961. 
with the,provisions of this Aet and subject to such adaptations' and modi-
~flcations~aJmay be notified by the appropriate Govenunent, be the first 
Regulations of each corresponding University. 45 

" '19 
CHAPl'ERVII 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
.... (1), Each correSponding UniverSity shaU'"haveageneral ftmd to !:~= . 
• wb1cll Ihall be credited-
S '(a) 'income 'from fees, en\:lowm~ts and'granu andotrwulpreper-
ties of the University including Hostels, 'Experil'ntnt 'StatiOl'ls ad 
1FermI; 
(b) contributions and grants which may be made by' the ap-
propriate Government on such contiltions which It may impose; and 
10 (c) othercontrlbutions, grants, donations and benefactions. 
,(2) Each corresponding University shall constitute a Finance COM' 
mittee consiSting Of-
'(d) the Vice-Chancellor; 
(b) the Comptroller; 
l,S '(0) ·fl member chosen by the 'Board from amongst the ofticlal 
members; 
'(4) a member ,chosen, by the Board from amongst the. non-oftlcial 
'meblben. 
'(-8) '1be.powersandduties,of the FiDallce-Committee of"8 CCNftspond-
. 20'· ing-'Univerllity' shall be as follows:-
(a) to examine the annual accounts of theUnlverslty' an'd to ad-
vise the Board thereon; 
, (~) ) to ,examine the annual budget estimates and to advise the 
Board thereon; 
25 ',{c) ~to;l'ftiew,the' 'ftDandal:position.of.,the,University from time 
·tOitlme; 
,(d) to make recommendations to' the "t1nlverSity·O'n ·all matters 
relatfililg·-to the 'finances of the University; 
(e) to' make recommendations to ,the ,Board m -all proposals in-
volving expenditure for which no provision' has been made in the 
budget or which involves expenditure tnexcess 'Of the amoant pro-
v1ded~ in the budget. 
<.:' •. 
(4) The accounts and the balance-sheet sba11 be S'tlbmftted 'by the 
. Vice-Chancellor through the Board to the apprepriale> Government which 
9S'ShaU cause them to be audited by the Examiner,' Loeal'Ttmd Aceeunts. 
(5) The accounts,wben audited, shall be pi1nteti ami copies thereof 
together with audit report, shall be submitted by the'Vice-Chancellor to 
,the Board, 'which shall forward them to the appropriate, .Government 
,with such comments as it may deem fit and ,that Government shall 
40 cause a copy of the audited account.-; together withtts comments :tbereou 
to be laid before the State LegiSlature. 

DiVillon of 
al8Ctl aDd 
Uabilltill. 
20 
CHAPI'ER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
35. On the commencement of this Act, the assets and liabilities 
of the existing University shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University 5 
and shall be apportioned between such Universities in accordance with the 
following principles, namely:-
(a) (i) any asset of the existing University which is, immediately 
before the commencement of this Act, in the State of Haryana, 
and every right to such property, shall stand transferred to, and shall. 10 
vest in, the Haryana Agricultural University; 
(ii) every other asset and every right thereto shall stand transfer-
red to, and shall vest in, the Punjab Agricultural University; 
(b) (i) every liability of the existing University which is relatable 
to any unit or asset in the State of Haryana shall, if SUbsisting iIrone- IS 
diately before the commencement of this Act, be the liability 
of the Haryana Agricultural University; 
(ii) every other liability of the existing University, if subsisting 
on such commencement, shall be the liability of· the Punjab Agricul-
tural University; 20 
(c) the cash balances (whether in the form of cash, bank or secu-
I ity deposits) and reserve funds held by the existing University, 
immediately before the commenc.:?ment of this Act, shall, after 
deducting all the liabilities of the existing University up to such 
commencement, be apportioned between the Haryana Agricultural 25 
University and the Punjab Agricultural University in the ratio of 
40:60; 
(d) every contract made by the existing University before the 
commencement of this Act shall, if subsisting at such commencement, 
be deemed to have been made- 30 
(i) in the case of a contract which is relatable to any asset Qr 
unit of the existing University in the State of Haryana, by the 
Haryana Agricultural University; 
(ii) in any other case, by the Punjab Agricultural University; 
(~) every share, debenture, bond and other investment made by 3S 
the existing University shall be valued on the basis of average market 
value thereof during one year immediately before the commencement 
of this Act, and the value so determined shall be apportioned 
between the Har~ana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agri-
cultural University in the ratio of 40: 60; 40 
(1) every borrowing made by the existing University before the 
commencement of this Act shall, if the liability is subsisting 
on such commencement, be repaid together with the interest due 
thereon by the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab 
Agricultural University in the ratio of 40: 60; 45 
(g) the Provident Fund and accruals thereto' of every officei' or 
other employee of the eXisting University shall stand transferred to 
the corresponding University in which he has been posted on the date 
of the commencement of this Act. 

14 of 1947. 
:.' 
~. 
21 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "asset" shall be deemed 
to include all property, movable and immovable, rights, powers, autho-
rities and privileges, and all other rights and interests arising out of such 
property as were immediately before the commencement of this Act 
5 in the ownership, possession, power or control of the existing University, 
and all books of accounts, registers, records and all other documents of 
whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all 
obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the existing University. 
36. If, at the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other Upl 
10. proceeding of whatever nature is pending by or against the existing })rOCCediDp. 
University, the same shall not abate, 'be discontinued or be in any way 
prejudicially affected by reason of the dissolution of the existing Univer-
sity, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted 
or enforced by or against-
1$ (a) the Haryana Agricultural University, if it relates to any 
property or unit of the existing University in the State of Haryana; 
and 
(b) in any other case, the Punjab Agricultural University. 
37. (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 13, all officers and other 
20 employees of the existing University holding office as such immediately 
before the commencement <1f this Act shall, on such commence-
ment, ~become the officers or other employees of the corresponding Uni-
versity and such officers or other employees shall be divided between 
those Universities in accordance with the following principles, namely:-
25 (a) those officers or other employees of the existing University 
who are holding office in, or in connection with, any property or unit 
of the existing University in the State of Haryana shall become the 
officers or other employees of the HarYana Agricultural University; 
(b) every other oft1cer or other employee of the existing Univer-
30 sity, shall become the officer or other employee of the Punjab 
Agricultural University. 
(2) Every officer or other employee of the existing University shall. on 
and from the commencement of this Act, hold his office or service 
in the corresponding University on the same terms and conditions and 
35 with the same rights to pension, provident fund, gratuity and other matters 
as would have been admissible to him if the existing University had not 
been dissolved, and continue to do so unless and until his employment in 
the corresponding University is duly terminated or until his remuneration 
and terms or conditions of service are duly altered by the corresponding 
40 University. 
(3) For the persons who, immediately befOTe the commencement of 
this Act, were the trustees for pension, provident, gratuity or other like 
fund, constituted for the officers or other employees of the existing Uni-
versity, there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the appro-
45 priateGovernment may. by general or special order, specify. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, or any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the 
services of any officer or other employee from the existing University to 
a corresponding University shall not entitle such officer Or other employee 
50 to any compensation, whether under this Act or under any other 

MCIIlber-
ship of 
c:orre&POnd-
iDg Uni-
vefsity 
bodies. 
Annual 
JlepOrt. 
Construc-
tion of 
Jd'ermces 
to cxiatiD' 
University in 
any dOCU-
ment, etc. 
22 
law for the time being in force, and no such claim shall be entertained 
by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
38, (1), AlL casual vacancies among the members (other than ex 0tfici0 
members) of- any authority or body of each corresponding University shall' 
be tUle.d, as soon as possible" by the person or body who or which ap,p0int- S· 
ed or nQminated the member, whose place became vacant, and the pe'rson 
appointed, or nominated to a casual vacancy shan be a member of such 
authority or body for the remaining period of the term for which the 
persoa whose place he fills would. have been a member. 
(2) A person, who is a member of any authority of a correspondiDI'lo 
University as a representative of another body, whether of that. Univer-
sity or not, shall retain his seat. on that authority so long as he continuee 
to be a member of the body by which he was appointed or nomiDated 
and thereafter till his successor is duly appointed or elected. 
(3~· No .act, or Pfoceeding of. any authority or body, of a corresponding IS 
University shall be invalid by reason merely of the existence of any 
vacancy or defect in the constitution of such authority or body. 
(4), If, any question arises whether any person has been duly appoint-
ed as, or is entitled'to be, a member of any authority of' a correspondirrg 
University subordinate to the Board or whether any decision of the C01"P 30, 
respondmg University is in accordance with this Act and' ttIe Statutes, 
the question shall be referred to the appMpriate Government whose 
decision thereon shall be ftnal. 
38, (.1). 'Ihe Annual Report, of a corresponding University shall· be pre-
pared: under the, directions of the Vice-Chancellor and Rubmitted to, the 2S 
Board at least one month before the annual meeting at whichit is'to. be 
considered: . 
(2) The Board shall, after consideration of the Annual Report, forward 
a copy thereof to the appropriate Government. 
(3) On receipt of a copy of the Annual Rrport referred to in sub- 30 
se~tion (1" the appropriate Government shall cause a copy of. such Be-
port~ together with· its comments thereon, to be laid before the State~ 
Legislature • 
. (4) Notwithstanding the dissolution of the existing University, the 
Annual Report of- the existing University for the y.ear· 196~70 shall be 35 
prepared tmGet: the directj.on& at the Vice.-G:hancellof. Qf' th~Bunj;tb.~i,. 
cultural! liDi~ity' and the Boardr of that Universit!/'. slu\ll, after, c,OllSi~ 
deration of the Annual Report, forward a copy thereof to the app.rOQl'ia~ 
Government. 
CO; Any reference to the existing University in any law, other. than i 40 
this Act, or in any contract'Clr other instrument shall be conSltruedl-
(a.) if such reference relates tD any asset or, prope1ity" of the.. 
existing University in the State of Haryana, as a refer,ence t9 the 
Haryana, Agricultural Universiqr;. and 
(b) in any other case, as a reference to the Punjab Agricultural4S 
University. 

2J 
41. Any obligation incurred, before the commencement of this Act, 
by the existing University to confer any degree or other academic 
distinction on, or to issue any diploma or other certificate to, any person 
or to grant any copy of any degree, diploma, certificate, marks-sheet or 
5 other docwnent to any person shall, on such commencement, be the obli-
gation of the Punjab Agricultural University. 
42. In consider,u.on of:the:maintenance, by the Pun~ab Agricultural 
University, of a campus at Palampur, the Government of the Union terri-
tory of Himachal Pre,desb shall bear a portion ot the cost of the Punjab 
10 Agriqult~al University and the quantum of such cost shall be dettmnin-
ed by the Central Government having regard to the benefit derived by 
th~t Union territory. 
43. (1) If any dispute arises by reason of the dissolution of the existing 
University, such dispute shall be resolved in the first instance by 
IS the Vice-Chancellors of the corresponding Universities and in the event 
ot the failure of such Vice-Chancellors to arrive at an agreed solution 
with regard to any such dispute, the matter shall be referred to the Sec-
retary to the Government of India in the Ministry dealing with Agri-
culture Bnd the decision thereon of such Secretary shall be final. 
20 (2) 1(., on the establW,lment of a University in the Union t(;'r~~to..ry 
Q£ HiIna.chal Praqe@, any d.ispute arises with reg~rd to the asse~ or 
l.l4bUi~ perta\ni~ toth~ AiJ;'icultural College Ilt PaJ..empur or with 
r~1at4 to th.e tD,Wfe~ of tbe ofJi.cers or other emplo'y~.s. of S}.lch CPll.~ .. ~ 
.to, t~~ ,V,Nve.rs,ity esy.Q1;is,t1.~ iA th.~ Vnio.n. t,eo::itory ot. ijiQlac~l ~4~, 
~5 ,~~, 4i,$pute shall b~" resplv~ts i,n th~ ftisJ. iO/J~nc,e by the ,:Vice-C.,hance,llor 
of' the Punjab Agricultural 'University and the Chief SecretarY to tb~ 
Government of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh and in the event 
af their failure to arrive at an agreed solution with regard to any such 
.' I ~te,;~; 1D'~4;r shall be referred to the Secretary to t~,,~ent 
30 of India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture:,~ t!~r ~~.,'tf~~~e~:1!l 
of such Secretary shall be final. . ' 
t4. If any difficulty ariMl in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President may, by order, do anything, not inconsistent with 
..,., such provisions, which appears to him to be nece888ry or expedient for 
35 the purpose of removing the diftlculty: 
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry' ~f 
the period of two years from the commencement of this Act, 
Obli&atiou 
to be 
di&cbarp1 
bytbe 
Punjab 
Agricultural 
University. 
Proportion 
of COSt to 
be bOrne 
by the 
Govern-
ment of 
Himachal 
Pradesh. 
Settlement 
of unre-
,olved dis-
putes. -
Power to 
remove 
dfftlcultle •• 
4S. (1) The Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961, is hereby re- R.eDeIIt .nd 'lVi~, pealed. 
~o 01 J"'. 40 (2) The provisions of the General ClaUlel Act, 1897, shall apply to 
the repeal of the said Act as If the said Act were a Central Act. 
(3) The Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Ordinance, 
1970, is hereby repealed. 
(4) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
4S under the said OrdiJUUlCe shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding proviSions of this Acl 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 252 (1) of the Constitution lays down that if it appears to the 
Legislature of two or more States, to be desirable that any of the matters 
with respect to which Parliament has no power to make laws for the 
States except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should be regulated in 
such States by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are 
passed by, all the Houses of the Legislatures of these States, it shall be 
lawful for Parliament to pass an Act for regulating that matter accord-
ingly, and any Act so passed shall apply to such States and to any other 
State by which it is adopted afterwards by resolution passed in that 
behalf by the House, where there are two Houses, by each of the Houses 
of the Legislature of that State. On 11th February. 1968 and 21st April, 
1969 the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Haryana and Punjab 
respectively have passed resolutions in terms of article 252 of the Cons-
titution, authorising Parliament to enact suitable legislation for the dis-
solution of the Punjab Agricultural University and for the establishment 
of two separate Agricultural Universities-one for the State of Harylma 
and the other for the remaining area presently covered by the Punjab 
Agricultural University. The Bill seeks to give effect to this object and 
also provides for all other matters connected therewith or incidenta! 
thereto. 
NIlW DaIa; JAGJIV AN SAM. 
7'he 1"hP~1"JI1 11'10. 
, , 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BIll 
to provide for the establishment of two independent Agricultural Universities in place of 
the Punjab Agricultural University constituted by the Pun!ab Agricultural Univer-
sity Act, 1961, and for lnatters consequential on, or connected with, the establish-
ment of those in4ependent Agriculwr.al Universities. 
(Shri Ja,ji'lJan Ram, 
Minister Of Food and Agriculturl 
and Labour and Reha1n7itaticm.) 

Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Q)m'llUhity 
Devalopment & Co-operation, 
(Department of Agriculture) 
SUbj ect: - MEMORANDlM REGARDING DEI mATED LEGISlATION IN RESPECT OF 
THET.!ARi'AlI:A AND PUN.TAB AGRlC'JITURAI. UNIVERSITIES BILL, 1970 • 
•• • • • •• 
sub-clause (2) of clause 32 of the Haryana and Punjab 
Agricultural Universities Bill, 1970, read with clause 31 empowers 
the Board of Management of the Haryana 1\sricultural University and 
the Board of Management of the Punjab A.j;ricultural Uni'tsrsity to 
make statutes in respect of the followUg matters:-
(a) tht:J corlst1tuticn; powers and duties of the 
authorities of the UniverSity; 
(b) the election,., appointment; andoontinuance 
in office oft the members of the authorities 
of tho Vniversi toY and of the offlcers, 
teachers and other employees of the Uni~ersity 
inc1udirg the filling up of vacancies am all 
other matters relating to these authorities 
and officers, toaohers am other employees for 
which it may be nece·saary or desirable tc . 
provide; 
(c) the designaticn, the manner of appointlnant, the 
powers, and the duties of the ~officers of the 
University; 
(d) the cIassification and the •• ~er of. appointment 
of teachers; 
(e) tho constitution of gra~uity or provident fund 
or both for the benefit of officers, teachers 
and other employees of tre University; r 
(f) the institution of degrees and diplcmas; 
(g) the cord'ennent (If hooornt'ydegri::'es; 
(h)· the establishment, amalgamation, sub-division 
Ili'ld aboliti- n of Dcpartroect s; 
(i). the establishment, acd the abolition or hr)stels 
-rno.intained by the University; , , 
(J) tho instit~ion of fellowships, scholarships, 
medals uM prizes; 
(k) the maintenance of a register of graduates; 
..... 2/-

- 2 -
(1) the admission of students to the University am 
their enrolment am continuance as such; 
(m) the courses 0 f study to be laid down for degrees 
(n) 
and diplcmas of the University; . 
tho c~nditions urder which students shall be 
admitted to the degr~~, diploma or other c0urses 
and the. manner in which the examinaticns a.re to 
be hold and the eligibility for th'J r.ward r,f 
de~reesand diplomas; 
(0) the ccndi tions of residence of the students of 
the University and the levy of fees fer residence 
in hostels r.laintuined by the University; 
(p) the;, recognition and supervision of hostels not 
maintaiwd tv the University;., 
(q) the number, qualifications, emoluments, ani 
other conditions of service of officers, 
teachers am other employees of the University 
and the preparation and t~ maintenance of 
record of their services and activities; 
(r) the fees which may be charged by tl13 Universi ty; 
(s) the remunoration ani allowanc es, ,inc1lXiing 
travellirlg am daily allowances, to bo paid to 
persons employed en the business of University; 
(t) the conditions for tho award of fellowships, 
scholarships, medals and prizes, stipends and 
f'':''8 ccncessions; 
(u) all other matt~rs Which by this Bill are to be 
or may oe provided for by tho statutes. 
2. Clause 33 emp0wers tho Beard, the Academic Council, the 
Be-oro of Studies, or such othE'r authority as may be declared by 
tho ~tUtut8s to b0 an authority, of the Haryana Agricultural 
Univ.:::rsity or the Punjab Agricultural University to make Reg\}~ations 
for -
(6) laying down the procedure to be observed at itE;! 
mebting and the mlIlber of mE:lmbers required to 
furm a. quorum; 
(b) providing for ,0.11 matters which qy this dill am' 
'Statutos are to be provided for qy tho Regulations; 
..... 3/~ 

(0) providing for al:\Y other matter solely concerning 
the authr-ri ty and net provided for b:r this Bill 
and the statutes; 
(d) giving cf notioe 11:' the members of suoh authority 
of the dates of meetings and Qf the bUsiness to 
be transacted at mbetings am for k~eping of 
records of the proceedings cf the meetings; 
(e) providing for courses of st*, system ().f 
examinations and degraes and diplomas of the 
Universi ty after receiving drafts of the same 
from the Board of Studies. 
3. The mutters io respoct cf which statutes or Regw.s1"lons 
may be made are mdtters of detail or prooedure .... ith1n the scope of 
the general provisions of the Bill am it is not possible to provide 
them in the SW. The delegation of the legislative power is, 
therefore, of f ... llome.l dlaracter. 
New Delhi 
Dated 6.3.1970 
Sell .. 
(Annasaheb P.Shinde) 
Minister of State for Mini stry of Food, 
Agriculture, Cormnunlty Development & 
Co.operation. 