,alB No. as of I,SS. 
THE COMMANDERS-IN-CHIEF (CHANGE IN 
DBSIGNATION) BILL, 1955 
(As hmlODUC!'.D IN LoIC SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend certain enactments for the purpose of changing the desig-
nation of the Commanders-in-Chief oj the Armed Forces. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commanders-in-Chief (Change Short title 
in Designation) Act, 1955. :!ce~':~. 
j (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby amended Amendment 
to the extent and in the manner specified in the fourth column of certain 
thereof. enactment •• 
10 3. Any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Commander- ConstructioQ 
in-Chief of the regular Army, the Commander-in-Chief of the Indian of ~erencea 
Navy, and the Commander-in-Chief of the Air Force, in any law ~~I'8.;~­
for the time being in force, or in any instrument or other document, Chief in 
h Ch' enactments shall be construed as a reference to t e lef of the Army Staff, the or inatru-
IS Chief of the Naval Staff, and the Chief of the Air Staff respectively. menta. 

year No. 
I 2 
1881 XIII 
15134 XXXIV 
1948 XXXI 
15150 XLV 
1950 XLVI 
11M3 XXX 
THE SCHEDULE 
( Su section z ) 
Short title Amendments 
3 4 
The Fort William Act, In section 3. for the words 'The Com-
1881. mandcr-in-Chief, Indian Army'. the 
words 'The Chief of the Army Staff' 
shall be substituted. 
The Indian Navy (Dis- Throughout the Act, for the words 'the 
dpline) Act. 1934- Commandcr-in-Chief. Indian Navy', 
wherever they occur, the words 
'the Chief of the Naval Staff' shaD 
be substituted . .. . 
The National Cadet In sub-section (1) of sec:tion IZ. for 
Corps Act, 1948. clauses (,), <a and (I), the followiDa 
I clauses ahaD substituted. namely:-
I 
"(I) the Chief of the Army Staff, IX-
ofJit;W ; 
(f) the Chief of the Naval Staff, Ut-
I 
officio ; 
10 
1$ 
20 
I I 
(g) the Chief of the Air Staff, IX-
ofJi' , " laO. 
The Air Force Act, 1950 (I) In section 4. for clause (xifJ), the 
! 
j 
i 
The Army Act, 1950 
The Indian Military Nur-
sing Service Ordinance, 
1943· I 
followini clause shall be sub.tituted, 
namely:-
"(xifJ) 'Chief of the Air Staff' meana 
the officer commandina the 
Force ;". Air 
(z) Throughout the Act, unless other-
wise expressly provided, for the words 
'the Commander-in-Chief', wherever 
they occur. the words 'the Chief of the 
Air Staff' shall be substituted. 
(I) In section 3, for clause (iv~, the 
following clause shall be substituted, 
name&j-"(iv) , 'ef of the Army Staff' meana 
the officer commanding the reautar 
Army j". 
(2) Throughout the Act unles8 other-
wise expres8ly ~ded, for the words 
'the Comman er-in-Chief', y.rherever 
they occur, the words 'the Chief of the 
Army Staff' shall be SUbstituted, 
2S 
30' 
3$ 
40 
In sections 7 and II. for the words 4S 'Commander-in-Chief, Indian Army , 
the words 'Chief of the Army sid, 
,hall be sub.tituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under clause (2) of article 53 of the Constitution of India, the 
supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union vests in the 
President. In keeping with this provision of the Constitution, it 
has been decided that the practice of referring to the Service Chiefs 
of the Army, Navy and Air Farce as Commanders-in-Chief should 
be discontinued and that they should be designated as the Chief 
of the Army Staff, the Chief of the Naval Staff and the Chief of 
the Air Staff respectively. 
The Bill accordingly seeks to give effect to the above decision, 
firstly, by suitably amending certain enactments which contain 
references to the Commanders-in-Chief and, secondly, by providing 
for a rule of construction respecting references to Commanders-in-
Chief occurring in rules, orders, agreements and other instruments. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th April, 1955. 
K. N. KATJU. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to amend certain enactments for the purpose of changing the 
designation of the Commanders·in-Chief of the Armed Forces. 
(Dr. Ka,1as Nath Katju, 
Minister of Defence.) 