IIIU No. II of IP$I 
THE ESTATE DUTY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SAmIA) 

Bill No. 18 ef ,,,8 
THE ESTATEl.DUTY.(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHtA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Estate Duty Act, 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of. the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called th'e Estate Duty (Amendment) Act, Short title 
1958. ::n: .. 
S (2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1958. 
34 or 19'3· 2. In section 2 of the Estate Duty Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred AmendmeDt 
to as the principal Act),- olleC'ti.OIl a. 
(a) after clause (1), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
10 '(1A) "Appellate Controller" means a person appointed 
II of 1922. ,15 
to be an Appellate Controller of Est~te Duty under section 
4; 
(1B) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tri-
bunal appointed under section 5A of the Indian Income-tax 
Act, 1~22;'; 
(b) after clause (12), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(12A) "person accountable" or "accountable person" 
means the person accountable for estate duty within the 
mea.ing of this Act;'; 
(c) after clause (14), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:--
'(14A) "principal officer", in relation to a company or 
a corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial 

Amendment 
of eection 
4· 
Amendment 
of section 9. 
2 
Act, means the manager, m '.naging direclor, managing agent 
or secretary, and includes any person connected with the 
management of the company or corporation upon whom 
the Controller has served a notice of his intention of 
treating him as the principal officer for the purposes of this 5 
Act;'. 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(bb) Appellate Controllers of Estate Duty,"; 10 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(2A) The Central Government may appoint as many 
Appellate Controllers of Estate Duty as it thinks fit and they 
shall, subject to the control of the Board, perform their IS 
functions in respect of such estates or classes of estates or 
such areas as the Board may direct, and where such direc-
tions have assigned to two or more Appellate Controllers 
the same estate or classes of, estate or the same area, they 
shall perform their functions in accordance with any orders 20 
which the Board may make for the distribution and alloca-
tion of the work to be performed."; 
,(c) to sub-section (5), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that no such orders, instructions or directions 2S 
shall be given by the Board so as to interfere with the dis-
cretion of the Appellate Controller of Estate Duty in the 
exercise of his appellate functions.". 
t. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "two years", the words 30 
"five years" shall ,be substituted; 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply 
to- 35 
(a) gifts made in consideration ot marriage, sub-
ject to a maximum of,rupees ten thousand in value; 
(b) gifts which are proved to the satisfaction of the 
Controller to have been part of the normal expenditure 
of the deceased, subject to a maximum of rupees ten 40 
thousand in value.". 

1 ::If 1956. 
I of r956. 
If of 19ZZ. 
•• In section 10 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the worda Amen~ent . of seetlOD "two years", the words "five years" shall be substituted. 10. 
6. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the Amendment 
words "two years", in both the places where they occur, the words ~~.aectiOD 
5 "five years" shall be substituted. 
7. In section 12 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section Amen~ent 
(1), for the words "two years", the words "five years" shall be ~ seetlon 
substituted. 
8. In section 16 of the prmcipal Act, in clause (a) of sub-section Amendment 
10 (2), for the words "otherwise than for full consideration", the ~i secdOD 
words "notwithstanding that the disposition was made for full 
consideration" shall be substituted. 
9. In section 17 of the principal Act, in clause (vi) of sub-section Amenlf:meDt . of sec:non (4), for the word "even", the word "event" shall be substltuted. 17. . 
15 10. In section 18 of the principal Act, the Explanation shall be Amendment 
omitted. of section 18. 
20 
30 
35 
40 
11. In section 19 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "outside the territories ~~.8ection 
to which this Act extends", the words "outside India" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words and figures "section 
230 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913),' and "sec-
tion 129 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913,", the following 
words and figures shall respectively be substituted, namely:-
"section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956" and "section 
123 of the Companies Act, 1956,". 
12. In Part II, after section 20 of, the principal Act, the following Insertion, of 
section shall be inserted, namely:- ~:. sect10n 
"20A Where a company incorporated outside India which Duty aDd 
carries on busil!ess in India has beea treated for the purposes ~~=i:af 
of the Indian Income-tax .t\.ct, 1922, as resident for two out of inco!POd rI·!~ 
f h . ed' I outll e ...... the three completed assessments or t e years Imm late y in certain 
preceding the date of death of any member of or debenture case •. 
holder in the company, the company shall, within three months 
of the receipt of intimation of the death of the member or 
debenture holder, as the case may be, furnish to the Controller 
such particulars as may be prescribed in respect of the interest 
of the deceased in the company, and the company shall be 
accountable for the estate duty which shall be levied at the 
rates mentioned in Part II of the Second Schedule on the prin-
cipal value of the shares or debentures held by the deceased in 

Amendment 
df aection 
21. 
AmendmeDt 
rilleCtiOD 
22. 
AmendmeDt 
of Icction 
37· 
Amendment 
of lection 
33· 
the company except in cases where the deceased was a pefsOfl 
domiciled in India and the person accountable under any of the 
other provisions of this Act has obtained a certificate from the 
ControHer showing that either the estate duty in respect there-
of has been paid or will be paid or that none is due, as the 5 
'Case maybe.". 
n. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-"section (1), for the 
words "outside the territories to which this Act extends)' and "the 
said territories", wherever they occur, the words "outside India" 
and "India" shall respectively be substituted. 10 
14. In section 22 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "two years", the words "five years" shall 
be substituted; and 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted. 
15. In section 27 of the principal Act, for the word and figure 15 
"section 9" in both the p~aces where they occur, the words "this 
Act" shall be substituted. 
16. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) in clause (a), for the words "under a gift", the words 
"under one or more gifts" shall be substituted; 20 
(b) in clause (b), for th'e words "under a gift" and "two 
years", the words "under one or more gifts" and "five years" 
shall respectively be substituted; 
(c) in clause (k), for the words "rupees five thousand", the 
words "rupees ten thousand" shall be substituted. 25 
Substitution 17. For section 34 of the principal Act, the following section 
of Dew lee- shall be substituted, nan:ely:-tioIi·for 
1eCti00 u. 
Aurea.dOD. "34. (1) For the purpose of determining the estate duty to 
·be paid on any property.passing on the death of the deceased,-
(a) III property so passing other than property exempt- 30 
ed from estate duty under clauses (c), (d), (e), (i) and, 
(j) of sUb-section (1) of section 33; 
(b) agricultural land so 'passing, if any, situate in any 
State not specified in the First Schedule; and 
(c) in the case of property so passing which consists of 35 
a coparcenary interest in the joint family property of a 

f, 
a 
Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara, Maromakkat-
tayam or Aliyasantana law, also the interests in the joint 
family property of all the lineal descendants of the deceased 
member; 
shall be aggregated so as to form one estate and estate duty' 
shall be levied thereon at the rate or rates applicable in respect 
of the principal value thereof. 
(2) Where any such estate as is referred to in sub-sectioOl 
(1) includes any property exempt from estate duty, the- estate-
10 duty leviable on the property not so eX'empt shall be an amount 
bearing to the total amount of duty whic~ would have been. 
payable on the whole estate had no part of it been so exempt. 
the same proportion as the value of the property not so exempt 
bears to the value of the whole estate. 
15 ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this sub-sectIol1, "pro-
perty exempt from estate duty" means any property-
(i) which is exempt from estate duty under section 33; 
(ii) any agricultural land situate in any State not 
specified in the First Schedule; 
20 (iii) the interests of all coparceners other than the 
deceased in the joint family property of a Hindu family 
governed by the Mitakshara, Marumakkattayam or Aliya-
lantana law. 
(3) Notwithstanding anythin2 contained in sub-section (1, 
25 or sub-section (2), any property passing in which the deceased 
never had an interest. not bein2 a ri2ht or debt or benefit that 
is treated as property by virtue of the Explanations to clause 
(15) of section 2. shall not be aggregated with any property, 
but shall be an estate by itself. and tpe estate duty shall be 
30 levied at the rate or rates applicable in respect of the principal 
value thereat. 
(4) Every estate shall include _all income accrued upon the 
property included therein down to and outstan4ing at the date 
of the death of the deceased. 
35 (5) For the purposes of this section, no property shall bE' 
aggregated more than once nor shall estate duty in respect 
thereof be levied mot:e than once on the same death.". 

Amendment 
()f section 
35· 
Amendment 
of section 
47· 
Amendment 
of sect:on 
48. 
Amendment 
of section 
So. 
Insertion of 
new section 
soA. 
ReI:ef from 
estate dUlY 
where gift-
tax has 
been paid. 
Amendment 
of section 
53· 
18. In section 35 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) The rates of estate duty shall be as mentioned in 
the Second Schedule."; 5 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
19. In section 47 of the principal Act, for the words "out of the 
territories to which this Act extends" and the words "the said 
territories" wherever taey occur, the words "out of India" and 
"India" shall respectively be substituted. 10 
20. In section 48 of the principal Act, for the words "out of the 
territories tn which this Act extends", the words "out of India" 
shall be substituted. 
21. In section 50 of the principal Act, for the words "an amount 
which is equal to", the words "an amount which is equal to one-hal! 15 
of" shall be substituted. 
22. In Part VI, after section 50 of the principll Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
U50A. Where tax has been paid under the Gift-tax Act, 1958, 
in respect of a gift of any property and the property is also 20 
included in the estate of the donor as property passing under 
this Act, then, notwithstandmg anything contained in this Act, 
no duty shall be levied under this Act on any such property.". 
23. In section 53 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- 25 
"(3) Every person accountable for estate duty under this 
section shall, within six months of the death of the deceased, 
deliver to the Controller an account in the prescribed form and 
verified in the prescribed manner of all the prop~rties in respect 
of which estate duty is payabl,e: 30 
Provided that the Controller may extend the period of six 
months aforesaid on such terms which may incluae payment ~f 
interest as may be prescribed,". 

• 
7 of 1870. 
• 
• 
5 
7 
24. For sections 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64 and 65 of the 8fubatitution 
. 0 new sec-
principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, namely: - tions for sec-
tioDsS6 t065. 
"56. (1) In all cases in which a grant of representation 
applied for-
is Grant of 
representa-
tion, etc., 
• ~m~ 
(a) the executor of the deceased shall, to the best of made unless 
his knowledge and belief, specify in an appropriate account ~r:~~hed 
annexed to the affidavit of valuation filed in court under to the Con-
11 . . troller. 
section 19-1 of the Court-fees Act, 1870, a the property m 
respect of which estate duty is payable upon the death of 
the deceased and shall deliver a copy of the affidavit with 
the account to the Controller, and 
(b) no order entitling the applicant to the grant of re-
presentation shall be made upon his application until he has 
delivered the account prescribed in clause (a) and has pro-
duced a certificate from the Controller under sub-section (2) 
of section 57 or section 67 that the estate duty payable in 
respect of the property included in the account has been or 
will be paid, or that none is due, a!'; the case may be. 
(2) In all cases in which a grant of a succession certificate is 
~o applied for, a copy of the application shall be furnished by the 
applicant to the Controller and no order entitling the applicant 
to the grant of such a certificate shall be made upon his applica-
tion until he has produced a certificate from the Controller under 
sub-section (2) of section 57 or section 67 that the estate duty 
ZS payable in respect of the property mentioned in the application 
has been or will be paid, or that none is due, as the case may 
be . 
30 
3S 
57. (1) Estate Duty shall be due from the date of ·the death Power t .. 
.. . make pro-
of the deceased. and the Controller may, at any time after the visional 
receipt of account delivered. under section 53 ot section 56, :s~d:~~! 
proceed to make in a summary manner a provisional assessment of regular 
of the estate duty payable by the person delivering the account assess:neOi. 
on the basis of the account so delivered. 
(2) Upon delivery of the account under section 53 or section 
56, the person delivering it shall pay to the Controller, or furnish 
security to the satisfaction of the Controller for the payment of, 
the estate duty. if any, payable on th? provisional assessment 
made under sub-section (1), and the Contro'ler shall thereupon 
f!rant him a certificate that such duty has been or will be paid 
or that none is due, as the case may be. in respect of the pro-
perty mentioned in the certificate . 

ASlesament. 
Property 
OlC8piugU-
.-ment. 
8 
(3) After regular assessment has been made under section 
58 any amount paid towards the provisionaL assessment made 
under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been paid towards 
~ the regular assessment. 
(4) No appeal shall lie against a provisional assessment made S 
under sub-section (1), but nothing done or suffered by reason or in 
consequence of any such provisional assessment shall prejudice 
the determination on the merits of any issue which may arise 
in the course of the regular assessment under section 58. 
58. (1) If the Controller is satisfied without requiring the 10 
'presence of the person accountable that an account delivered 
under section 53 or section 56 is correct and complete, he shall 
assess the principal value of the estate of the deceased. and shall 
determine the amount payable as estate duty. 
(2) If the Controller is not so satisfied. he shall serve a notice J 5 
on the person accountable. either to attend in person at his office 
on a date to be specified in the notice. or to produce, or cause to 
be produced on that date, any evidence on which the person 
accountable may rely in support of his account. 
(3) The Controller, after hearin~ such evidence as the person 20 
accountable may produce and s'.lch other evidence as he may 
require on any specified points, shall, by order in writing, asses..; 
the' principal value of the estate of the deceased and determinC' 
the amount payable as estate duty. 
(4) In any case where no account has been delivered as re- 25 
quired by section 53 or section 56, or the person accountable faile; 
to comply with the terms of the notice served under sub-section 
(2), the Controller shall make the assessment to the best of hie; 
judgment and determine the amount payable as estate duty. 
59. If the Controller,-
'(a) has reason to believe that by reason of the omission 
30 
or failure on the part of the person accountable to submit 
an account of the estate of the deceased under section 53 
or section 56 or to disclose fully and truly all material facts 
necessary for assessment, any property chargeable to estate 35 
duty has escaped assessment by reason of under-valuation of 
the property included in the.account or of omission to include 
therein any property which ought tl') have been included OT of 
assessment at too Iowa rate or otherwise. or 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
9 
(b) has, in consequence of any information in his posses-
sion, reason to believe notwithstanding that there has not 
been such omission or failure as is referred to in clause (0.) 
that any property chargeable to estate duty has escaped 
assessment, whether by reason of undervaluation of the pro-
perty included in the account or of omission to include 
therein any property which ought to have been included, or 
of assessment at too Iowa rate or otherwise, 
he may at any time require the person accountable to submit an 
account as required under section 53 and may proceed to assess 
or re-assess such property as if the provisions of section 58 
applied thereto. 
60. (1) If ijle Controller, the Appellate Controller or the Penalty rM 
Appellate Tribunal, in the course of any proceedings under this coocealmad. 
Act, is satisfied that any person-
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the 
account of the property of the deceased which he is required 
to furnish under section 53, section 55, section 56 or section 5~ 
or has without reasonable cause failed to furnish it within 
the time allowed and in the manner required; or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with 
a notice under sub-section (2) of section 58; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of the property of the 
deceased or deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars 
thereof; or . 
(d) being a company referred to in section 20A, fails 
without reasonable cause, to pay the amount of estate duty 
due from the company under that section within the time 
specified in this behalf, 
30 he or it may, by order in writin" direct that-
35 
'2198 ~2. 
such person shall pay by way of penalty-
(i) in the case referred to in clause (a) or clause (d), 
in addition to the amount of the estate duty payable by 
him, a sum of rupees one thousand or a sum equal to 
double the amount of such duty, whichever is greater; 
and 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b) or clause (c), 
in addition to the amount of estate duty payable by 
him, a sum equal to double the amount of the estate 

Rectification 
of mistakes. 
:= orders of 
Controller. 
10 
duty, if ar,y, which would have.been avoided if the prin-
cipal value shown in the account of such person had 
been accepted as correct. 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless the 
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of 5 
being heard. 
61. At any time within five years from the date of any order 
passed by him or it, the Controller, the Appellate Controller, or 
the Appellate Tribunal may, on his or its own motion rectify any 
mistake apparent from the record and shall, within a like period 10 
rectify any such mistake which has been brought to the notic;e 
of the Controller, the Appellate Controller or the Appellate Tri~ 
bunal, as the case may be, by the person aCCfOuntable: 
Provided that no such rectification shall be made which has 
the effect of enhancing the estate duty payable unless the person 15 
accountable has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in the matter. 
62. (1) Any person-
(a) objecting-
(i) to any valuation made by the Controller, or 20 
(ii) to any order made by the Controller determining 
the estate duty payable under section 58 or section 59, 
or 
(iii) to any penalty levied by the Controller under 
section 60 or section 84, or 25 
(b) denying his liability to the amount of estate duty 
payable in respect of any property, 
may, within thirty days of the date of the receipt of the noticE' 
of demand under section 73, appeal to the Appellate Controller 
in the prescribed form which shall be verified in the prescribed 30 
manner. 
(2) The Appellate Controller may admit an appeal after 
the expiry oflthe thirty days referred to in sub-section (1) if he is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it 
within that period.' 35 
(3) The Appellate Controller shall fix a day and place fOT 
. the hearing of the appeal and may from time to time adjourn 
the hearing. 

11 
(4) The Appellate Controller may-
(a) at the hearing of an appeal, allow an appellant to 
go into any ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of 
appeal; • 
S (b) before disposing of an appeal, make such further 
inquiry as he thinks fit or cause further inquiry to be made 
by the Controller. 
(5) In disposing of an appeal, the Appellate Controller may 
pass such order as he thinks fit which may include an order 
10 enhancing the estate duty or penalty: 
Provided that no order enhancing the estate duty payable 
or penalty shall be made unless the person affected thereby has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
sucll enhancement. 
15 (6) The Appellate Controller shall, on the conclusion of the 
appeal, communicate the order passed by him to the appellant and 
to the Controller. 
63. (1) Any person accountable objecting to any order passed ~Pjf.:d. 
by an Appellate Controller under section 62, may appeal to the late ~bu­
Appellate Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which he:! =rer 
is served with notice of such order. of the Ap-pellate CoD-
(2) The Controller may, if he is not satisfied as to the correct- trOller. 
ness of any order passed by the Appellate Controller under sec-
tion 62, appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order and 
25 such appeal may be made at any time before the expiry of sixty 
days of the date on which the order is communicated to the 
Controller. 
(3) The Tribunal may adrr.it an appeal after the expiry. of 
the sixty days referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) if it is 
30 satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presentinQ It 
within that period. 
(4) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the 
prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner 
aJ'ld shall, except in the case of an appeal under sub-section (2) • 
• 3S be accompanied by a fee of rupees one hundred. 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to 
the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such order thereoc.n 

12 
as it thinks fit, and any such orders may include an order 
enhancing the estate duty payable or penalty: 
Provided that no order enhancing the estate duty payable or 
penalty shall be .made unless the person affected thereby has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause agai.nc;t 5 
such enhancement. 
(6) Where the appellant objects to the valuation of any 
property, the Appellate Tribunal may, and if the appellant so 
requires, shall refer the question of disputed value to the arbitra-
tion of two valuers, one of whom shall be nominated by the 10 
appellant and the other by the respondent, and the Tribunal 
shall, so far as that question is concerned, pass its orders under 
tub-section (5) conformably to the decision of the valuers: 
Provided that if there is a difference of opinion betwet:n the 
two valuers, the matter shall be referred to a third valuer ncmi- IS 
nated by agreement, or failing agreement, by the Appellate Tri-
bunal, and the decision of that valuer on the question of valua-
tion shall be final. 
(7) The costs of any arbitration proceeding under sub-c;ection 
(6) shall be borne by the Central Government or the pt'rson 20 
accountable, as the case may be, at whose instance the question 
was referred to the valuers: 
Provided that where the person accountable has been wholly 
or partially successful in any reference made at his instance, the 
extent to which the costs shall be borne by him shall bE' at ~he 25 
discretion of the Appellate Tribunal. 
(8) The valuers may, in disposing of any matter referred to 
them for arbitration under sub-~ection (6), hold or caus(' to be 
held such inquiry as they think fit, and after giving the appellant 
and the respondent an opportunity of being heard, PHC;S s1tch 30 
orders thereon as they think fit and shall send a copy ~f such 
order to the Appellate Tribunal. 
(9) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Tribunal 
under this section shall be forwarded to the person accountable 
and to the Controller. 35 
(10) Save as provided in section 64 any order passe::J by the 
Appellate Tribunal on appeal shall be final. 
(11) The provisions of sub-sedions (5), (7) and (8) of section 
5A of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, shall apply tc thE' Appel- II of I9:lZ. 
late Tribunal in the discharge of its functions under this Act as 40 

13 
they apply to it in the discharge of its functions under thlt 
Act. 
64. (1) Within ninety days of the date upon which he is Reference . bl to the Hilh served with an order under section 63, the person accounta ~ or Court. 
5 the Controller may present an application in the prescribed form 
and, where the application is by the person account.Jble. accom-
panied by a fee of one hundred rupees to the Appellate Tribunal 
requiring the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any 
question of law arising out of such order, and the Appellate 
10 Tribunal shall, if in its opinion a question of law arises out of 
such order, state the case for the opinion of the High Court. 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) may be admitted 
after the expiry of the period of ninety days aforesaid if the 
Appellate Tribunal is satisfied that there was suff.cient cause 
IS for not presenting it within the said period. 
(3) If, on an application made under sub-sectIOn (1), tbe 
Appellate Tribunal,-
(a) refuses to state a case on the ground that no question 
of law arises; or 
20 (b) rejects it on the ground that it is time-barred; 
the applicant may, within three months from the date on which 
he is served with a notice of refusal or rejection. 'lS the case 
may be, apply to the High Court, and the High CO.lrt .nay, if 
it is not satisfied with the correctness of the decision of the 
~S Appellate Tribunal, require the Appellate Tribunal to state the 
case to the High Court, and on receipt of such requisition the 
Appellate Tribunal shall state the case: 
Provided that. if in any case where the Appellate Tribunal 
has been required by a person accountable to stale a case the 
30 Appellate Tribunal refuses to do so on the ground tnat no ques-
tion of law arises, the person accountable may, within thirty 
days from the date on which he receives notice of refusal to 
state the case, withdraw the application, and if he does so, the fee 
paid by him under sub-section (1) shall be refunded to him. 
35 (4) The statement to the High Court shall set forth the 
facts, the determination of the Appellate Tribunal and the ques-
tion of law which arises out of the case. 
(5) If the High Court is not satisfied that the case as stated 
is sufficient to enable it to determine the question of law raised 
thereby, it may require the Appellate Tribun:ij, to make such 
modifications therein as it may direct. 

Appeal to 
the Supreme 
Court. 
14 
(6) The High Court. upon hearing any 5uch case, shall decide 
the question of law raised thereby. and in doing so, may, if it 
thinks fit, alter the form of the question of law and shall de'.iver 
judgment thereon cOlltaining the ground on which such decision 
is founded and shall send a copy of the judgment uJ'1der the l:it'al 5 
of the Court and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate 
Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall pass such orders 3S 
are necessary to dispose of the case conformably to such 
judgment. 
(7) Where the amount of any assessment is reduced as a 10 
result of any reference to the High Court, the amount, if any, 
over-paid as estate duty shall be refunded with such interest 
as the Controller may allow, unless the High Court, on intima-
tion being given by the Controller within thirty day:. of the 
receipt of the result of such reference that he intends to ask for 15 
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, makes an order authoric;-
ing the Controller to postpone payment of such refund until 
the disposal of the appeal in the Supreme Court. 
(8) The costs of any reference to the High Co~rt shall be 20 
in the discretion of the High Court. 
(9) Section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, :.hdll apply 9 of 1908. 
to an application to the High Court under this sectioll. 
(10) When a case has been stated to the High Court und"r 
this section, it shall be heard by a Bench of not le.;s than two 
Judges of the High Court and shall be decided in accordance 25 
with the opinion of such Judges or of the majority (If any) of 
such Judges: 
Provided that where there is no such majority, the Judges 
shall state the point of law upon which they differ, and the case 
shall then b~ heard upon that point only by one or more of the 30 
other Judges of the High Court, and such point shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority of the Judges who have 
heard the case, including those who first heard it. 
65. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any 
judgm~nt of the High Court de1iv~red on a case stated under 35 
section 64 in any case which the High Court certifies as a fit 
case for appeal to the Supreme Court . 
. (2) Where the judgment of tne High Court is varied or reverR-
ed on appeal under this section, effect shall be given to tile order 
of the Supreme Court in the manner provided in sub-section (6) 40 
of section 64. 

15 
(3) The High Court may, on application made to it for the 
execution of any order of the Supreme Court in respect of any 
costs awarded by it, transmit the order for execution to any 
court subordinate to the High Court.". 
S 25. For section 67 of the principal Act, the following section shall S':!bstitutioL 
. at new Bec-be substItuted, namely:-, tion for 
section 67. 
"67. Where the amount of estate duty determined by the Certificate of 
. paytnent of 
Controller as payable on an assessment made under section 58 estate duty. 
has been paid by the person accountable, the Controller shall, 
10 on application by that person, grant to him a certificate to that 
effect.". 
26. In section 70 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the Amen~ent 
words "eight" and "sixteen" the words "three" and "six" shall of section , 7Q· 
respec,tively be substituted. 
15 27. For section 73 of the principal Act, the following sections Substitutioc 
of new' 
20 
30 
35 
shall be substituted, namely: - sections for 
• section 73. 
"73. (1) When any estate duty, penalty or interest is due Notice of 
. d d d h' A h C 11 demand and 10 consequence of any or er passe un er t IS ct, t e ontro er recovery of 
shall serve upon the person accountable or other person liable dnatuty, pe-ty, etc. 
to pay such duty, penalty or interest a notice of demand in the 
prescribed form specifying the sum so payable and the time 
within which it shall be payable. 
(2) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of demand 
issued under sub-section (1) shall be paid within the time, at 
the place and to the person mentioned in the notice, or if no 
time is so mentioned, then on or before the first day of the 
second month following the date of service of the notice and 
any person accountable failing so to pay shall be deemed to be 
in default. 
(3) Where a person accountable has been assessed in respect 
of assets located in a country outside India, the laws of which 
prohibit or restrict the remittance of money to India, the 
Controller shall not treat the person accountable as in default in 
respect of that part of the estate duty which is attributable to 
the assets in that country, and shall continue to treat the person 
accountable as not in default in respect of that part of the duty 
until the prohibition or restriction of remittance is removed. 

16 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, 
where the person accountable has presented an appeal under 
section 62 the Controller may in his discretion treat the person 
accountable as not being in default as long as such appeal has 
not been disposed of. 
"' 
5 
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (lA), (2), (3), (4), 
(5), (SA), (6) and (7) of section 46 and section 47 of the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922, shall apply as if the said provisions were 
provisions of this Act and referred to estate duty (including 
estate duty provisionally assessed) and sums imposed by way 10 
of penalty or interest under this Act instead of to income-tax 
and sums imposed by way of penalty or interest under that 
Act and to Controller of Estate Duty instead of to Income-tax 
Officer. 
11 of 1922. 
Limitation 
for com-
mencing 
procecdiDgs 
for assess-
ment or re-
assessment. 
73A. No proceedings for the levy of any estate duty under 15 
this Act shall be commenced-
(a) in the cast! of 0. first assessment, after the expiration 
of five years from the date of death of the deceased in 
respect of whose property estate duty became payable; and 
(b) in the case of a re-assessment, after the expiration 20 
,of three years from the date of assessment of such property 
to estate duty under this Act.", 
AmendmeDt 28. In section 83 of the principal Act, for clause (b) of the 
of section Explanation, the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-83· 
'(b) "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil or 2~ 
attorney of any High Court and includes a pleader in practice.'. . 
Substitution 29. For section 84 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
of Dew sec- be substituted, namely:-tion for 
Section 84-
Companies 
to furnish 
particulars 
of deceased 
persons to 
the Con-
troller. 
"84. (1) Where a company within the meaning of the I of 1956. 
Companies Act, 1956, has knowledge through any of its principal 30 
officers of the death of any member of or debenture-holder in 
the company,-it shall, within three months of receipt of intimation 
of the death, furnish to the Controller such particulars as may 
be prescribed in respect of th~ interest of the deceased in the 
company; and it shall not be lawful for the company to register 3 
the transfer of any shares or debentures standing in the name 5 
of the deceased unless the transferee has acquired such shares or 
debentures for valuable consideration or a certificate from the 
Controller is produced before the company to the effect that, 

• 
• 
, 
5 
10 
17 
the estate duty in respect of such shares or debentures has been 
paid or will be paid or that none is due, as the case may be. 
(2) ·Where a corporation established by a Central, State or 
Provincial Act has knowledge through any of its principal 
officers of the death of any person who is a registered holder 
of stocks, shares or other securities in the corporation, it shall, 
within three months of the receipt of intimation of the death, 
furnish to the Controller such particulars as may be prescribed 
in respect of the interest of the deceased in the corporation. 
(3) Any company or corporation which without reasonable 
cause fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall 
be liable to pay a penalty of rupees one thousand.". 
30. In the principal Act, for the Second Schedule, the following Amendmeot 
Shd . ed of the c e ule shall be subsbtut ,namely: - Second 
"THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See sections 5, 20A and 35) 
RATES OF ESTATE DUTY 
PART I 
Schedule. 
In the case of any property which passes or is deemed to pass 
20 on the death of the deceased-
35 
2196 LSD-3. 
(I) On the first Rs. 50,000 of the principal value of the 
Rate of 
duty 
estate Nil. 
(2) On the next Rs. 50,000 of the principal·value of the 
estate 6 per cent. 
(3) On the next Rs. 50,000 of the principal value of the 
estate 8 per cent . 
(4fOn the next Rs. 50,000 of the principar""value of the 
estate • 10 per cent. 
(s) On the next Rs. 1,00,000 of the principal value of the 
estate . 12 per cent. 
(6) On the next Rs. 2,00,000 of the principal value of the 
estate . 15 per cent. 
(7) On the next Rs. 5,00,000 of the principal value of the 
estate . 20 per cent. 
(8) On the next Rs. 10,00,000 of the principal value of the 
estate . 25 per cent. 
(9) On the next Rs. 10,00,000 of the principal value of the 
estate . 30 per cent 
(10) On the next Rs. 20,00,000 of the principal value of the • 
estate . 35 per cent 
(II) On the balance of the principal value of the estate . 40 per cent: 

5 
Sa1':lap. 
10 
18 
PART II 
In the case of shares or debentures held by the deceased in any 
such company as is referred to in section 20A-
(I) If the principal value of the shares or de-
bentures does not exceed Rs. 5,000 . 
(2) If the principal value of the shares or 
Rate of duty 
Nil. 
debent~ exceeds RB. 5,000 71 per cent.". 
31. Nothing contained in section 24 shall affect-
(a) any appeal pending before the Board in respect of any 
order made by the Controller before the commencement of this 
Act; or 
(b) any right or remedy by way of appeal which has 
accrued to any person in respect of any order made by the 
Controller before such commencement; 
and any such appeal may be disposed of and further proceedings 
taken in relation thereto and any such right or remedy may be 
enforced. as if this Act had not been passed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill is to make certain amendments to the 
Estate Duty Act, 1953 (;34 of 1953) in the l~ht of the experience 
gained in the working of that Act since its coming into force on 15th 
Oetober, 1953. The main amendments are intended to restrict some 
of the concessions which in the light of subsequent experience do not 
appear to be justified. Other amendments have been proposed to 
clarify assessment procedure, to facilitate collection of duty and also 
to provide for two appellate authori.ties. These latter amendments 
seek to bring the provisions of the Estate Duty Act, 1953, into line 
with those of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, the Wealth-tax Act, 
1957, and the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957. 
2. The notes on clauses explain the object underlying each of the 
important amendments proposed in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; J. NEHRU. 
The 28th February. 1958. 

Notes on clauses 
ClaUse 2 defines "Appellate Controller", "Appellate Tribunal", 
"person accountable" and "principal officer". 
Clause 3 provides for inclusion of Appellate Controller of Estate 
Duty amongst the Estate Duty authorities and for his functions. 
C'Lause 4 amends section 9 by increasing-(a) from two years to 
five years the period before death during which gifts inter vivos 
become liable to estate duty, as recommended by the Taxation 
Enquiry Commission, and (b) the extent of relief admissible in the 
case of gifts in consideration of marriage or of gifts which are part 
of the normal expenditure. 
Clauses 5 to 7 are consequential upon the amendment proposed 
in clause 4. 
Clause 8 contains a clarificatory amendment. 
Clause 9 corrects a printing mistake. 
Clause 10 deletes the Explanation to section 18 defining "principal 
officer" as it is no longer necessary in view of the amendment pro-
posed in clause 2. 
Clause 11 substitutes "India" for the words "territories to which 
the Act extends" as the Act now extends to the whole of India. 
Clause 12 substantially reproduces the provisions of sub-section 
(1) of section 84 of the Act relating to companies incorporated outside 
India which carry on business in India and at the same time extends 
the liability for estate duty to debentures held by deceased persons 
in such companies. 
Clause 13 makes amendments similar to those in ~lause 11. 
Clause 14 contains an amendment similar to those in clauses 4(a). 
5, 6. and 7. The proviso is omitted as being redundant. 
Clause 15 contains a clarificatory amendment. 
Clause 16 contains amendments which are either consequential 
upon the amendment proposed in clause 4 (a), or are clarificatory. 
20 

21 
Clau.se 17 redrafts the provisions relating to aggregation for deter-
mining the rate of estate duty so as to bring under aggregation the 
interests in the joint family property of the lineal descendants of the 
deceased member as well. 
Clau.se 18 amends section 35 of the Act to do away with the 
provision for different exemption limits for the value of the 
deceased's interest in coparcenary property and for property of any 
other kind. 
Clauses 19 and 20 contain amendments similar to those in clause 11. 
Clause 21 seeks to restrict the relief admissible under section 50 
of the Act to one half of the court-fees paid. 
Clause 22 provides that no estate duty shall be paid in respect 
of property on which gift-tax has been levied. 
Clause 23 amends section 53 to provide for the levy of interest 
on the estate duty payable for non-submission of accounts within the 
time allowed. 
Clause 24 effects the following amendments:-
(i) the new section 56 makes grant of succession certificate 
also conditional on production of Controller's certificate as 
to payment of estate duty; 
(ii) the new section 57 provides for "provisional assessment"; 
(iii) the new section 58 provides for regular assessment; 
(iv) the new section 59 provides for assessment or re-assessment 
of property escaping assessment in the first instance; 
(v) the new section 60 incorporates the provisions of section 56 
of the Act and also provides for penalty for concealment 
generally; 
(vi) the new section 61 corresponds to section 62 of the Act; 
(vii) the new sectIon 62 amends section 63 of the Act and pro-
vides for appeals being filed in the first instance to the 
Appellate Controller of Estate Duty instead of to the 
Board as at present; 
(viii) the new section 63 provides for an appeal from the orders 
of the Appellate Controller to the Appellate Tribunal. The 
Appellate Tribunal is·-alSQ empowered to refer questions 
of disputed valuation to the arbitration of valuers; 

22 
(ix) the new section 64, redrafts section 64 of the Act and pr0-
vides for the Appellate Tribunal to refer questions of law 
to the, High Court at the instance of the person accountable 
or the Controller; 
\ (x) the new section 65 corresponds to section 65 of the Act. 
Clause 25 amends section 67 so as to confine it to certificates of 
payment of estate duty. 
Clause 26 reduces the number of permissible instalments for pay-
ment of estate duty in respect of immovable property from eight 
yearly or sixteen half-yearly instalments to three yearly or six half-
yearly ins~alments. 
Clause 27 makes th:? following amendments:-
(1) the new section 73 incorporates the provisions of sub-
section (2) of section 58 and also makes provisions for 
recovery of duty, penalty, etc., on lines similar to those in 
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922; 
(2) the new section 73A reproduces section 59 of the Act with 
the modification that no assessment shall be commenced 
after the expiration of five years from the date of death 
of the deceased and no re-assessment proceedings shall be 
commenced after the expiry of three years from the 
. completion of the original assessment. 
Clause 28 contains a clarificat,ory amendment. 
Clause 29 corresponds to sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 84 of 
the Act and also brings statutory corporations under its purview. 
Clause 30 amends the Second Schedule providing for uniformity 
In the exemption limit and in the rates applicable in all cases whether 
the estate consists of coparcenary property or property of any other 
kind. 
Clause 31 is a "saving'~ clause preserving the rights and remedies 
available to accountable persons under the existing provisions 
relating to appeals and the procedure regulating appeals. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to amend the Estate Duty Act, 1953. The Estate 
Duty Act is being administered by the officers of the Income-tax 
Department and only a few officers are employed exclusively on 
estate duty assessments. With the reduction of the exemption limit. 
the assessment work is bound to increase and it will be necessary 
to employ larger number of officers exclusively on estate duty work. 
Appeals against assessments, which under the existing Act, have to 
be filed before the Central Board of Revenue will hereafter be heard 
by the Appellate Controllers. It is therefore necessary to appoint 
Appellate Controllers as well. The increase of personnel, along 
with incidental expenses of administration, including payment of 
remuneration of valuers is estimated to cost Rs. 5 lakhs. 
I. VOLUME OF WORK 
By the reduction of the exemption limit to rupees fifty thousand. 
it is estimated that there will roughly be another 10,000 estates in a 
year which would become liable to estate duty. More Assistant 
Controllers have therefore to be appointed. To deal with appellate 
work it is proposed to appoint only one Appellate Controller for the 
present. Additional staff will be appointed as and when it is found 
really necessary. 
II. REQUIREMENT OF PERSONNEL AND FINANCE 
A. Officers. No. Cost Rs. 
No. of Appellate Con-
trollers 
No: of Assistant Control-
lers taking the average dis-
posal per Assistant Con-
troller per annum at 500 
B. Staff. 
No. of Inspectors 
No. of Head-clerks 
No. of U. D. Cs. 
No. of L. D. Cs. 
No. of stenographers 
No. of steno-typists 
I 
20 
10 
21 
42 
21 
I 
21 
23 
I X 2,000 X 12 = 
20 X 500 X 12 1,20,000 
10 X 250 X 12 30,000 
21 x 250 X 12 63,000 
42 x 150 X 12 75,600 
21 x 120 X 12 30,240 
I x 150 X 12 1,800 
21 x 140 x 12 -= 35,280 
3,79,920 
say 3,75,000 

C. Incidental expenses. 
Incidental expenses including 
Class IV staff, contingencies 
and payment of remunera-
tion to valuers estimated 
at . 
TOTAL • 5,00,000 
" 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Estate Duty Act, 1953. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article II7 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of. 
India, reconunended to the Lok Sabha, the introduction and 
consideration of the Bill. 
GMGJPD-LSI-219fj LS -4-3-SB-ao50 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri J(JfJJahar Lal Nehru, 
Minister of Finance.) 