55 of 1976. 
Bill No. 18 of Ita .e 
THE IRON ORE MINES AND MA.N,GANE&E ORE MINES 
LABOUR WELFARE CESS (AMENDMENT) SILL, 1982 
, A 
BILL 
to emend the Iron Ore Mines and MangcfJ.e8e, Or~ Mines Labour Welfare 
Cess Act, 1976. 
---.- " . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) Th:is Act may be called the Iron Ore Mfttes and Manganese Ore Short 
Mines Labour Welfare Cess (Amendment) Act, 1982. . title and 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
commen. 
cement. 
10 
may, by notification in the' ometal Gatette, appoint. 
Z. In the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare ADlend. 
Cess Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the prinCipal Act), in the long ~~t of 
title,- ~. 
(4) for the words' "and martganese ore", the words It, manganese' 
ore and chrome ore" shalt be substituted; 
(b) for the words "and manganese ore mines", the words 
", manganese ore mines and chrome ore mines" sJuill be SQb$titute<;l. 
title. • 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
1. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
2. 
An1end-
ment 01 
section 
a. I 
Amend. 
ment of 
, section 4 
2 
3. In section 1 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "and Manganese Ore Mines 
Labour Welfare", the words ", Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome 
qro Mines Labour Welfare" shall be substituted; 
'(b) in sub-section (3), in the provfso,- 5 
'" ' (i) after the words "only to manganese ore mines,", the 
words "or only to chrome ore mines," shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "and manganese, ore mines", the words 
", manganese ore mines and chrome ore mjnes" shall be substi-
tuted. 10 
f. 'In section 2 of the principal Act. for the words "and Manganese Ore 
Mines Lah:our Welfare" wher~ver they occur, the words ", Manganese 
Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare" shall De substitu-
ted. ~ - .. ."w "; ,., • 
. . 
5. In seCtion '3 of the principal Ad,- 15 
(a) In the openin~ portion, f~ the words "and Manganese Ore 
Mines Labour Welfare", the words ". ManganeBe Ore MInes and 
Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare", shall be substitUted; 
(lb) after cla1llle (H), and before the Explanation, the following 
elause shall be Inserted, namely:- 20 
"(iii) on aU chrome ore produced In any mine,-
(a) a duty of customs, where such chrome ore Is ex-
peeted; or •• 
(Ib) ,a duty of excise, where such chrome ore is sold or 
otherwise disposed of to the occupier of any mataIlurgical 25 
factory, or to any person who In turn sells it to a metallurgical 
fadory, oIr Is used by the owner of the mine In any 
metallurgical factory, 
at 'such rate not exceeding six rupees per metric tonne of chrome 
ore as the Central Government may, from time to time fix, by So 
notification In the OfHcial Gazette."; . 
(c) in the Explanatlon,-
(i)' after the word!'! "or manganese ore mine", the words "or 
chrome 0f4e mine"shall be inserted; 
. (ii) fair 'the words, brackets, letters and figures t'or sub-dause 35 
(Ib) of c1_se(ii), al the von ore or manganese orer, the word", 
brackets, letters and figures t'or sub-clause('b) of clanse (ii) 01' 
sub-clause ('b) of elBase (iii), all the iron ore or manganese ore 
or chrome ore," shall be substituted.. i' 
8. In secti(,n 4 of the prtndpal' Act,-
(n) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) after the wO!'ds "or manganese are", the words "or 
c}l "ome ore" 8~all be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "ss the case may be, manganese·ore", the 
" .rds "manganese ore, or chrome are, as the case may be," shall 45 
be substituted; ~. . , : 

LOK S.f..BbA 
to 
'l.HEa ThON c..aE. HINES k'lD l'UJ~vA;~ GLE ~ytlT::_S ~1!..60l.;l". \.h1.1'AlE 
C .... S~ (J>.i,Il;..J;[ :'ll:.N'!') bl.LL~ 1 ':;:,", 
(r9 bl;)/AS introduc';::d iL LOK' :'cblJ2i,) 
1 • Page 2) l..l.nes 22 and 23:,-
2. Page 2~ l.lne 25,-
!21:. "matallur!:;,ical" ~ "metaJ..lurglcal ll 
read " all II 
-
4-. Page 4, lin€1 from bottom,-
'f.Q!. lIcon~ideraion" 
. 
r.ead "consideration" 
5. Page 8, in the r.larginal heading to section 3,-
for "etc." ,£ead, "ore." 
Narch 8, 1,82 

5 
.. " 
i 
'w 
a 
,(b) in sub-section (2)",-
'(i) in the opening portion and in clause (a), after the words 
"or manganese ore", the words "or chrome ore" sh$11 be in-
serted; 
(ii) 'in clause (b), after the words "or manganese ore mine", 
the words "or chrome ore mine" and aiter the words "iron ore 
or manganese ore", the words "or chrome ore" shall be in-
serted. 
7. In section 6 of the principal Act, after the words "or manganese Amend. 
10 ore", the words "or chrome ore" shall be inserted. ment of section 
6. 
8. In section 7 of the principal Act, after the words "or a manganese Amend. 
ore mine", the words "or a chrome ore mine" shall be inserted. ment ot 
section 
7. 
9. In section 8 of the principal Act, after the words "or manganese ore 
mine" in both the places where they occur, the words "or chrome ore 
15 mihe" shall be !inserted. 
Amend-
mentot. 
section 8. 
!20 
10. In section 9 of the principal Act, after the words "or a manganese Amend. 
ore mine", the words "or a chrome ore mine" shall be inserted. ment of 
seCtion 
, ,. 
I" 
11. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(a) in clause (c), after the words "or manganese ore", the words 
"or chrome ore" shall be inserted; 
(b) in clause (d), after the words "or manganese ore mine", the 
wordS "or chrome ore mme" shall be inserted. 
9. 
Amend. 
ment ot 
section 
14. 

, 
STATBMENTOF OBlECTS AND UASONS 
This Bill seeks to amend the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines 
LaboUr Welfare Cess Act, 19'tGr to provide for the levy of a. C8SS on all 
chrome ore which is produced in any mine and which is either exported 
or sold or oth8rwise disposed. of to the occupier of 'any metallurgical 
factory OJ' used by the owner of the mine in any metallurgical factory. 
In case of chrome ore which is exported, lhe cess will be by way of a 
duty of customs and in other cilies it will be by way of a duty of excIse. 
2. The object o~ the proposed cess is to secure the funds necessaryt 
for financing of activities to promote the welfare of worken employed in 
chrome ore mines. 
3. The proceeds of the proposed cess, after deducting therefrom the 
cost of collection and after due appropriation, would be credited to the 
Fund under' the Iron Ore Mines and ~nganese Ore' Mines Labour Wel-
fare Fund Act, 1976, and a separate Bill for this purpose, "namely, the 
Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund (Amend-
ment) Bill, 1982, seeks to make the necessary provisions for converting 
the said Fund in~ a jolint fund for the welfare' o! the workers in iron 
ore mines and manganese ore mines and also chrome ore mines. 
NEW Dam; 
The 25th February, 1982. BHAGWAT JHA AZAD. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER ARTICLE 
117 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. M. 15011/4/78-M. IV, dated the 2nd March, 1982 
from 8hri Bhagwat Jha Azad, Minister of State of the Ministry of 
Labour to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
above Bill to amend the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore MInes 
Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1976, has recommended under article 117(1) 
of the Constitution, the introduction in and under article 117 (3) of the 
Constitution, the consideraion by Lok Sabha, of the said Bill. 

FINANOIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill. seeks to amend section 3 of. the Iron Ore Mina 
and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act. 1976 to provi~ for 
the levy and collection as a cess of a duty of customs or a du~y of excis, 
at a ra.te not . exceeding six rupees per metric tonne of chrome ore. 
However, for the present the cess is proposed to be levied at the rate of 
three rupees per tonne of chrome ore, and thereby to generate funds to 
the extent of nine lakbs of rupees annually . 
• 2. The metallurgical factOl'ies an4 .. chemical refractory industries con-
sumingchrome ore. will collect the· cess levied by way of a duty of 
excise from the owners of chrome ore mines and will pay the amount 
60 collected to the Central Government. The Customs Department will 
be responsible for the collection of the cess levied by way of a duty o~ 
customs on all exp.orts of chrome ore. The total cost of collection is 
not likely to exceed half a per cent. of the amounts collected by way of 
cess. On the assumption that the total collection of the c~, both by we.y 
of duties of excise and customs, will be of the order' of nine la.kbs .of 
rupees per year, the cost of collection is not likely to exceed Rs. 4500/- per 
year. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure, whether of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature. 
3. It may incidentally be mentioned that section 3 of the Iron Ore Mines 
and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1976 &:I proposed 
to be amended by the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund (Amendment) Bill, 1982 envisages that' the proceeds ot 
the aforementioned cess shall, after deducting tlte cost of collection and 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in that behalf, be 
credited to the Iron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore 
Mines Labour Welfare Fund under ~t legislation The Iron Ore Mines 
and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Bi1l, 1982 
is complementary to the present Bill and the machinery under the Iron 
Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1976 is 
proposed to be utilised for the purposes of the said cess on chrome ore, 

mMORANDUM REGA1U>1NG DJi:L1tGATED LEGISLATION' 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section6.of the Iron Ore Mines 
and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1976 to empower 
the Central Government, to exempt by notification in the Official Gazette, 
any metallurgical factory or class of metallurgical factories from all or 
any of the provisions of that Act, subject to such exceptions and modifi-
cations as may be specified in the notification, if the Central Government 
is of the opinion that in respect of such metallurgical factories or class 
_ of metallurgical factories, the levy of the duty of custolUl or the duty 
of excise on chrome ore is disproportionate to the cost of collection of 
such duty of customs or duty of excise from such metallurgical faCtory or 
class of metallurgical factories. As the clause specifies clear guidelines 
. for issuing such notification, the delegation of legislative power is of 
a normal character; 
2. Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend clauses (c) and (d) of sub-
section (2) of section 14 of the Act to empower the Central Government 
to make rules with respect to the period within which the person selling 
or otherwise disposing of chrome ore to the occupier of a metallurgical 
factory shall p'ay the duty of excise to such occupier under sub-section (2) 
of'section 4 and with respect to the period within which the owner of a 
chrome are mine shall pay the duty of -excise to the Central Government 
under sub-section (3) of seetion 4 of the Act. The above matters with 
respect to' which rules may be made 'Ire ~atters of procedure or detail. 
The deiegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
, 

1" 
. ANNEXURE 
EXTRAC'l'S FROM: TRZ IRON 9u MINEs AND MANGANESE Qu Mnn:I 
LABoUR WELFARE CESS ACT, 1976 
(55 or 1976) 
• • • · , • . 
An Act to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on iron ore and 
manganese ore for the financing of activities to proQ'lote the welfare 
of persons employed in the iron ore mines and manganese ore' mines 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Short 
Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1976. title, 
• • • • • • 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates. 
may be appointed' for different states: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, apply in the first instance the provisions of this Act, only 
to iron ore mines, or only to manganese ore mines, in a State with effect 
from such date as may be specified in the notification, and if that 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may 
extend this Act to all iron ore mines and manganese ore mines in that 
State "with effect from such date as may be Specified in the notification 
published in the Oftlcial Gazette. 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
extent 
and 
commen.. 
cement. J 
Deftni. 
tions. 
(a) "export" means taking out of India to· a place outside India; 
(b) "Fund" means the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore I 
Mines Labour Welfare Fund formed under section 3 of the Iron 
Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 
.. 1976; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
(2) Words and expressio~ used. but not defined in this Act and 
defined in the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare 
Fund .Act, 1976, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them 
in that Act. .. , ~ ,I , 
:, '1 

'Levy and 
collection 
of cess 
on irctl 
ore and 
manea-
nese etc. 
. ,Payment 
of duty of 
customs 
and dUty 
of excise, 
8 
3. With e-ffect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
-notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall he levied and 
collected as a cess for the purposes of the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese 
Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1976-
(i) on all iron ore produeed in any mine,-
(d) a duty of customs, 'where such iron ore 1& exported; or 
(b) a duty of excise, where such iron ore is sold or other-
wise disposed of to the OfCup'ler of any metallurgical factory, 
or to any person who in turn sells it to a metallurgical factory, 
• or is" used ~y the owne' of the mint in any metaillurgical factory, 
at such rate not exceeding one rupee per metric tonne of iron ore 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, fix by notification 
in the Officlal Gazette; 
(ii) on aU manganese ore produced in any mine,---
" «(I) a 4uty of customs, where such manganese ore is 
exported; or 
(b) a >dut:" of e~~.:where such manp:Rttese ore fi; sold or 
otHerwise dispo~tjf to the occupier ~ any metalfurgical 
, factory, or to anv ~rs()n who i~ ttlm sells it to a metallurgical 
factory, or is used by the owner of the mine in any metallurgical 
factory, 
at streh rate not exceedtn~ sIx rupees per metric tonfte' of man~8-
nese ore 8S the Cenb-al Government may, from time'to time, fix by 
Tlotifiration in the Offichll Gs;o:ette. 
E.-rn~allat{~,.-Whe1'P. Hie OWl'el:' of Anv tTM'l ot'e mine or man~ane!;e 
ore ?J\'ne ~!'; 91so the n'!f'l1P!el' nf It metallut"PIcal f~cl:ol'V. then. for the 
nut'OOl'les of sl11j-dAu~e (b) of dause '(i) or sub-cl"uCle (b) of clau~p. (ii), 
311 the iron OT'e OT' maTtJtallese o"e. R!! the case moayhe. 'PT'oduceti 'n the 
mtne J\nd not sold OT' nthet"Wi!-"~ di!';'PO"led of to thp. occunier of aTlV otber 
metnl1ur/t;~1 facltl'Y'V 0" to anv other nel'Sdn ~hall M tieemed, unl~s the 
contra~ is provE'd to have been used bV such ownet:' for his own metal-
lmrie:!l factory. 
4, (1) Every dutv /'If ('ustoms leviable under thir. Act on IUlV iron ore' 
or 1'TU'Tl~l'1~ ore c;h~ll he payablf" to the Centr81 Government by the 
person by whom the iron ore or, as the case may he" manganese ore is 
exported. 
(2) Eve"dll~r of e~ciRe leviab1e untier this Act on any iron ore ()1." 
man/t"iYl~se ore :qhall be payable-
(tt) to thp occupiel' of the metallurgical fa('torv Dv the J)eI'!lon 
bv whom $Uch iron ore or ml\nganese ore k sold Or otherwise dis-
posed of to sll~h occupier, 
(h) tn t.he ee"h"al G6verttJ'l1e11t. by the' 0WT1et' Of tht'!' iron ore 
mh,p. or manJ!tlnefllp. Mf" mine w~e nle iron or~ or mim~.mtse OT'P 
is uqad by INch owner in any mf"tallurgical factory, 
Within mlt:'h period a~ mav be presctibed, ., 

9 
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Oentral 
Government is of opinion that in respect of any metallurgical factory 
or class of metallurgical factories the levy of the duty of customs or 
duty of excise on iron ore or manganese ore under this Act is dispro-
portionate to the cost of collection of such duty: of customs or duty of 
excise from such metallurgical factory or class of metallurgical factories, 
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such excep-
tions and mOdifications as may be specifi~ in the said notification, 
exempt such metallurgical factory or class of metallurgIcal factories from . 
all or arty of the provisions of this Act. 
7. If any occupier of a factory or any owner of an iron ore mine or 
a manganese ore mine fails to pay any amount payable by him to the 
Central Government under section 4 within the period prescribed there-
under, such occupier or owner l as the case may be, shall be liable to pay 
simple interest at twelve per cent. per annum on the amount to be paid 
from the date on. which such payment is due. till such amount is actually 
paid. , . 
8. If any duty of excise payable by the occupier of the metallurgical 
factory QI' the owner of the iron ore mine or manganese ore mine to 
the Central Government under section 4 is not paid to that Govemment 
within the period prescribed thereunder, it shall be deemed to be in 
arrears and the authority: prescribed in this behalf may, after such 
inquiry as it deems fit, impose on the occupier of the metallurgical factory 
or, as the case may be, on ~he owner of the iron are mine or manganese 
ore mine a penalty not exceeding the amount of duty of excis~ in 
arrears: 
Provided that before imposing any such penalty such occupier Or such 
owner, as the case may be, shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard and, if after such hearing the said authority is satisfied that 
the default was f()r any good and su~cient reason, no penalty shall ~ 
imposed under this section. . 
Power 01 
Central 
Govern .. 
"mem to 
exempt. 
Interest 
payable 
byoccu-
piers ot 
fadorie. 
and 
O~II 
of mines. 
Penalty 
'lor nOll-
payment 
of duty 
ot excise 
within the 
prescribeci 
period. 
9. Any amount due under this Act (including the interest or penalty, 
If any, payable under section 7 or section 8, as the case may! be) from 
any bccupier of a metallurgical factory or any owner of an iron ore· 
mine or a manganese ore mine may be recovered. by. the Central Gov-
ernment in the same manner as. an arrear of land revenue . 
Recovery 
olamo. 
unts due 
under 
tbeAc:t. 
• 
11&. (1) • 
• • • • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregOing power, such rules may provide for-
• • • • • 
• (c) the period within which the person selling or otherwise 
dIsposing of the iron ore or manganese ore to the occupier of the 
metallurgical factory shall pay the duty of excise to such occupier 
under sub-section (Z) of section 4' , 
(d) . the period within which' the owner of the iron ore mfne or' 
manganese ore mine shall ~ay the duty of excise to the Central 
Government under. sub-section (2) of section 4; . 
• • • • 
Power to 
make 
rulu. 

WK SABHA 
A 
BU,L 
.. 
to amend the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare Cess Act, 1976. 
(Shri Bhagwat lha Azad, 
. Minister oj State 
. of the Ministn'y of Labour). 
• 