1
THE FOREST CONSERVATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SHRIKANT  E. SHINDE , M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest Conservation Act, 1980.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Forest Conservation (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), for clause (iv), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No. 18 of 2019
69 of 1980.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
"(iv) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be cleared of trees, plants,
saplings or shrubs which have either grown naturally or sown or planted by sentient
human beings by way of any public drive or private initiative, as the case may be, in
that land or portion, for the purpose of using it for reafforestation.".
3. In section 3A of the principal Act, for the words "simple imprisonment for a period
which may extend to fifteen days", the words "imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend upto five years and with five years and with fine
which shall not be less than rupees five thousand but which may extend upto rupees five
lakh" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 3.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has eighteen per cent. of the world population inhibiting it; in just two per cent. of
the world's land surface area. We are the second most populous, youngest and fastest
growing developing economy in the world. With increased urbanization and a rapid push
than ever before towards infrastructural and industrial development, it does not have (neither
did it have ever) a lot of scope for forestation. No doubt, that despite having a central Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980, it has not been able to expand its green cover in pace with its
increasing population. Although we have observed a marginal rise of 0.21 per cent. in the
area under forest between 2015 and 2017, (according to the biennial India State of Forest
Report-SFR 2017) we are still far behind getting India to have thirty three per cent. of its
surface area under forest cover. It has been a long standing goal since 1988, three decades
for now. the world is becoming a carbon-envelope with the passage of time and India is no
exception to it. Out of top twenty most polluted cities in the world, fourteen are in India. It is
an alarming trend and the need of focusing on planting more trees at a war level is the only
solution we have at present. A humongous task lies ahead and it is not possible only with
natural causes. This means the Union or the State Government's responsibility not only ends
with conservation but also plantation. Human and scientific intervention is a must and like
any other aspect of development, man-made forestation should also be considered at the
Central level. Although there are various campaigns and drives already existent and the
Government at various levels have been successful in implementation of these drives also.
However such drives cannot be completed only with plantation. The planted herbage needs
to be preserved as well. Since it wasn't on the priority of the Government like other areas of
development ever before, Central laws were liberal enough to a greater extent for the offenders
to get away with. Hence, the need is to induce the idea of man-made forest in the parent Act
and bring accountability and increase penalty and liability of/to the offenders.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT E. SHINDE
November 29, 2018.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) ACT, 1980.
[69 OF 1980]
* * * * * * *
2. * * * * *
* * * * *
(iv) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be cleared of trees which have
grown naturally in that land or portion, for the purpose of using it for reafforestation.
* * * * * * *
3A. Whoever contravenes or abets the contravention of any of the provisions of
Section 2, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a period which may extend to
fifteen days.
* * * * * * *
Restriction on
the
dereservation
of forests or
use of forest
land for non-
forest
purpose.
Penalty for
contravention
of the
provisions of
the Act.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest Conservation Act, 1980.
————
(Dr. Shrikant E. Shinde, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3196LS(S3)—31-01-2019.