AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA*

Bill No. 18 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

By

‘Suri G.M. BaNatwatta, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

| it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:
1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In article 19 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after sub-clause (2), the following
lause shall be added, namely:

3. Article 39A of the Constitution shall be omitted.

4. After Part VI of the Constitution, the following Part and articles thereunder shall
namely:

1
। 89 00 १॥

Short title.

Amendment of
article 19.

Omission of
article 394.

Insertion of
new Part VIA.


Equal justice
and free legal
aid,

Disposal of

Procedure on
expiration of
mandatory pe-
riod for cases,
ete.

Disposal of
cases etc. after
mandatory pe-
riod.

Cases or mat-
ters pending on
the date of com-
inginto force of
this 4०.

Rules of
Courts,

Annual Report
‘on operation of
this part.

Interpretation.

2
“PART VIA
JUDICIAL PROCESS

237A. The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice,
on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular provide free legal aid, by suitable
legislation or scheme or in any other form, to insure that opportunities for securing justice
are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.

237B.All cases or matters filed before the Supreme Court shall be decided or resolved
within twenty-four months from the date of submission before the Supreme Court, and,
unless reduced by the Supreme Court, within twelve months in case of High Court and
within six months in case of a tribunal, district judge or any quasi-judicial or administrative
body.

237C. Upon the expiration of the Period within which a case or matter had to be
decided or resolved, a certificate to this effect signed by the presiding authority before
whom the case or matter was filed, shall forthwith be issued and a copy thereof attached to
the record of the case or matter, and served on the parties and that certificate shall state why
a decision or resolution has not been rendered or issued within the said period.

237D. Notwithstanding the expiration of the applicable mandatory period, the court
or the quasi-judicial or administrative body as the case may be shall decide or vecolve or
otherwise dispose of the case or matters submitted for determination without further delay.

237E. All cases or matters pending or continuing before judicial, quasi-judicial or
administrative bodies on the date of coming into force of this Act shall be deemed to have
been submitted for decision or resolution on the date of coming into force of the Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 2000 and shall accordingly be disposed of within the mandatory period
in accordance with the Provisions of article 237B and other articles in this Part,

2378. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the Supreme
Court may from time to time, with the approval of the President, make rules as to the
Procedure and proceedings in any judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative body within its
jurisdiction for the enforcement of the right under sub-clause (h) of clause (1) of article 19
including—

(a) rules as to when a case or matter shall be deemed submitted for decision or
resolution;

(b) rules as to the speedy disposal of the case or matter after the expiry of the
applicable mandatory period.

(2) The provisions of clause (1) shall apply to High Courts with respect to judicial,
quasi-judicial or administrative bodies in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, with the
Substitution of references to the High Courts, the State Legislatures and the Governors for
references to the Supreme Court, the Parliament and the President, as the ease may be.

237G. The Supreme Court shall submit to the President an annual report on the op-
eration of this Part, and the President shall cause all such Teports to be laid before each
House of Parliament, and sent to the Government of the States for being laid before each
House of the State Legislatures,

237H. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression “District
Judge” has the same meaning as in Chapter VI of Part VI.

20

25

30

35


——

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Judicial delays and backlog of cases in courts have assumed frightening proportion.
It erodes the whole foundation of justice and lead to an almost denial of justice to the
aggrieved. The unscrupulous find in judicial delays a means to evade justice. Unhealthy
and questionable practices sprout up for redressal of grievances outside the legal system.
The entire social atmosphere is vitiated.

It is imperative that citizens have fundamental right to speedy disposition of their
cases. The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution to recognise this right and to provide for a
mandatory period for disposal of all cases. The Constitution of the Republic of the
Philippines provides for such a mandatory period (Article VIII section 15) pursuant to the
guarantee in its Article III, section 16 for speedy disposition of cases filed before judicial,
quasi-judicial or administrative bodies.

Article 39A of our Constitution, contained among the Directive Principles of State
Policy, gives a direction to the Government to secure that the operation of the legal system
promotes justice to all. The Bill seeks to make the article enforceable by law through its
inclusion in the proposed new Part VIA.

The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution accordingly.

New Detut; G.M. BANATWALLA
February 2, 2000.


MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Supreme Court and the High Courts to make rules
to carry out the purposes of the Bill.

The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

. . . .
19. * . * * .
(1) All citizens shall have the right—

(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
* . * . .

(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business.

* * * * *

39A. The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice,
a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable

ion or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice
not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.

Protection of
certain rights
regarding free-
dom of speech,
etc,

Equal Justice
and free leg
aid.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, MP)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—3491LS—18-2-2000.