1
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
DR. T HOKCHOM M EINYA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in section 197, sub-sections (2), (3) and
(3A) shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  18  of  2017
Amendment
of section 197.
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Violence against women in disturbed areas often goes unnoticed due to impunity
provided to armed forces under the provision of extraordinary laws of the country. This
contradicts with the fundamental right enshrined in article 21(A) which relates to protection
of life and personal liberty. Based on the unequal power structures in the society, women are
discriminated against and are vulnerable. This contradicts with fundamental rights mentioned
in Article 15 which pertain to prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste,
sex or place of birth.
The provision of international humanitarian laws suggest that women shall be treated
with all the regard (Article 12 of first and second Geneva Convention of 1949 and Article 14
of third Geneva Convention of 1949).
The most comprehensive international laws for the basic human rights is the 1974
United Nations General Assembly Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children in
Emergencies and Armed Conflicts, which recognized “the need to provide special protection
of women and children belonging to the civilian population” for they are “too often the
victims of inhuman acts and consequently suffer serious harm”. It prohibited “all forms of
repression and cruel and inhuman treatment of women and children, including imprisonment,
torture, shooting, mass arrests, collective punishment, destruction of dwellings and forcible
eviction”; and condemned attacks and bombings on the civilian population and called for
respect of basic human rights and humanitarian law in all cases.
The 1993 Declaration against Violence against Women adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly signified an important step in defining violence against women as “any
act of gender based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or mental
harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation
of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life”. This definition comprises not only
violence committed by the general community and by family members, but by the State too.
It also recognized in its preamble that women in situations of armed conflict are especially
vulnerable to violence.
The Resolution on Women, Peace and Security 1325 adopted by the United Nations
Security Council in 2000 requested the inclusion of women in peace building and peacekeeping
operations and decision-making bodies. It also called for the respect of human rights of
women and urged the States to refrain from granting impunity to people who have committed
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, including those relating to sexual violence
against women.
The increase in number of such crimes has been a matter of grave concern for the
society and requires to be addressed urgently.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for protection of individual liberty, right to life,
equality before law and prevention of victimization, prohibition of impunity to military
personnels under the grab of extraordinary laws for the lives of vulnerable women in disturbed
areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; THOKCHOM MEINYA
November 18, 2016.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
Section 197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants.
* * * * *
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by
any member of the Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of
sub-section (2) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the Forces charged
with the maintenance of public order as may be specified therein, wherever they may be
serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section will apply as if for the expression
“Central Government” occurring therein, the expression “State Government” were substituted.
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 3), no court shall take
cognizance of any offence, alleged to have been committed by any member of the Forces
charged with the maintenance of public order in a State while acting or purporting to act in
the discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proclamation issued under
clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except with the previous
sanction of the Central Government.
* * * * *
* * * * *
Prosecution
of Judges and
public
servants.

4
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
————
(Dr. Thokchom Meinya, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4058LS(S3)—03.02.2017.