Bill No. 18-F of 2010
THE ENERGY CONSERV ATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK  SABHA  ON  4 TH MAY,  2010
RAJYA SABHA ON 17TH AUGUST, 2010)

1
THE  ENERGY CONSERV ATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to amend the Energy Conservation Act, 2001.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Energy Conservation (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2. In section 2 of the Energy Conservation Act, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(i) in clause ( a), for the words “an auditor possessing qualifications specified
under”, the words “an energy auditor accredited in accordance with the provisions of”
shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words and figures “established under section 30”, the
words and figures “referred to in section 30” shall be substituted;
Short title.
Amendment
of section 2.
52 of 2001.
Bill No. 18-F of 2010

2
(iii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(c) “building” means any structure or erection or part of structure or
erection after the rules relating to energy conservation building codes have
been notified under clause ( p) of section 14 and clause ( a) of section 15 and
includes any existing structure or erection or part of structure or erection, which
is having  a connected load of 100 Kilowatt (kW) or contract demand of
120 Kilo- volt  Ampere (kVA) and above and is used or intended to be used for
commercial purposes;’;
(iv) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ma) “energy savings certificate” means any energy savings certificate
issued to the designated consumers under sub-section ( 1) of section 14A;
(maa) “equipment or appliance” means any equipment or appliance which
consumes, generates, transmits or supplies energy and includes any device that
consumes any form of energy and produces a desired work;’.
3. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “three years”, the
words “five years” shall be substituted.
4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “The Central
Government”, the words “The Bureau” shall be substituted.
5. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) recommend to the Central Government for issuing of the energy
savings certificate under section 14A;”;
(ii) for clause (p), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(p) specify, by regulations, the qualifications, criteria and conditions
subject to which a person may be accredited as an energy auditor and the
procedure for such accreditation;”;
(iii) in clause (r), for the words “energy managers”, the words “energy auditors
and energy managers” shall be substituted;
(iv) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(sa) conduct examination for capacity building and strengthening of
services in the field of energy conservation including certification of energy
managers and energy auditors.”.
6. In section 14 of the principal Act,—
 (i) in clause ( c), for the proviso, the following provisos shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided that no notification prohibiting manufacture or sale or purchase
or import of equipment or appliance shall be issued within a period of six months
from the date of notification issued under clause (a) of this section:
Provided further that the Central Government may, having regard to the
market share and the technological development having impact on equipment or
appliance, and for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the said period of six
months referred to in the first proviso by a further period not exceeding six
months;”;
(ii) in clause (e), for the words “any user or class of users of energy as a designated
consumer”, the words “any user or class of users of energy in the energy intensive
industries and other establishments as specified in the Schedule as a designated
consumer” shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 14.

3
(iii) in clause (m), for the words “energy managers”, the words “energy auditors
and energy managers” shall be substituted;
(iv) in clause (o), for the words “such form and manner”,  the words “such form,
the time within which and the manner” shall be substituted.
7. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“14A. (1) The Central Government may issue the energy savings certificate to
the designated consumer whose energy consumption is less than the prescribed norms
and standards in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed.
(2) The designated consumer whose energy consumption is more than the
prescribed norms and standards shall be entitled to purchase the energy savings
certificate to comply with the prescribed norms and standards.
14B. The Central Government may, in consultation with the Bureau, prescribe
the value of per metric ton of oil equivalent of energy consumed for the purposes of
this Act.”.
8. In section 26 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) the words, brackets and letter “or clause (n)” shall be omitted;
(ii) for the words “ten thousand rupees”, the words “ten lakh rupees”
shall be substituted;
(iii) for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words “ten thousand
rupees” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) If any person fails to comply with the provisions of clause ( n) of
section 14, he shall be liable to a penalty which shall not exceed ten lakh rupees
and, in the case of continuing failure, with an additional penalty which shall not
be less than the price of every metric ton of oil equivalent of energy, prescribed
under this Act, that is in excess of the prescribed norms.”.
9. For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“30. The Appellate T ribunal established under section 110 of the Electricity
 Act, 2003 shall, without prejudice to the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, be the
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and hear appeals against the orders of
the adjudicating officer or the Central Government or the State Government or any
other authority under this Act.”.
10. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“31A. The provisions of sections 120 to 123 (both inclusive ) of the Electricity
Act, 2003 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the Appellate Tribunal in the discharge of
its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the discharge of its function under the
Electricity Act, 2003.”.
Insertion of
new sections
14A and 14B.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue energy
savings
certificate.
Power of
Central
Government
to specify
value of
energy.
Amendment
of section 26.
Substitution of
new section
for section 30.
Appellate
Tribunal.36 of 2003.
Insertion of
new section
31A.
Procedure and
powers of
Appellate
Tribunal.
36 of 2003.

4
11. Sections 32 to 43 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
12. In section 54 of the principal Act, the words “Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal
or the Members of the Appellate Tribunal or officers or employees of the Appellate Tribunal
or the Members of the State Commission or the” shall be omitted.
13. In section 56 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (j), for the words “energy managers”, the words “energy auditors
and energy managers” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-clause (l), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(la) prescribing the procedure for issuing the energy savings certificate
under sub-section (1) of section 14A;
(laa) the value of per metric ton of oil equivalent of energy consumed
under section 14B;”;
(iii) clauses (s), (t) and (u) shall be omitted.
14. In section 58 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(f) the qualifications, criteria and conditions subject to which a person
may be accredited as an energy auditor and the procedure for such accreditation
under clause (p) of sub-section (2) of section 13;”;
(b) in clause (h), for the words “energy managers”, the words “energy auditors
and energy managers” shall be substituted.
15. In the Schedule to the principal Act, in the heading, the words “specified as
designated consumers” shall be omitted.
16. The enactment specified in the Schedule to this Act shall be amended in the
manner specified therein.
Omission of
sections 32 to
43.
Amendment
of section 54.
Amendment
of section 56.
Amendment
of section 58.
Amendment
of the
Schedule.
Amendment
of certain
enactment.

THE  SCHEDULE
(See section 16)
AMENDMENT TO THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
(36 OF 2003)
In section 110, for the words “under this Act”, the words  “under this Act or any other
law for the time being in force” shall be substituted.
————
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
Dated the Chairman.
————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.
Amendment of
section 110.
5

A
BILL
to amend the Energy Conservation Act, 2001.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—4028RS(S4)—18-08-2010.