= ३900 ४00

[As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 18 of 2002

‘THE FREE EDUCATION (FOR CHILDREN OF PARENTS LIVING
BELOW POVERTY LINE) BILL, 2002
By
‘Suri SuSHILKUMAR SHINDE, M.P.
k
BILL

to provide for free education and other incentives to the children of parents living
below poverty line and for masters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the Free Education (for Children of Parents Living
Below Poverty Line) Act, 2002.

(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(“appropriate Government” means the State Government in respect of 2
State and the Central Government in all other cases;

(ii) “Board” means the Board constituted under section 3;
(ii) “child” means the child born of parents living below poverty line;

Short title, extent
and commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Constitution of
Board,

Appointment of
Designated
Authority.

Power to make
rules.

2

(iv) “Designated Authority” means the Authority constituted under
section 4;

(¥) “Parents living below poverty line” means all such parents whose
income from all sources is less than rupees one thousand and five hundred per
mensem; and

(vi) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Board at State level to

supervise the functioning of the Designated Authority in each district constituted
under section 4 and in particular.—

(i) to lay down guidelines to identify and register children born of parents
living below poverty line in the area to be covered under the scheme of this Act;

(ii) to ensure that sufficient number of schools are set up in each district ~

to the children within walking distance from their residence.
iii) to determine and revise the rate of incentive payable to the children

and to ensure that the incentive is adequate enough to encourage the children
to attend the school.

(2 The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such number of other members,

as may be determined by the appropriate Government.

4. (J) There shall be constituted an authority to be known as ‘Designated

Authority’ in cach district to be appointed by the appropriate Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.

(2) The Designated Authority shall perform the following functions, namiely:—

(a) to maintain a register of all children;

(0) to ensure that every cligible child is enrolled as a student and attends
school maintained by the Government or local authority in the area;

(c) to ensure that every child is paid an incentive for attending school, at
such rate, as may be fixed by the Board constituted under section 3;

(d) to provide text books, stationery and uniform free of cost to every child
admitted in a school; and

(6) to perform any other function assigned to it from time to time by the
Board to carry out the purposes of this Act.
5. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,

make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

15

|

25

30


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Over forty percent of the country's population still lives below poverty line
even fifty-five years after independence. Most of them cannot afford to send their
children to school, and are often forced to send them for wages, and even for alms.
Tools are given to the hands which deserve toys.

The inclusion of ‘right to education’ in Fundamental Right is not enough to
move the children from place of their work to school.

The Government of Maharashtra have tried to attract these children from work-
place to schools, by paying them a little pocket money every day. This incentive
worked well and proved successful in diverting them from workplace to schools and
reducing drop-outs.

It is, therefore, proposed to provide for proper incentive to the children of parents
living below poverty line, every day they attend the school. ‘'his would not only
promote education among the poor people living below poverty line but also would
reduce the school drop-outs to a large extent.

New Dent, SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE
February 24, 2002.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Board at the State level to
supervise the functioning of Designated Authority in every district.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Designated Authority to enrol
every eligible child of parents living below poverty line in school.

‘The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. Itis estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakh is
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

‘Anon recurring expenditure of about rupees one crores also likely o be involved



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill, The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



A
BILL

to provide for free education and other incentives to the children of parents living
> below poverty line and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Sushilkumar Shinde, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5427LS—1 1-03-2002.