1
THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2)  It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day of April, 1997.
2. In the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 2, for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(e) “employee” means any person (other than an apprentice) who is employed
for wages, whether the terms of such employment are express or implied, in any kind
of work, manual or otherwise, in or in connection with the work of a factory, mine,
oilfield, plantation, port, railway company, shop or other establishment, to which this
Act applies, but does not include any such person who holds a post under the Central
Government or a State Government and is governed by any other Act or by any rules
providing for payment of gratuity;’.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
39 of 1972.
Bill No. 18 of 2009
AS TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
10
5

2
3.  After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“13A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of
any court, for the period between the 3rd day of April, 1997 and the date on which the
Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 2009, receives the assent of the President, the
gratuity shall be payable to an employee in pursuance of the notification of the
Government of India in the Ministry of Labour and Employment vide number S.O.1080,
dated the 3rd day of April, 1997 and the said notification shall be valid and shall be
deemed always to have been valid as if this Act, as amended by the Payment of
Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 2009 had been in force at all material times and the gratuity
shall be payable accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall extend, or be construed to
extend, to affect any person with any punishment or penalty whatsoever by reason of
the non-payment by him of the gratuity during the period specified in this section
which shall become due in pursuance of the said notification.”.
Insertion of
new section
13A.
Validation of
payment of
gratuity.
5
10

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 provides for payment of gratuity to employees
engaged in factories, mines, oilfields, plantations, ports, railway companies, shops or other
establishment and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Section 1(3)(c) of
the said Act empowers the Central Government to apply the provisions of the said Act by
notification in the Official Gazette to such other establishments or class of establishments in
which ten or more employees are employed, or were employed, on any day preceding twelve
months. Accordingly, the Central Government had extended the provisions of the said Act to
the educational institutions employing ten or more persons by notification of the Government
of India in the Ministry of Labour and Employment vide number S.O. 1080, dated the
3rd April, 1997.
2. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in its judgment in Civil Appeal No. 6369 of 2001 dated
the 13th January, 2004, in Ahmedabad Pvt. Primary Teachers’ Association vs. Administrative
Officer and others 
[AIR 2004 Supreme Court 1426] has held that if it is extended to cover in
the definition of ‘employee’, all kinds of employees, it could have as well used such wide
language as is contained in section 2(f) of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952 which defines ‘employee’ to mean any person who is employed for
wages in any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in connection with the work of an
establishment. It has been held that non-use of such wide language in the definition of
‘employee’ reinforces the conclusion that teachers are clearly not covered in the said definition.
3. Keeping in view the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is proposed to
widen the definition of ‘employee’ in order to extend the benefit of gratuity to the teachers.
Accordingly, the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Bill, 2007 was introduced in Lok Sabha
on the 26th November, 2007 and the same was referred to the Standing Committee on Labour
which made certain recommendations. After examining those recommendations, it has been
decided to give effect to the amendment retrospectively with effect from the 3rd April, 1997,
the date on which the provisions of the said Act were made applicable to educational
institutions.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; OSCAR  FERNANDES.
The  11th February, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause (e) of section 2 of the Payment of Gratuity
Act, 1972 to bring teachers of the educational institutions within the provisions of the said
Act for the purpose of payment of gratuity. It is the responsibility of the employer to pay
gratuity to his employees. The employees of the Central Government and State Governments
are not covered by the said Act. However, in respect of teachers employed by institutions
aided by the Central Government, the liability on employers may involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. The exact expenditure to be incurred on this account cannot
be estimated at this stage.
2. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring and non-recurring
expenditure.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE  PAYMENT  OF  GRATUITY  ACT, 1972
(39 OF 1972)
*****
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
*****
(e) “employee” means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on wages
in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantations, port, railway company or
shop, to do any skilled, semi-skilled, or un-skilled, manual, supervisory, technical or
clerical work, whether the terms of such employment are express or implied and whether
or not such person is employed in a managerial or administrative capacity, but does
not include any such person who holds a post under the Central Government or a State
Government and is governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment
of gratuity;
*****
Definitions.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of State for Labour and Employment)
GMGIPMRND—1003LS(S5)—20-02-2009.