As tronucep my Lok SABHA

Bili No. 18 of 2003

THE ELECTION AND OTHER RELATED LAWS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2003
A
BLL

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the Companies
Act, 1956 and the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—.

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1. This Act may be called the Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment)
Act, 2003.
CHAPTER Tl
. AMENDMENTS OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE Act, 1951
3 of 1951. 2. After section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereafter in this

10 Chapter referred to as the principal Act), the following séctions shall be inserted, namely:—

f lof 1956. 1299, Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, every political party
है may accept any amount of contribution voluntarily offered to it by any person or
company other than a Government company:

Provided that no political party shall be eligible to accept any contribution from
any foreign source defined under clause (०) of section 2 of the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976.”

6

Short title.

Insertion of
new sections
298 and 29C.
Political parties
entitled to ac-
cept contribu-
tion.


Dectaration of
donation re-
ceived by the
political par-
ties.

Insertion of
new section
398.
Allocation of
equitable
sharing of
time.

oo 2

xplanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 29C,—

(a) "company" means a company as defined in section 3;

(b) "Government company" means a company within the meaning of .

section 617; and

(०) "contribution" has the meaning assigned to it under section 293A, of
the Companies Act, 1956 and inciudes any donation or subscription offered by
any person to a political party; and है

(a) "person" has the meaning assigned to.it under clause (37) of section 2
of the Income-tax Act, 1961, but does not include Government company, local
authority and every artificial juridical person wholly or partially funded by the
Government,

29C. (1} The treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the
political party in this behalf shall, in each financial year, prepare a report in respect of
the following, namely:—

(a) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by
- such political party from any person in that financial year;

(6) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by
such political party from companies other than Government companies in that
financial year,

(2) The report under sub-section (7) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.

(3) The report for a financial year under sub-section (7) shall be submitted by the
treasurer ofa political party or any other person authorised by the political party in this
behalf before the due date for furnishing a return of its income of that financial year
under section 139 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 to the Election Commission.

(4) Where the treasurer of any political party or any other person authorised by
the political party in this behalf fails to submit a report under sub-section (3), then,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961, such political party
shall not be entitled to any tax relief under that Act.’.

3. Afier section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:—

'39A. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the tithe
being in force, the Election Commission shall, on the basis of the past performance of
a recognised political party, during elections, allocate equitable sharing of time on
the cable television network and other electronic media in such manner as may be
prescribed to display or propagate any election matter or to address public in connec-
tion with an election,

(2) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub-section (J), in respect
of an election, shail be made after the publication of list of contesting candidates
under section 38 for the election and shall be valid till forty-eight hours before the
hour. fixed for poll for such election,

(3) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub-section (J) shall be
binding on all political parties concerned,

(4) The Election Commission may, for the purpases of this section, make code
of conduct for cable operators and electronic media and the cable operators and every
person managing or responsible for the management of the electronic media shall
abide by such code of conduct.



floss) Act, 1295,',

4, In section 77 of the principal Aci, in sub-section (/), far Explanations J and 3, the Amendment

1995.
pe following Explanations shall be substituted, namely:— of section 77

‘Explanation | —¥or the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared thai—

10 (a) the expenditure incurred by leaders of a political party on account of
travel by air or by any other means of transport for propagating programme of
the political party shall not be deemed to be the expenditure in connection with
the election incurred or authorised by a candidate of that political party or his
election agent for the purposes of this sub-section;

15 (8) any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facili-
गे ties provided or any other act or thing done by any person in the service of the
: Government and belonging to any of the classes mentioned in clause (7) of
section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of his official duty as men-
tioned in the proviso to that clause shall not be deemed to be expenditure in
connection with the election incurred or authorised by a candidate or by his
election agent for the purposes of this sub-section.

Explanation 2—¥or the purposes of clause (a) of Explanation I, the expres-
sion “leaders of a political party", in respect of any election, means,—

(i) where such political party is a recognised political party, such persons
not exceeding forty in number, and

(i) where such political party is other than a recognised political party,
such persons not exceeding twenty in number,

whose names have been communicated to the Election Commission and the Chief
Electoral Officers of the States by the political party to be leaders for the purposes of
such election, within a period of seven days from the date of the notification for such
election published in the Gazette of India or Official Gazette of the State, as the case
may be, under Patt Il:

Provided that a political party may, in the case where any of the persons referred
to in clause (/) or, as the case may be, in clause (i?) dies or ceases to be a member of
such political party, by further communication to the Election. Commission and the
Chief Electoral Officers of the States, substitute new name, during the period ending
immediately before forty-eight hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of
the last poll for such’ election, for the name of such person died or ceased to be a”
member, for the purposes of designating the new leader in his place.’

5. After Part V of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:— «Insertion of
| new Part VA. *
‘PART VA
FREE SUPPLY OF CERTAIN MATERIAL, TO CANDIDATES OF RECOGNISED POLITICAL PARTIES

78A. (7) The Government shall, at any general election held for the purposes of Free supply of
constituting the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, supply, copies of elec
free of cost, to the candidates of recognised political parties such number of copies of ©"! Tells.
the elecioral roli, as finally published under the Representation of the People Act,
1950 and snch other material as may be prescribed. |.



4 :
(2) The materiat referred to in sub-section (7) shall be supplied,—

(7) subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Central Govern-
ment in consultation with the Election Commission with respect to the reduc-
tion of the maximum expenditure which may be incurred by the candidate under
section 77; and .

(ii) through such officers as may be specified by the Election Commis-
sion who shall act in accordance with such general or special directions as may
be given by the Election Commission, 7

Supply of cer- ~  78B. (1) The Election Commission shall, at any time between the date of publica-
ae ee ea tion of the notification calling the general election held for the purposes of constitut-
. ing the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State and the date on
which the poll is to be taken, supply or cause to be supplied, such items as the Central
Government may, by order, determine in consultation with the Election Commission,
to the electors in the constituencies concerned or to the candidates set up by the

recognised political parties,

(2) Where the Election Commission supplies the items to the candidates under
sub-section (J), the Central Government may, in consultation with the Election
Commission, impose conditions with respect to the reduction of the maximum
expenditure which may be incurred by the candidate under section 77,

Explanation. —For the purposes of section 39A, this Chapter arid clause (4h)
of sub-section (2) of section 169, the expression "recognised political party", has the
meaning assigned to it in the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order,
1968.'. .

Amendiment of 6. In section 169 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
section 168. (i) after clause (aa), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(aaa) the form of contribution report;"; ;
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(bb) the'manner of allocation of equitable sharing of time on the cable
television network and other electronic media;";

(iti) after clause (A), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(hh) the material to be supplied by the Government to the candidates of
recognised political parties at any general election held for the purposes of
constituting the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State;",

CHAPTER Ii
AMENDMENT OF THE COMPANIES AcT, 1956

Amendment 7. In section 293A of the Companies‘Act, 1956, after sub-section (5), the following

of section Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
293A of Act 1 7 .

of 1956. ‘Explanation —For the purposes of this section, “political party" means 2
political party registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People ‘
Act, 1951... /

CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENTS OF THE INCOME-TAX Act, 1961

Amendment of 8. Insection 13A of the Income-tax Act, 196] (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as
section 134. the Income-tax Act), —

(i) in the proviso, in clause (0), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words
“ewenty thovsand rupees" shall be substituted;



(7) afier the proviso and before the Explanation, the following proviso shail be
inserted, narnely:—

“Provided further that if the treasurer of such political party or any other
person authorised by that political party in this behalf faiis to submit a report
05 under sub-section (3) of section 29C of the Represeniation of People Act, 1951
for a financial year, no exemption under this section shall be available for that
political party for such financial year.";

(ii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted,

namely:—
10 ‘Explanation —F or the purposes of this section, “political party" means a
: political party registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People
हक, Act, 1951...

9, In section 808 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3), for the word, figures and Amendment of
letters."section 80GGA", the words, figures and letters "section 80GGA or section 80GGC" section 808.
45 shall be substituted.

10. After section 80GGA of the Income-tax Act, the following sections shall be inserted, Insertion of

namely:— new sections
पु 80GGB and
80GGC.

*80GGB. In computing the total income of an assessee, being an Indian company, Deduction in
there shall be deducted any sum contributed by it, in the previous year to any political respect of con-

tributions given
0 Party. by companies

Explanation —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the ° political par-
purposes of this section, the word "contribute", with its grammatical variation, has the Hes.
meaning assigned to it under section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956.

. 80GGC. In computing the total income of an assessee, being any person, except Deduction in
25 local authority and every artificial juridical person wholly or partly funded by the respesl of ven
Government, there shall be deducted any amount of contribution made by him, inthe py any person

previous year, toa political party, to political par-

Explanation —-For the purposes of sections 80008 and 80GGC, “political party”
means a political party registered under section 29A of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951:



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Election and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2002 was introduced in the
Lok Sabha on the 19th March, 2002. The said Bill, inter alia, provided for donations to the
political. parties, report thereof to the Election Commission, the audit of the accounts of
doriatiowy as reported, allocation of equitable sharing of time to ‘the political parties, free
supply of copies of electoral rolls to the candidates of recognised political parties, supply of
identity slips of electors to candidates, amendment of section 13A of the Income-tax Act,
196] to raise the timit of voluntary contribution in respect of which no record is required to be
maintained by a political party, from ten thousand rupees to twenty thousand mpees (which
_is not to be liable to be included in the total income of the previous year of Such political
party). The Bill also provided for income-tax relief in relation to donation given by companies
or individuals to the political parties, The aforesaid Bill was referred to the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Commitiee on Home Affairs and the Committee presented its
report on the Bill to both Houses of Parliament on 18th December, 2002, Since some
recommendations made by the said Standing Committee were substantive in nature, it has
been considered appropriate by the Government to withdraw the said Bill and to introduce a
fresh Bill on the lines recommended by the said Parliamentary Standing Committee. The
salient-features of the proposed Bill, inter alia, areas follows:—

(a) 1 provides for contributions from companies and individuals to the political
parties and the declaration thereof by the political parties to the Election Commission.
of india where the contribution received is in excess of twenty thousand rupees, Such
declaration shall be submitted by the treasurer of ihe political party or any other
person authorised by a political party in this behalf.

(b) Itcontains provision for equitable sharing of time by the recognised political
parties on the cable television network and other electronic media.

(c) it substitutes Explanations | and 3 to'section 77 of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 by new Explanations which elaborates the expression “leaders of the
political parties” and contains provisions for not including the travelling expenses of
such leaders in connection with the election and the expenditure incurred by the
Government officials in respect of safety arrangements in the election expenditure.

(d) It contains provisions for free supply of copies of electoral rolls by the
Government to the candidates of recognised political paities, It also contains provi-
sions for supply of such itéms by the Election Commission as are decided in consulta-
tion with it by the Central Government, to the electors or to the candidates set up by
the recognised political parties.

(e) It is proposed to amend section 13A of the Income-tax Act, [961 to raise to
rupees twenty thousand voluntary contribution in respect of which no record is to be
maintained by the political parties. The Bill also contains provisions to provide income-
tax relief in relation to the contribution given by the companies and individuals to
political parties.

(f) Certain consequential amendments have been made in these provisions to
align them with other provisions of the Bill and the provisions of the Income-tax Act,
1961. :

2. Thé Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DEH; ARUN JAITLEY.
The 6th March, 2003.



‘ FINANCIAL, ju

HORAN DMI

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to inseit a new section 339A in the Representation of the

* Peopit Aci, 1951, The proposed section 394, relates to allocation of equitable Sharing of time

for the purposes of election campaign. The time shall be allocated in the prescribed Manner

on the cable television network and other electronic media, The electronic media includes

radio and any other broadcasting media notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette. This may involve costs for the Government owned orcontrolied media, ~

may, by order, determine in consuttation with the Election Commission to the electors or to
the candidates set up by the recognised political parties.

3. The Bill, ifenacted, would involve annual recurring expenditure anda non-recurring
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Itis, however, Not possible to calcutate the
estimate of the expenditure involved in the purported measures as it is not possible to
anticipate with any accuracy the number of contestants in an election as well as the number
of voters in any constituency in view of the continuous change in their numbers on various
accounts,



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 169 of the Representation of the People Act,
1951 by inserting clauses (aaa), (bb) and (bh) after clauses (aa), (b) and (h) respectively in
‘Sub-section (2) thereof. The proposed clauses (aaa), (bb) and (hh) empower the Central
Government to make rules to provide for the form of contribution teport, the manner of
allocation of equitable sharing, of time on the cable television network and other electronic
* media and the material to be supplied by the Government to the candidates of recognised
political parties at any general election held for the purposes of constituting the House of the
People or the Legislative Assembly of a State.

2, The matters, in respect of which such rules may be made, are matters of detail and
may hardly be provided for in the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.



of

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PgopLe Act, 1951
(43 of 1951)

x व a * +

CHAPTER VUE
ELECTION ExPeNses
* fe * a *
77, (1) Every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by his election agent,
keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure in connection with the election in-
curred or authorised by him or by his election agent between the date on which he has been
nominated and the date of declaration of the result thereof, both dates inclusive.

Explanation 1, Notwithstanding any judgment, order or decision of any court to
the contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorised in connection with the election of a
candidate by a political party or by any other association or body of persons or by any
individual (other than the candidate or his election agent) shall not be deemed to be, arid
shall not ever be deemed to have been, expenditure in connection with the election incurred
or authorised by the candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of this sub-section:

Provided that nothing contained in this Explanation shall affect—

(व) any judgment, order or decision of the Supreme Court whereby the election
of a candidate to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly of a State has
been declared void or set aside before the commencement of the Representation of the
People (Amendment) Ordinance, 1974;

(0) any judgment, order or decision of a High Court whereby the election of any
such candidate has been declared void or set aside before the commencement of the
said Ordinance if no appeal has been preferred to the Supreme Court against such
judgment, order or decision of the High Court before such commencement and the
period of limitation for fiting such appeal has expired before such commencement.

Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that any expenditure
incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities provided or any other act or thing
done by any person in the service of the Govemment and belonging to any of the classes
mentioned in clause (7) of section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of his official
duty as mentioned in the proviso to that clause shall not be deemed to be expenditure in
connection with the election incurred or authorised by a candidate or by his election agent
for the purpose of this sub-section है

’ + * * *
PART XI
GENERAL

169. (/)* है * * * *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, naniely:x—

+ पु * * * *

Account of
election ex-
penses and
maximem
thereof.

Power to
make rules.



Prohibitions
and restrictions
regarding po-
litical contribu-
tions.

Special provi-
sion relating
incomes politi-
cal parties.

Deductions to
be made in
computing
total income.

tu

EXTRACTS FROM THE ComPANtES ACT, 1956
(lor 1956)

* + हू *

293A. (7) * * * * *

(5) If a company makes any contribution in contravention of the provisions of this
section, — .

(a) the company shall be punishable with fine which may extend to three times
the amount so contributed; and

(b) every officer of the company who is in default shail be punishable with _
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

* * * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961
(43 of 1961)

* * + * +

13A. Any income ofa political party which is chargeable under the head "Income from
house property" or "Income from other sources" or any income by way of voluntary contri-
butions received by a political party from any person shall not be included in the total income
of the previous year of such political party:

Provided that—

(a) such political party keeps and maintains such books of account and other
documents ag would enable the Assessing Officer to properly deduce its_income
therefrom;

(8) in respect of each such voluntary contribution in excess of ten thousand ,
rupees, such political party keeps and maintains a record of such contribution and the
name and address of the person who has made such contribution; and

(c) the accounts of such political party are audited by an accountant as defined

in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288.

Explanation.—Fot the purposes of this section, “political party" means an associa- _
tion or body of individual citizens of India registered with the Election Commission of India
as a political party under paragraph 3 of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment)
Order, 1968, and includes a political party deemed to be registered with that Commission
under the proviso to sub-paragraph (2) of that paragraph.

* + * * *

CHAPTER VIA
DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE IN COMPUTING TOTAL INCOME
A-General

804. (7) In computing the total income of an assessee, there shall be allowed from his
gross total income, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the
deductions specified in sections 80C to 80U

(2) The aggregate amount of the deductions under this Chapter shall not, in any. case,
exceed the gross total income of the assessee, .

(3) Where, in computing the total income of an association of persons or 8 body of
jndividuats, any deduction is admissiblé under section 80G orsection 80GGA or section
8011 or section 80HHA or section SOHHB or section 89HHC or section 80HHD or section
80-1 or section 80-IA or section 801B or section 801 or section 80JJ, no deduction under the
same section shall be made in computing the total income of a member of the association of
persons or body of individuals in relation to the share of such member in the income of the
association of persons or body of individuals.



LOK SABHA

A

BILL

farther toaméndahie Representation ofthe People Act, 1951, the Companies Act, 1956 and
theIncome-tax Act, 1961.

(Shei Arve Jaitley]. Minister of Lend Jtetice dtd Commerce and Industty.)

PIGIP MIND B28 8208 ,88:2093.