THE COMPETITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to amend the Competition Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In section 2 of the Competition Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ba) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Competition Appellate Tribunal established
under sub-section (1) of section 53A.’.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment of
section 2.
12 of 2003.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 18 of 2006

2
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( c), after the word
"access", the words "in any manner" shall be inserted.
4. For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“8. ( 1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than
two and not more than six other Members to be appointed by the Central
Government.
(2) The Chairperson and every other Member shall be a person of ability, integrity
and standing and who has special knowledge of, and professional experience of not
less than fifteen years in, international trade, economics, business, commerce, law,
finance, accountancy, management, industry, public affairs, which, in the opinion of
the Central Government, may be useful to the Commission.
(3)   The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole-time Members.”.
5. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“9. (1) The Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed
by the Central Government from a panel of names recommended by a Selection
Committee consisting of—
(a)  the Chief Justice of India or his nominee..............................Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Company Affairs....................Member;
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice......................Member.
(2) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
 “Provided that the Chairperson or other Member shall not hold office as such
after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.”.
7. In section 12 of the principal Act, for the words “one year”, the words “two years”
shall be substituted.
8. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“13. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence, direction
and control in respect of all administrative matters of the Commission:
   Provided that the Chairperson may delegate such of his powers relating to
administrative matters of the Commission, as he may think fit, to any other Member or
officer of the Commission.”.
Substitution
of new section
for section 8.
Composition of
Commission.
Substitution of
new section for
section 9.
Amendment of
section 10.
Amendment of
section 12.
Substitution of
new section for
section 13.
Administrative
powers of
Chairperson.
Selection
Committee for
Chairperson
and Members of
Commission.
Amendment of
section  4.

3
9. In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections  shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Director
General for the purposes of  assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry
into contravention of any of the provisions of this Act and for performing such
other functions as are, or may be, provided by or under this Act.
(1A) The number of other Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General or such officers or other employees in the office of Director General
and the manner of appointment of such Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Directors General or such officers or other employees shall be such as may be
prescribed.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “such other advisers, consultants and
officers,”, the words  “such officers or other employees,” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4), for the words “such other advisers,
consultants, or officers,”, the words  “such officers or other employees,” shall be
substituted.
10. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“17. (1) The Commission may appoint a Secretary and such officers and other
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions
under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Secretary and officers and other employees of the Commission
and the number of such officers and other employees shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Commission may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified
by regulations such number of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding
ability, who have special knowledge of, and experience in, economics, law, business
or such other disciplines related to competition, as it deems necessary to assist the
Commission in the discharge of its functions under this Act.”.
11. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words
“receipt of a complaint,”, the words “receipt of any information, in such manner and” shall
be substituted.
12. In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that any statutory authority, may, suo motu,  make such a
reference to the Commission.”;
(b) for sub-section (2) and the proviso thereto, the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the Commission shall,
give its opinion, within sixty days of receipt of such reference, to such
statutory authority which shall consider the opinion of the Commission and
thereafter, give its finding recording reasons therefor on the issues referred to in
the said opinion.”.
13. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“22. (1) The Commission shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may
be provided by regulations.
Substitution of
new section for
section 17.
Appointment
of Secretary,
experts,
professionals
and officers
and other
employees of
Commission.
Amendment of
section 19.
Amendment of
section 21.
Amendment of
section 16.
Substitution of
new section for
section 22.
Meetings of
Commission.

4
(2) The Chairperson, if for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Commis-
sion, the senior-most Member present at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Commission shall be
decided by a majority of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an
equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the Member presiding, shall have
a second or/casting vote:
Provided that the quorum for such meeting shall be three Members.’’.
14. Sections 23, 24 and 25 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
15. For section 26 of  the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“26. ( 1) On receipt of a reference from the Central Government or a State
Government or a statutory authority or on its own knowledge or information received
under section 19, if the Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie
case, it shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made into the
matter.
(2) Where on receipt of a reference from the Central Government or a State
Government or a statutory authority or information received under section 19, the
Commission is of the opinion that there exists no prima facie case, it shall close the
matter forthwith and pass such orders as it deems fit and send a copy of its order to the
Central Government or the State Government or the statutory authority or the parties
concerned, as the case may be.
(3) The Director General shall, on receipt of direction under sub-section ( 1),
submit a report on his findings within such period as may be specified by the
Commission.
(4) The Commission may forward a copy of the report referred to in sub-
section (3) to the parties concerned:
Provided that in case the investigation is caused to be made based on reference
received from  the Central Government or the State Government or the statutory authority,
the Commission shall forward a copy of the report referred to in sub-section (3) to the
Central Government or the State Government or the statutory authority, as the case may be.
(5) If the report of the Director General referred to in sub-section (3) recommends
that there is no contravention of the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall invite
objections or suggestions from the Central Government or the State Government or
the statutory authority or the parties concerned, as the case may be, on such report of
the Director General.
(6) If, after consideration of the objections and suggestions referred to in sub-
section (5), if any, the Commission agrees with the recommendation of the Director
General, it shall close the matter forthwith and pass such orders as it deems fit and
communicate its order to the Central Government or the State Government or the
statutory authority or the parties concerned, as the case may be.
(7) If, after consideration of the objections or suggestions referred to in sub-
section (5), if any, the Commission is of the opinion that further investigations are
called for, it may direct further investigations in the matter by the Director General or
cause further inquiries to be made by in the matter or itself proceed with further inquiry
in the matter in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(8) If the report of the Director General referred to in sub-section (3) recommends
that there is contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, and the Commission is
of the opinion that further inquiry is called for, it shall inquire into such contravention
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.”.
Omission of
sections 23, 24
and 25.
Substitution of
new section for
section 26.
Procedure for
inquiry under
section 19.

5
16.  In section 27 of the principal Act,—
(i) clauses (c) and (f) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (g), for the word “order”, the words “order or issue such direction”
shall be substituted.
17.  In section 28 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words, brackets, letter and figures “Central
Government on recommendation under clause ( f ) of section 27,", the word
"Commission" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), clause (d) shall be omitted.
18. In section 29 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the words "Where the commission is of the", the
words "prima facie" shall be inserted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) After receipt of the response of the parties to the combination under
sub-section (1), the Commission may call for a report from the Director General
and such report shall be submitted by the Director General within sixty days:
Provided that the Commission may, if it is satisfied that the Director General
was prevented by sufficient cause from submitting the report within the said
period, allow the Director General to submit the report within a further period
not exceeding sixty days.”.
(c) in sub-section (2), after the words "parties to the combination", the words,
brackets, figure and letter "or the receipt of the report from Director General called
under sub-section (1A), whichever is later" shall be inserted.
19. For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“30. Where any person or enterprise has given a notice under sub-section (2) of
section 6, the Commission shall examine such notice and form its prima facie opinion
as provided in sub-section (1) of section 29 and proceed as per provisions contained
in that section.”.
20. In section 32 of the principal Act, after clause (f)—
(a) after the words “have power to inquire”, the words and figures “in accordance
with the provisions contained in sections 19, 20, 26, 29 and 30 of the Act” shall be
inserted;
(b) after the words “relevant market in India”,  occurring at the end, the words
“and pass such orders as it may deem fit in accordance with the provisions of this Act”
shall be inserted.
21. For section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“33. Where during an inquiry, the Commission is satisfied that an act in
contravention of sub-section (1) of section 3 or sub-section (1) of section 4 or section
6 has been committed and continues to be committed or that such act is about to be
committed, the Commission may, by order, grant a temporary injunction restraining
any party from carrying on such act until the conclusion of such inquiry or until further
orders, without giving notice to the opposite party, where it deems it necessary.”.
22. Section 34 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Amendment of
section 27.
Amendment of
section 28.
Amendment of
section 29.
Substitution of
new section for
section 30.
Amendment of
section 32.
Procedure in
case of notice
under sub-
section ( 2) of
section 6.
Substitution of
new section for
section 33.
Power to issue
interim orders.
Omission of
section 34.

6
23. In section 35 of the principal Act, for the words “complainant or defendant”, the
words “person or an enterprise” shall be substituted.
24. For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“36. (1) In the discharge of its functions, the Commission shall be guided by the
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any
rules made by the Central Government, the Commission shall have the powers to
regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Commission shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions
under the Act, the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) requisitioning, subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872,  any public record or document or copy of such
record or document from any office.
(3) The Commission may call upon such experts, from the field of economics,
commerce, accountancy, international trade or from any other discipline as it deems
necessary, to assist the Commission in the conduct of any inquiry by it.
(4)  The Commission may direct any person —
(a) to produce before the Director General or the Secretary or an officer
authorised by it, such books, or other documents in the custody or under the
control of such person so directed as may be specified or described in the
direction, being documents relating to any trade, the examination of which may
be required for the purposes of this Act;
(b) to furnish to the Director General or the Secretary or any other officer
authorised by it, as respects the trade or such other information as may be in his
possession in relation to the trade carried on by such person, as may be required
for the purposes of this Act.”.
25. Section 37 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
26. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“39.  (1)  If a person fails to pay any monetary penalty imposed on him under
this Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover such penalty, in such manner as
may be specified by the regulations.
(2) In a case where the Commission is of the opinion that it would be expedient
to recover the penalty imposed under this Act in accordance with the provisions of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, it may make a reference to this effect to the concerned income-
tax authority under that Act for recovery of the penalty as tax due under the said Act.
(3) Where a reference has been made by the Commission under sub-section (2)
for recovery of penalty, the person upon whom the penalty has been imposed shall be
deemed to be the assessee in default under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the provisions
contained in sections 221 to 227, 228A, 229, 231 and 232 of the said Act and the
Omission of
section 37.
Substitution of
new section for
section 39.
Execution of
orders of
Commission
imposing
monetary
penalty.
1 of 1872.
5 of 1908.
Amendment of
section 35.
Substitution of
new section for
section 36.
Power  of
Commission to
regulate its
own procedure.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.

7
Second Schedule to that Act and any rules made thereunder shall in so far as may be,
apply as if the said provisions were the provisions of this Act and referred to sums by
way of penalty imposed under this Act instead of  to income-tax and sums imposed by
way of penalty, fine and interest under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and to the Commission
instead of the Income-tax officer and Commissioner of Income-tax.
Explanation 1.— Any reference to sub-section (2) or sub-section (6) of section
220 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, in the said provisions of that Act or the rules made
thereunder shall be construed as references to sections 43 to 45 of this Act.
Explanation 2.— The Tax Recovery Commissioner and the Tax Recovery Officer
referred to in the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall be deemed to be the Tax Recovery
Commissioner and the Tax Recovery Officer for the purposes of recovery of sums
imposed by way of penalty, under this Act.”.
27.  Section 40 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
28.  For section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“42. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, if any person violates
any direction issued or contravenes, without any reasonable ground, any decision or
order of the Commission issued under sections 27, 28, 31, 32 and 33 or any condition
or restriction subject to which any approval, sanction, direction or exemption in relation
to any matter has been accorded, given, made or granted under this Act or fails to pay
the penalty imposed under this Act, then he shall, without prejudice to any proceeding
under section 39, be liable for imposition of an additional penalty not exceeding rupees
ten lakhs or imprisonment for a term up to one year or both as the Civil Court having
jurisdiction in the matter may deem fit.
(2) The Commission may cause an investigation to be made into compliance of
its orders and, based on the results of the investigation or otherwise, file a complaint
before the Civil Court having jurisdiction in the matter, which shall pass such order
under this section as it may deem fit:
Provided that the Civil Court shall not take cognizance of any offence punishable
under this section, save on a complaint filed by the Commission or any of its officers
authorised by it.".
29. In section 43 of the principal Act, in clause (a), for the words, brackets and figure
“under sub-section (5)”, the words, brackets and figures “under sub-sections ( 2) and (4)”
shall be substituted.
30. In section 46 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the Commission in
cases where the report of investigation directed under section 26 has been received
before making such disclosure:”;
(b) in the second proviso, for the word "first", the word "has" shall be substituted.
31. In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words and brackets
"In formulating a policy on competition (including review of laws related to competition),
the Central Government may make a reference", the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“The Central Government may, in formulating a policy on competition (including
review of laws related to competition) and a State Government may, in formulating a
policy on competition, make a reference”.
Omission of
section 40.
Substitution of
new section for
section 42.
Contravention
of orders of
Commission.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Amendment of
section 43.
Amendment of
section 46.
Amendment of
section 49.

8
32. In section 51 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause ( d), for the words, brackets and letters “clauses ( a) to ( c)”, the
words, brackets and letters “clauses (a) and (c)” shall be substituted.
33. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in the Explanation, for the
words “Supreme Court”, the words “Appellate Tribunal or the Supreme Court” shall be
substituted.
34. After Chapter VIII of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely: —
‘CHAPTER VIIIA
C
OMPETITION  APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL
53A. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an
Appellate Tribunal to be known as Competition Appellate Tribunal—
(a) to hear and dispose of appeals against any direction issued or decision
made or order passed by the Commission under sub-sections (2) and (6) of
section 26, section 27, section 28, section 31, section 32, section 33, section 38,
section 39, section 43, section 44, section 45 or section 46 of the Act;
(b) to adjudicate on claim for compensation that may arise from the
findings of the Commission and pass orders for the recovery of compensation
under section 53N.
(2) The Headquarter of the Appellate Tribunal shall be at such place as the
Central Government may, by notification, specify.
53B. (1) The Central Government or the State Government or a local authority
or enterprise or any person, aggrieved by any direction, decision or order
referred to in clause ( a) of section 53A may prefer an appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of sixty
days from the date on which a copy of the direction or decision or order made by the
Commission is received by the Central Government or the State Government or a
local authority or enterprise or any person referred to in that sub-section and it shall be
in such form and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of
the said period of sixty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal may,
after giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders
thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the direction, decision
or order appealed against.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the
Commission and the parties to the appeal.
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall be
dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to
dispose of the appeal within six months from the date of receipt of the appeal.
53C. The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than
two other members to be appointed by the Central Government.
Amendment of
section 52.
Insertion of new
Chapter VIII A.
Establishment
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Appeal to
Appellate
Tribunal.
Amendment of
section 51.
Composition
of Appellate
Tribunal.

9
53D. (1) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a person, who is, or
has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court.
(2) A member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a person of ability, integrity and
standing having special knowledge of, and professional experience of not less than
twenty-five years in, competition, international trade, economics, business, commerce,
law, finance, accountancy, management, industry, public affairs, administration or in
any other matter which in the opinion of the Central Government, may be useful to the
Appellate Tribunal.
53E. (1) The Chairperson and members of  the Appellate Tribunal shall be
appointed  by  the  Central  Government from a panel of names recommended by  the
Selection Committee composition of which has been specified in section 9.
(2) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names shall be such as may be prescribed.
53F. The Chairperson or a member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office as
such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office, and shall
be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson or other member of the Appellate Tribunal shall
hold office as such after he has attained,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-eight years;
(b) in the case of any other member of the Appellate Tribunal, the age of
sixty-five years.
53G . (1) The salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(2)  The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of  service of
the Chairperson and other members of the Appellate Tribunal  shall not be
varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
53H. If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in
the office of the Chairperson or a member of the Appellate Tribunal, the Central
Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this
Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Appellate
Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.
53-I. The Chairperson or a member of the Appellate Tribunal may, by notice in
writing under  his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a member of the Appellate Tribunal shall,
unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of  three months  from the date of receipt of
such notice or until a person  duly appointed  as his successor enters upon his office or
until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
53J. ( 1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal by reason of his death, resignation, the senior-
most member of the Appellate Tribunal shall act as the Chairperson of the Appellate
Tribunal until the date on which a new Chairperson appointed in accordance with the
provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy enters upon his office.
(2) When  the  Chairperson  of the Appellate Tribunal  is  unable  to discharge
his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most member or,
as the case may be, such one of the member of  the  Appellate Tribunal,  as  the  Central
Government  may,  by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the functions
of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
Term of office
of Chairperson
and members
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and  members
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Selection
Committee.
Vacancies.
Qualifications
for appointment
of Chairperson
and members of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Resignation of
Chairperson
and members
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Member of
Appellate
Tribunal to
act as its
Chairperson in
certain cases.

10
53K. (1) The  Central Government may, in consultation  with  the Chief  Justice
of  India, remove from office the Chairperson  or  any other member of the Appellate
Tribunal, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent;  or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid
employment; or
(c) has  been  convicted of an offence which, in the opinion  of  the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude;  or
(d) has  become  physically or mentally incapable of acting  as  such
Chairperson or other member of the Appellate Tribunal;  or
(e) has  acquired  such financial or other interest as is  likely  to affect
prejudicially  his functions as such Chairperson or member  of the Appellate
Tribunal;  or
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no Chairperson or a
member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be removed from  his  office on the ground
specified in clause (e) or clause (f) of sub-section (1) except by an order  made  by  the
Central Government after an inquiry made in this behalf by a Judge of the Supreme
Court in which such Chairperson or  member  had been informed of the charges against
him and  given  a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
53L. The Chairperson and other members of the Appellate Tribunal shall not,
for a period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any
employment in, or connected with the management or administration of, any enterprise
which has been a party to a proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal under this Act:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any employment
under the Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or in any
statutory authority or in any corporation established by or under any Central, State or
Provincial Act or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956.
53M. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Appellate Tribunal
with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall
discharge their functions under the general superintendence and control of the
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal.
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers
and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
53N. (1) Without prejudice to any other provisions contained in this Act, the
Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any enterprise or
any person may make an application to the Appellate Tribunal to adjudicate on claim
for compensation that may arise from the findings of the Commission and to pass an
order for the recovery of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage
shown to have been suffered, by such person as a result of any contravention of the
provisions of Chapter II, having been committed by enterprise.
(2) Every application made under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by the
findings of the Commission, if any, and also be accompanied with such fees as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may, after an inquiry made into the allegations
mentioned in the application made under sub-section (1), pass an order directing the
enterprise to make payment to the applicant, of the amount determined by it as realisable
Restriction on
employment
of Chairperson
and other
members of
Appellate
Tribunal in
certain cases.
1 of 1956.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson
and members
of  Appellate
Tribunal.
Staff of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Awarding
compensation.

11
from the enterprise as compensation for the loss or damage caused to the applicant as
a result of any contravention of the provisions of Chapter II having been committed by
such enterprise:
Provided that in a case no decision or order has been made or direction issued
on the contravention alleged on the application by the Commission, the Appellate
Tribunal may obtain the recommendations of the Commission before passing an order
of compensation.
(4) Where any loss or damage referred to in sub-section (1) is caused to numerous
persons having the same interest, one or more of such persons may, with the permission
of the Appellate Tribunal, make an application under that sub-section for and on behalf
of, or for the benefit of, the persons so interested, and thereupon, the provisions of rule
8 of Order 1 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall apply
subject to the modification that every reference therein to a suit or decree shall be
construed as a reference to the application before the Appellate Tribunal and the order
of the Appellate Tribunal thereon.
53-O. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural
justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the
Central Government, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own
procedure including the places at which they shall have their sittings.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall  have,  for  the purposes  of discharging its functions
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of the following  matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) subject  to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the  Indian Evidence
Act,  1872, requisitioning any public record  or document or copy of such record
or document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decisions;
(g) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte;
(h) setting  aside any order of dismissal of any  representation  for default
or any order passed by it ex parte;
(i) any  other  matter  which  may   be  prescribed.
(3)  Every  proceedings  before the Appellate Tribunal shall  be  deemed  to be
judicial proceedings within  the  meaning  of sections  193  and  228, and for the
purposes of section 196,  of  the Indian  Penal  Code  and the Appellate Tribunal  shall
be  deemed to be a civil court for  the  purposes  of section  195 and Chapter XXVI of
the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973.
53 P . (1)  Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal shall be enforced by it in
the same manner as if it were a decree made by a court in a suit pending therein, and it
shall be lawful for the Appellate Tribunal to send, in case of its inability to execute
such order, to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,—
(a)  in the case of an order against a company, the registered  office of the
company is situate;  or
(b)  in  the  case of an order against any other  person,  place where the
person concerned  voluntarily  resides or carries on business  or  personally
works for gain, is situated.
Procedure and
powers of
Appellate
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Execution of
orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.

12
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal
may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such
civil court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.
53Q. Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, if any person contravenes,
without any reasonable ground, any order of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be liable
to be detained in civil prison for a term which may extend to one year, unless in the
meantime the civil court directs his release and he shall also be liable to a penalty not
exceeding rupees ten lakhs.
53R. No act or proceeding of the Appellate Tribunal shall be questioned or shall
be invalid merely on the  ground of existence of any vacancy or defect in the  constitution
of the Appellate Tribunal.
53S. (1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal  may either
appear in person or authorise one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries
or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case
before the Appellate Tribunal.
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any
enterprise preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal may authorise one or more
chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners
or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every person so authorised may
present the case with respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
Explanation.— The expressions “chartered accountant” or “company secretary”
or “cost accountant” or “legal practitioner” shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the Explanation to section 35.
53T. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal
may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of
communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to
be filed after the expiry of the said period of sixty days.
53U. The Appellate Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction,
powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may
exercise and, for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
shall have effect subject to modifications that,—
(a) the reference therein to a High Court shall be construed as including a
reference to the Appellate Tribunal;
(b) the references to the Advocate-General in section 15 of the said Act
shall be construed as a reference to such  Law Officer as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.’.
35. In section 57 of the principal Act, for the words “the Commission”, the words “the
Commission or the Appellate Tribunal” shall be substituted.
36. For section 58 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘‘58. The Chairperson and other Members and the Director General, Additional,
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General and Secretary and officers and other
employees of the Commission and the Chairperson, members, officers and other
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed, while acting or purporting to
act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.’’.
Contravention
of orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.
V acancy
or Appellate
Tribunal not  to
invalidate acts
or proceedings.
Right to legal
representation.
Appeal to
Supreme  Court.
Amendment of
section 57.
Substitution of
new section for
section 58.
Power to
punish for
contempt. 70 of 1971.
Members,
Director General,
Secretary, officers
and other
employees, etc.
45 of 1860.

13
37. In section 59 of the principal Act, for the words “the Registrar or officers or other
employees of the Commission”, the words “the Secretary or officers or other employees of
the Commission or the Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of the Appellate
Tribunal” shall be substituted.
38. In section 61 of the principal Act, for the word “Commission”, the words
“Commission or the Appellate Tribunal” shall be substituted.
39. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(a) the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of
panel of names under sub-section (2) of Section 9;’’;
(ii) clause (c) shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(da) the number of Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General or such officers or other employees in the office of Director General
and the manner in which such Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General or such officers or other employees may be appointed under sub-section
(1A) of section 16;”;
(iv) in clauses ( e) and ( f), for the words “such other advisers, consultants or
officers” the words “such officers or other employees” shall be substituted;
(v) in clause (g), for the word “Registrar”, the word “Secretary” shall be substituted;
(vi) clauses (h) and (i) shall be omitted;
(vii) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ma) the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Appellate Tribunal
under sub-section (2) of section 53B and the fees payable in respect of such appeal;
(mb) the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of
panel of names under sub-section (2) of section 53E;
(mc) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and other members of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1)
of section 53G;
(md) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers
and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 53M;
(me) the fee which shall be accompanied with every application made
under sub-section (2) of section 53N;
(mf) the other matters under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 53-O
in respect of which the Appellate Tribunal shall have powers under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit;”;
(viii) for clause (n), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(n) the manner in which the monies transferred to the Competition
Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal shall be dealt with by the
Commission or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, under the fourth
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 66.
40. In section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for clauses (d) and (e), the
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(d) the procedures to be followed for engaging the experts and professionals
under sub-section (3) of section 17;
(e) the fee which may be determined under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 19;
(f) the rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at the meetings
of the Commission under sub-section (1) of section 22;
(g) the manner in which penalty shall be recovered under sub-section ( 1) of
section 39;
(h) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by
regulations.”.
Amendment of
section 63.
Amendment of
section 61.
Amendment of
section 59.
Amendment of
section 64.
5 of 1908.

14
41. In section 66 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 is hereby
repealed and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission
established under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the said Act (hereinafter referred
to as the repealed Act) shall stand dissolved:
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section, the
Monopolies  and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission established under sub-
section (1) of section 5 of the repealed Act, may continue to exercise jurisdiction
and powers under the repealed Act for  a period of two years from the date of the
commencement of this Act in respect of all cases or proceedings (including
complaints received by it or references or applications made to it) filed before
the commencement of this Act as if the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices  Act, 1969 had not been repealed and all the provisions of the said Act
so repealed shall mutatis mutandis apply to such cases or proceedings or
complaints or references or applications and to all other matters.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing
in this proviso shall confer any jurisdiction or power upon the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission to decide or adjudicate any case or
proceeding arising under the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act,
1969 on or after the commencement of this Act.
(1A) The repeal of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act,
1969 shall, however, not affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly
done or suffered thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
incurred under the Act so repealed; or
(c) any penalty, confiscation or punishment incurred in respect of
any contravention under the Act so repealed; or
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
obligation, liability, penalty, confiscation or punishment as aforesaid,
and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and any such penalty, confiscation or punishment may be imposed or made as if
that Act had not been repealed.”.
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
"Provided further that the Director-General of Investigation and
Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General of
Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee who has
been,  immediately before the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission, employed on regular basis by the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall become, on and from
such dissolution, the officer and employee, respectively, of the Competition
Commission of India or the Appellate  Tribunal, in such manner as may be
specified by the Central Government, with the same rights and privileges
as to pension, gratuity and other like matters as would have been admissible
to him if the rights in relation to such Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission had not been transferred  to, and vested in, the
Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case
may be, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the
Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case
may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions
of employment are duly altered  by the Competition Commission of India
or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be:”;
Amendment of
section 66.
54 of 1969.
54 of 1969.
54 of 1969.
54 of 1969.

15
(ii) in the third proviso, for the words “the Central Government”, the words
“the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case
may be,” shall be substituted;
(iii) in the fourth proviso,—
(A) for the words “the Central Government shall, out of the monies
standing”, the words “the Competition Commission of India or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall, out of the monies standing”
shall be substituted;
(B) for the portion beginning with the words "the Central Government
and such monies" and ending with the words "as may be prescribed" the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
"the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal,
as the case may be, and such monies which stand so transferred
shall be dealt with by the said Commission or the Tribunal, as the
case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed";
(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) All cases pertaining to monopolistic trade practices or restrictive trade
practices pending (including such cases, in which any unfair trade practice has
also been alleged), before the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission and on or after the expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to
sub-section (1) shall, stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and shall be
adjudicated by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the
repealed Act as if that Act had not been repealed.";
(d) in sub-section (4), for the words “on or before the commencement of  this
Act shall, on such commencement”, the words, brackets and figure “on or before the
expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to sub-section ( 1), shall” shall be
substituted;
(e) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) All cases pertaining to unfair trade practices referred to in clause (x)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 36A of the Monopolies  and Restrictive Trade
Practices Act, 1969 and pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices  Commission on or after the expiry of two years referred to in the
proviso to sub-section (1), shall, stand transferred to the Competition Commission
of India, and the Competition Commission of India shall dispose of such cases
as if they were cases filed under that Act.”.
54 of 1969.

16
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Competition Act was enacted in 2002 keeping in view the economic developments
that have resulted in opening up of the Indian economy, removal of controls and consequent
economic liberalisation which required that the Indian market be geared to face competition
from within the country and outside.  The Competition Act, 2002 provided for the
establishment of a Commission to prevent practices having adverse effect on competition, to
promote and sustain competition in markets, to protect the interests of consumers and to
ensure freedom of trade carried on by other participants in markets, in India, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The Competition Commission of India (CCI) was established on the 14th October,
2003 but could not be made functional due to filing of a writ petition before the Hon’ble
Supreme Court. The Hon’ble Supreme Court delivered its judgment on the 20th January,
2005.  While disposing of the Writ Petition, the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed that “if an
expert body is to be created as submitted on behalf of the Union of India consistent with
what is said to be the international practice, it might  be appropriate for the respondents  to
consider the creation of two separate bodies, one with expertise that is advisory and regulatory
and the other adjudicatory.  This followed up by an appellate body as contemplated by the
proposed amendment, can go a long way, in meeting the challenge sought to be raised in this
Writ Petition based on the doctrine of separation of powers recognised by the Constitution.
Any way, it is for those who are concerned with the process of amendment to consider that
aspect. It cannot be gainsaid that the Commission as now contemplated, has a number of
adjudicatory functions as well.”. The Hon’ble Supreme Court left open all questions regarding
the validity of the Competition Act, 2002 including rule 3 of the Competition Commission
of India (Selection of Chairperson and Other Members of the Commission) Rules, 2003.
3. The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006, inter alia, seeks to make the following
amendments to the Competition Act so as to address various legal issues and to make the
CCI fully operational on a sustainable basis, namely:—
(a) to provide that CCI would be an expert body which  will function as a market
regulator for preventing anti-competitive practices in the country and it would also
have advisory and advocacy functions in its role as a regulator;
(b) to omit the provisions relating to adjudication of disputes between two or
more parties by the CCI and  to provide  for investigation through the Director General
in case there exist a prima facie case relating to anti competitive agreements or abuse
of dominant position under the Competition Act, 2002 and conferring power upon the
CCI to pass orders on completion of an inquiry and impose monetary penalties and in
doing so the CCI would work as a collegium and its decisions would be based on
simple majority;
 (c) to provide for establishment of the Competition Appellate Tribunal (CAT),
which shall be a three-member quasi-judicial body headed by a person who is or has
been a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court and
selection of the Chairperson and other Members of CAT to be made by a Selection
Committee headed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India or his nominee,
and having Secretaries of Ministries of Company Affairs and Law as its members;
(d) to provide for hearing and disposing of  appeals by the CA T against any
direction issued or decision made or order passed by the CCI;
(e) to provide for  adjudication by CA T of claims on compensation and passing
of orders for the recovery of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage
suffered as a result of any contravention of the provisions of the  Competition Act,
2002;
16

17
(f) to provide for implementation of the orders of the CA T as a decree of a civil
court;
(g) to provide for filing of appeal against the orders of the CA T to the Supreme
Court;
(h) to confer powers to sectoral regulators to make suo motu reference to CCI
on competition issues, in addition to the present provision of making reference, when
such request is made by any party in a dispute before it.
4. The Bill also aims at continuation of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Prac-
tices Commission (MRTPC) till two years after constitution of CCI, for trying pending cases
under the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 after which it would stand
dissolved.  The Bill also provides that MRTPC would not entertain any new cases after the
CCI is duly constituted.  Cases still remaining pending after this two year period, would be
transferred to CAT or the National Commission under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986
depending on the nature of cases.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PREM CHAND GUPTA
The 24th February, 2006.
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. 5/31/2003-IGC, dated the 24th February, 2006 from
Shri Prem Chand Gupta, Minister of Company Affairs to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Competition
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 recommends introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under article
117(1) of the Constitution and also recommends to Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill
under article 117(3) of the Constitution.

18
Notes on Clauses
Clause 2.— This clause seeks to amend  section 2 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to definitions. It is proposed to define the expression “Appellate Tribunal” used in
the Bill.
Clause 3.— This clause seeks to amend section 4 of the Competition Act, 2002 relating
to abuse of dominant position.
 Under the existing provisions contained in clause (c) of sub-section (2)  of said section,
there  shall be an abuse of dominant position  if an enterprise indulges  in practice or practices
resulting in denial of  market  access.
 It is proposed to amend the said clause (c) and to insert the words ”in any manner”.
The proposed amendment is clarificatory in nature.
Clause 4.— This clause seeks to substitute section 8 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to composition of Competition Commission of India.
 The new clause provides that the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and
not less than two and not more than six other Members instead of ten Members under the
existing provisions of section 8 to be appointed by the Central Government. It also proposes
to remove from eligibility requirement that the person who has been or is qualified to be a
Judge of a High Court, omit the special knowledge of, and professional experience of
administration or in any other matter from the qualifications for appointment as Chairperson
or any other Member.
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to substitute section 9 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to selection of Chairperson and other Members  of the Competition Commission of
India.
  Under the existing provisions, the Chairperson  and other Members shall be selected
in the manner as may be specified by the rules made by the Central Government. The
Competition Commission of India (selection of Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission) Rules, 2003 made under this section provide for selection of the Chairperson
and other Members by a Selection Committee consisting of ( a) a person, who has been a
retired judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court or a retired Chairperson of  a Tribunal
established or constituted under an Act of Parliament or a distinguished jurist or a Senior
Advocate for five years or more—as Member, (b) a person who has special knowledge of,
an professional experience of twenty-five years or more in international trade, economics,
business, commerce or industry—as Member, (c) a person who has special knowledge of,
and professional experience of twenty-five years or more in accountancy, management,
finance, public affairs or administration—as Member, to be nominated by the Central
Government.
 The new clause provides that the Chairperson and other Members of  the Competition
Commission of India shall be appointed  by  the  Central  Government from a panel of names
recommended by a Selection Committee consisting of (a) the Chief Justice of India or his
nominee, (b)  the Secretary in the Ministry of Company Affairs—as Member  and ( c) the
Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice—as  Member:
 It further provides that the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection
of panel of names shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 6.— This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to term of office of Chairperson and other Members of the Competition Commission
of India.
18

19
 Under the existing provisions no Chairperson of the Competition Commission of
India can  hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty-seven years and no  other
Member can  hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
 It is proposed to amend the said section 10 to provide that the Chairperson or other
Member shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
Clause 7.— This clause seeks to amend section 12 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to restriction on employment of Chairperson and other Members of the Competition
Commission of India in certain cases.
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the  Chairperson  and
other Members shall not,  for  a  period  of one year from the date on which they cease to
hold  office, accept  any  employment  in,  or  connected with  the  management  or
administration  of,  any  enterprise  which  has been  a  party  to  a proceeding before the
Commission under this Act. However, this provision does not apply to  any employment
under the Central Government or a State Government or local authority or in any statutory
authority or any corporation established by  or  under  any  Central, State or Provincial Act
or  a  Government  company  as  defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
 It is proposed to amend said section 12 to increase the said  restriction on employment
of Chairperson and other Members of the Competition Commission of India from one year
to two years.
Clause 8.— This clause seeks to substitute section 13 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to financial and administrative powers of Member Administration.
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the financial and
administrative powers of Member Administration are vested in  the Member Administration
designated by the Central Government.
 It is proposed to substitute the said section 13 by a new section to provide that the
Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence, direction and control in respect
of all administrative matters of the Commission. However,  the Chairperson may delegate
such of his powers relating to administrative matters of the Commission, as he may think fit
to any other Member or officer of the Commission.
Clause 9.— This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to appointment of Director General, etc.
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the Central Government
can  appoint  a   Director  General  and  as  many  Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Directors General or such other advisers,  consultants  or  officers,  as it may think fit,  for
the purposes  of  assisting  the  Commission in  conducting  inquiry  into  contravention of
any of the provisions of the Competition  Act and for the conduct of cases before the
Commission and for performing such other functions  as are, or may be, provided by or
under  the Competition Act, 2002.
 It is proposed to amend the said section so as to, inter alia, omit  the “advisers” and
“consultants” from the scope of section 16 and therefore the Central Government  would not
appoint  “advisers” and “ consultants” in the Competition Commission of India. The power
to engage the “advisers”, and “ consultants” is proposed to be conferred upon the Competition
Commission of India.
Clause 10.— This clause seeks to substitute section 17 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to Registrar and officers and other employees of the Competition Commission of
India by a new section.
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the Commission  may
appoint  a  Registrar and  such  officers  and  other employees  as it considers necessary for
the efficient performance  of its functions under this Act.

20
 It is proposed to substitute said  section to confer power upon  the  Commission to
appoint a Secretary instead of Registrar and  such experts and professionals of integrity and
outstanding ability who have special knowledge of, and experience in economics, law, business
or such other disciplines related to competition, as it deems necessary to assist the Commission
in addition to officers and other employees in the discharge of its functions under the said
Act.
Clause 11.— This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to inquiry into certain agreements and dominant position of enterprise.
 Under the existing provisions contained in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of said section,
the   Commission  may   inquire  into  any   alleged contravention  of  the  provisions
contained in  sub-section  (1)  of  section  3 or sub-section (1) of section 4 either on its own
motion or on receipt  of  a  complaint.
 It is proposed to amend said section so as to  substitute “receipt of a complaint”,  by
the words “receipt of any information, in such manner’’  to enable the Commission to   inquire
into  any   alleged contravention on receipt of any information instead of receipt of a complaint.
Clause 12.— This clause seeks to amend section 21 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to reference by statutory authority.
 Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section ( 1) of said section where in
the course of  a proceeding  before  any statutory authority an issue is raised by  any party
that  any decision which such statutory authority has taken  or proposes  to take, is or would
be, contrary to any of  the provisions of the Competition Act, 2002,  then  such  statutory
authority may make  a  reference  in respect of such issue to the Commission.
 It is proposed to amend said sub-section (1)  so as to provide that any statutory authority
may make a reference on its own under that sub-section. It further provides that on receipt of
opinion of the Competition Commission of India, the statutory authority shall pass orders
recording reasons thereon.
Clause 13.— This clause seeks to substitute section 22 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to Benches of the Competition Commission of India.
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the jurisdiction, powers
and authority  of the Commission may be exercised by Benches thereof.
 It is proposed to substitute the said section for the meetings of the Competition
Commission of India. It, inter alia, provides that the Commission shall meet at such times
and places, and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings as may be provided by regulations. It further  provides that all questions
which come up before any meeting of the Commission shall be decided by a majority of the
members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in
his absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. It also  provides that
the quorum for such meeting shall be three members.
Clause 14.— This clause seeks to omit sections 23, 24 and 25 of the Competition Act,
2002 relating to distribution of business of the Competition Commission of India amongst
Benches, procedure for deciding a case where Members of a Bench differ in opinion and
jurisdiction of Bench.
Clause 15— This clause seeks to substitute section 26 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to procedure for inquiry on complaints under section 19.
It is proposed to provide that on receipt of a reference from the Central Government
or a State Government or a statutory authority or on its own knowledge or information
received under section 19, if the Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie
case, it shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made into the matter.
It further provides that on receipt of reference under the above provision, if the Commission

21
is of the opinion that there exists no prima facie case, it shall close the matter forthwith and
pass such orders as it deems fit and send a copy of its order to the Central Government or the
State Government or the statutory authority or the person or consumer or their association or
trade association, as the case may be. The Director General on receipt of direction under the
above provision shall submit a report on his findings within such period as may be specified
by the Commission.  The Commission may forward a copy of the report to the parties
concerned. It also provides that if the report of the Director General  recommends that there
is no contravention of the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall invite objections or
suggestions from the Central Government or the State Government or the statutory authority
or the parties concerned as the case may be, on such report of the Director General.  It
provides that if the Commission agrees to the recommendations of the Director General, he
shall close the matter and pass such order as it deems fit and communicate its order to the
authorities mentioned.  It further provides that after consideration of the objections or
suggestions referred to above, if any, the Commission is of the opinion that further
investigations are called for, it may direct for further investigation. It further provides that if
the report of the Director General recommends that there is contravention of any of the
provisions of the Competition Act and the Commission is of the opinion that further inquiry
is called for, it shall enquire into such contravention in accordance with the provisions of the
Competition Act.
Clause 16.— This clause seeks to amend section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to Orders by  the Competition Commission of India after inquiry into agreements or
abuse of dominant position.
 The provisions contained in the said section, inter alia,  confer power upon the
Competition Commission of India to pass orders awarding  compensation to parties in
accordance with the  provisions contained in section 34.
 The power to award compensation is proposed to be conferred upon the Appellate
Tribunal by new section 53N proposed to be inserted by clause 34 of the Bill.
It is, therefore, proposed to omit clause ( c) of the aforesaid section which  confer
power upon the Competition Commission of India to pass orders awarding  compensation.
The proposed amendment is of consequential in nature.
Clause 17.— This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to division of enterprise enjoying dominant position.
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said  section,  the Central Government
can, on recommendation of the Commission order division of enterprise enjoying dominant
position.
 It is proposed to amend section 28 of the Act so as to confer said  power upon the
Competition Commission of India to order division of an enterprise, instead of the Central
Government to  order the division on recommendation of the Commission.
Clause 18.— This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to procedure for investigation of combinations.
 It is, inter alia,  proposed to insert a new sub-section ( 1A) to provide that the
Commission may, after receipt of the response of the parties to the combination under sub-
section (1), call for a report from the Director General and such report shall be submitted by
the Director General within sixty days. However, the Commission may, on sufficient reason
being submitted by the Director General for non-submission of report within sixty days,
grant up to sixty days more to the Director General for submission of the report.
Clause 19.— This clause seeks to substitute section 30 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to inquiry into disclosures under sub-section (2) of section 6.

22
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, where any person or
enterprise has given a notice under sub-section ( 2) of section 6, the Commission shall
inquire, (a) whether the disclosure made in the notice is correct (b)  whether the combination
has, or is likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on competition.
 It is proposed to substitute section 30 so as to provide that where any person or
enterprise has given a notice under sub-section (2) of section 6, the Commission shall examine
such notice and form its prima facie opinion and proceed  in accordance with the provisions
of section 29.
Clause 20.— This clause seeks to amend section 32 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to acts taking place outside India but having an effect on competition in India. The
proposed amendment is  clarificatory in nature.
Clause 21.— This clause seeks to substitute section 33 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to power to grant interim relief.
 Sub-section ( 2) of the said section confers specific power upon the Competition
Commission of India to grant , by order,  a temporary  injunction restraining any party from
importing such  goods until  the conclusion of such inquiry or until further orders, without
giving notice to the opposite party, where it deems it necessary and a copy  of such order
granting temporary injunction shall be sent to the concerned authorities in cases specified in
the said sub-section. Sub-section ( 3) of the existing aforesaid section provides that the
provisions of rules 2A to 5 (both inclusive) of Order XXXIX of the  First  Schedule to the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  shall, as far as may be, apply to a temporary injunction
issued by the Commission  under  this  Act, as they apply  to  temporary  injunction issued  by
a civil court.
 It is proposed to omit said sub-sections (2) and (3).
Clause 22.— This clause seeks to omit section 34 of the Competition Act, 2002 relating
to power to award compensation.
 The power to award compensation is proposed to be conferred upon the Appellate
Tribunal by new section 53N proposed to be inserted by clause 34 of the Bill. It is, therefore,
proposed to omit aforesaid section 34 conferring power upon the Competition Commission
of India to award compensation.
Clause 23.— This clause seeks to amend  section 35 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to appearance before of the Competition Commission of India.
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said  section, a complainant or defendant
or  the  Director  General may either appear in person or  authorise one or more  chartered
accountants  or company secretaries or cost accountants  or legal  practitioners  or any of his
or its officers to present his  or its case before the Commission.
It is proposed to amend the said section so as to substitute the words ‘‘person or an
enterprises’’, for the words ‘‘a complainant or defendent’’ for appearance before the
Commission.
Clause 24.— This clause seeks to substitute  section 36 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to power of Commission to regulate its own procedure.
 The existing provisions confer powers upon the Competition Commission of India,
inter alia, to dismiss an application in default or deciding it ex parte or exercise power in
respect of any other matter which may be prescribed and provides that  every  proceeding
before the Commission shall be deemed to  be  a judicial proceeding within the meaning of
sections 193 and 228 and for the  purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the
Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section  195 and Chapter
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973.
 It is proposed to omit said powers and provision.
Clause 25.— This clause seeks to omit  section 37 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to review of orders of  the Competition Commission of India.

23
Clause 26.— This clause seeks to substitute  section 39 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to execution of orders of  the Competition Commission of India which provides that
every order passed  by  the Commission  under this Act shall be enforced by the Commission
in  the same  manner  as if it were a decree or order made by a High Court  or the  principal
civil court in a suit pending therein and it  shall  be lawful  for  the Commission to send, in the
event of its inability  to execute it, such order to the High Court or the principal civil court,
as the case may be.
 It is proposed to substitute said  section,  inter alia, to provide that   if a person fails
to pay any monetary penalty imposed on him under this Act, the Commission shall proceed
to recover such penalty, in the manner as may be specified by regulations. Sub-section (2) of
proposed new section provides that in a case where the Commission is of the opinion that it
would be expedient to recover the penalty imposed under the Competition Act, 2002 in
accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, it may make a reference to this
effect to the concerned income-tax authority under Income-tax Act, 1961 for recovery of the
penalty as tax due under the said Act.
Clause 27.— This clause seeks to omit  section 40 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to appeal.
 Under the existing provisions contained in the said  section, any  person  aggrieved by
any decision or order  of  the Commission  may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within
sixty  days from  the  date  of  communication of the decision  or  order  of  the  Commission
to him on one or more of the grounds specified in  section  100 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.
 It is proposed to insert, by clause 34 of the Bill, new sections 53B and 53T to provide
filing of appeal from any direction, decision or order referred to in clause (a) of  new section
53A to the Appellate Tribunal and filing of an appeal to the Supreme Court from any decision
or order of the Appellate Tribunal. Ommission of section 40 is consequential in nature.
Clause 28.— This clause seeks to substitute  section 42 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to contravention of orders of the Competition Commission of India.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said  section if any person contravenes,
without  any reasonable  ground,  any order of the Commission, or any condition  or restriction
subject  to  which any approval,  sanction, direction  or exemption  in relation to any matter
has been accorded, given, made or granted  under this Act or fails to pay the penalty imposed
under this Act,  he  shall  be liable to be detained in civil prison for  a  term which  may
extend to one year, unless in the meantime the  Commission  directs  his  release  and he shall
also be liable to  a  penalty  not exceeding rupees ten lakh.
 It is proposed to substitute the said section so as to provide that a civil court having
jurisdiction  shall order for civil prision and additional penalty on a complaint  made by the
Commission.
Clause 29.— This clause seeks to amend  section 43 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to penalty for failure to comply with directions of  the Competition Commission of
India and Director General of the Commission. The proposed amendment is consequential
in nature.
Clause 30.— This clause seeks to amend  section 46 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to power to impose lesser penalty.
  Under the existing provisions of the said section the Competition Commission of
India  has been conferred power  to  impose lesser penalty in the circumstances mentioned in
that section. The first proviso to said section provides that the Commission shall not impose
lesser penalty in cases  where proceedings for the violation of any of the provisions of this
Act or the rules or the regulations have been instituted or  any investigation  has  been
directed to be made under section  26  before making of such disclosure.

24
 It is proposed to substitute said first proviso to provide that the Commission shall not
impose lesser penalty  in cases where the report of investigation  directed to be made under
section  26  has been received before making of such disclosure.
Clause 31.— This clause seeks to amend  section 49 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to Competition advocacy.
 Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section ( 1) of the said  section  the
Central  Government  may, in formulating a policy on competition (including  review  of
laws  related  to  competition), make a reference to the Commission for its opinion  on
possible  effect of such policy on competition and on receipt of such a reference,  the
Commission  shall, within sixty days of  making  such reference,  give  its  opinion to the
Central  Government,  which  may thereafter formulate the policy as it deems fit.
It is proposed to amend said sub-section (1) to enable a State Government, in formulating
a policy on competition, make a reference to the Commission for its opinion under said
section and provisions of this section would apply to the reference made by the State
Government.
Clause 32.— This clause seeks to amend  section 51 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to constitution of fund.
  The provisions contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of the existing said section,
inter alia, provide that the  monies received as costs from parties to proceedings  before the
Commission shall be credited to the “Competition Fund” constituted by that section.
  It is proposed to omit said clause ( b) so as  to provide that the  monies received as
costs from parties to proceedings  before the Commission shall  not be credited to the
Competition Fund.
Clause 33.— This clause seeks to amend  section 52 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to accounts and audit.
The Explanation to sub-section ( 2) of said section clarifies that the orders  of  the
Commission, being matters appealable to  the  Supreme Court, shall not be subject to audit
under this section.
It is, therefore, proposed to amend said Explanation so as to provide that the orders  of
the  Commission, being matters appealable to the Competition Appellate Tribunal shall also
not be subject to audit under this section.
Clause 34.— This clause seeks to insert  new Chapter VIIIA of the Competition Act,
2002 relating to establishment of Competition Appellate Tribunal.
 The new Chapter VIIIA contains provisions for (a) establishment of Appellate Tribunal,
(b) appeal to Appellate Tribunal, ( c) composition of Appellate Tribunal,
(d) qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and members of Appellate Tribunal,
(e) Selection Committee, (f) term of office of Chairperson and members of Appellate Tribunal,
(g) terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and members,  (h) vacancies, (i) resignation
of Chairperson and members, (j) member to act as Chairperson in certain cases, (k) removal
and suspension of Chairperson and members of Appellate Tribunal, ( l) restriction on
employment of Chairperson and other members in certain cases, ( m) Staff of Appellate
Tribunal, (n) Procedure for awarding compensation, (o) procedure and powers of Appellate
Tribunal, ( p) execution of orders of Appellate Tribunal, ( q) contravention of orders of
Appellate Tribunal, (r) vacancy  or Appellate Tribunal not  to  invalidate acts or proceedings,
(s) right to legal representation, ( t) appeal to Supreme Court and ( u) power to punish for
contempt.
Clause 35.— This clause seeks to amend  section 57 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to restriction on disclosure of information.

25
 Under the existing provisions  contained in the said section, no information relating
to  any enterprise, being an information which has been obtained by or on  behalf  of  the
Commission for the purposes of  this  Act,  shall, without  the  previous  permission in
writing of  the  enterprise,  be disclosed  otherwise  than in compliance with or for the
purposes  of the Competition Act or any other law for the time being in force.
  Clause 34 of the Bill proposes to insert  new Chapter VIIIA in the Competition Act,
2002 relating to Competition Appellate Tribunal. It is proposed to bring the Appellate Tribunal
within the scope of section 57 of the Competition Act, 2002. The proposed amendment is
consequential in nature.
Clause 36.— This clause seeks to amend  section 58 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to Members, Director General, Registrar, officers and other employees, etc., of  the
Competition Commission of India, to be public servants.
 Under the existing provisions  contained in the said section, the Chairperson and
other Members and the Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or  Assistant  Directors
General and Registrar and officers and  other employees  of  the  Commission  shall  be
deemed,  while  acting   or purporting  to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of the
Competition Act, 2002, to  be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the  Indian
Penal Code.
 Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to confer power upon  the  Commission to appoint a
Secretary instead of Registrar. Clause 34 of the Bill proposes to insert  new Chapter VIII-A
in the Competition Act, 2002 to establish the Competition Appellate Tribunal. It is proposed
to bring the Secretary or officers or other employees of the Commission, Chairperson,
members, officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal within the scope of section
58 of the Competition Act, 2002. The propose amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 37.— This clause seeks to amend  section 59 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to protection of action taken in good faith.
 Under the existing provisions  contained in the said section, no suit, prosecution or
other  legal  proceedings can lie against the Central Government  or Commission or any
officer of the Central Government or the Chairperson or  any  Member or the Director
General, Additional, Joint, Deputy  or Assistant  Directors  General  or  Registrar   or  officers
or  other employees  of the Commission for anything which is in good faith  done  or intended
to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
  Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to confer power upon  the  Commission to appoint a
Secretary instead of Registrar . Clause 34 of the Bill proposes to insert  new Chapter VIII-A
in the Competition Act, 2002 proposing to establish the Competition Appellate Tribunal.  It
is proposed to bring the Secretary or officers or other employees of the Commission,
Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal within the
scope of the aforesaid section. The proposed amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 38.— This clause seeks to amend  section 61 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.
 Under the existing provisions  contained in the said section, no civil court  shall have
jurisdiction  to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect  of any  matter which the Commission
is empowered by or under this Act  to determine  and  no injunction shall be granted by any
court  or  other authority  in respect of any action taken or to be taken in  pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Act.
 Clause 34 of the Bill proposes to insert  new Chapter VIII-A in the Competition
Act, 2002 proposing to establish the Competition Appellate Tribunal.  It is proposed to
exclude the jurisdiction of civil courts in respect of any matter in which the Commission
or Appellate Tribunal is empowered to determine. The proposed amendment is
consequential in nature.

26
Clause 39.— This clause seeks to amend  section 63 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to power to make rules.
 It is proposed to amend said section so as to confer powers upon the Central
Government to make rules in respect of certain matters specified in that section and to make
certain other amendments which are consequential in nature.
Clause 40.— This clause seeks to amend  section 64 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to power to make regulations by the Competition Commission of India.
 It is proposed to amend said section 64 so as to confer powers upon the Competition
Commission of India to make regulations in respect of certain matters specified in the said
section
Clause 41.— This clause seeks to amend  section 66 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to repeal and saving.
 Under the existing provisions, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act,
1969 is proposed to be repealed and upon such repeal, the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the repealed
Act shall stand dissolved. Sub-sections ( 2) to (10) of the aforesaid section deals with the
matters arising out of such repeal.
 It is proposed to amend said section 66 so as to provide that the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission may continue to exercise jurisdiction and power
under that Act for a period of two years from the date of bringing into force of section 66 of
the Competition Act, 2002, only in respect of all cases of proceeding filed before such
commencement. It further provides that the transfer of pending cases after the two years
period to the Appellate Tribunal or the National Commission under Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 depending on the nature of cases. It also provides that the staff of the Commission
who has been employed on regular basis by the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission shall, on its dissolution, become employees for the Competition Commission
or the Appellate Tribunal in the manner as specified by the Central Government.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to establish a Competition Appellate Tribunal with a Chair-
person and up to two members, along with associated staff, whose expenses would be paid
from the Consolidated Fund of India. However clause (4) of the Bill seeks to reduce the
strength of the Competition Commission from ten additional Members to six additional
Members. Clause 13 of the Bill further provides for Commission to function as a collegium
and not through Benches, leading to absence of need for provision of offices to these Benches,
and the need for branches of Director General’s office at these Benches.
2. The expenditure to be incurred on creation of the competition Appellate Tribunal
would be rupees 109.61 lakh per annum. However, there would be a decrease in expendi-
ture up to an extent of rupees 222.39 lakh in a year due to reduction of strength of Compe-
tition Commission of India from ten additional members to six additional members, and by
removal of the concept of Benches functioning at different locations, and their associated
Director General subordinate offices. Thus, there would be an overall saving of rupees
112.78 lakh per annum.
3. Thus, there would not be any additional financial outgo due to the changes
proposed in the amendment Bill.
27

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to amend section 63 of the Competition Act, 2002. This
clause empowers the Central Government to make rules, by notification, to carry out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. The matters in respect of which such rules may be
made are specified therein. These matters relate to, inter alia,  provide for (a) the term of
selection committee and manner of selection of panel of names under sub-section ( 2) of
section 9; (b)  the number of Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General  or
such officers or other employees in the office of Director General and the manner in which
such Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors or such officers or other employees
may be appointed under sub-section (1A) of section 16; (c) the salary, allowances and other
terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees in addition to the  Director
General,  Additional, Joint,  Deputy  or  Assistant Directors  General  under sub-section (3)
of section 16; (d)  the  qualifications  for  appointment of  officers and other employees in
addition to the  Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General
under sub-section (4) of section 16;  (e)  the  salaries  and allowances and other terms and
conditions  of service of the Secretary  in addition to the officers and other employees
payable, and the  number  of such officers and employees under sub-section  ( 2)  of
section 17; ( f ) the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Appellate Tribunal
under sub-section (2) of section 53B and the fees payable in respect of such appeal; (g) the
term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names under sub-
section (2) of section 53E, (h) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of
the Chairperson and other members of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) of section
53G; (i) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 53M; (j) the fee which
shall be accompanied with every application made under sub-section ( 2) of section 53N;
(k) the other matters under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 53-O in respect of which
the Appellate Tribunal shall have powers under the Code of Civil Procedure while trying a
suit; and (l) the  manner  in  which  the monies  transferred  to  the  Competition Commission
of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall  be dealt with by that  Competition
Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal under  the  fourth proviso to sub-section (2)
of section 66;
2. Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to amend section 64 of the  Competition Act, 2002. This
clause empowers the Competition  Commission of India  to make regulations, by notification,
to carry out the purposes of the proposed legislation. The matters in respect of which such
regulations may be made are specified therein. These matters relate to, inter alia,  provide
for (a) the procedures to be followed for engaging the experts and professionals under sub-
section (3) of section 17; (b) the rules procedure in regard to the transaction of business at
the meetings of the Commission under sub-section (1) of section 22; and (c) the manner in
which penalty shall be recovered under sub-section (1) of section 39.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and the regulations made by the
Competition  Commission of India  shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are made,
before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are generally
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power involved is of a normal character.
28

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPETITION ACT, 2002
(12 OF 2003)
*                          *                             *                            *                            *
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
*                         *                              *                            *                            *
Prohibition of abuse of dominant position
4. (1) No enterprise shall abuse its dominant position.
(2) There shall be an abuse of dominant position under sub-section ( 1), if an
enterprise,—
*                         *                              *                            *                            *
(c) indulges in practice or practices resulting in denial of market access; or
*                         *                              *                            *                            *
8. (1) The Commission shall consist of  a  Chairperson  and not less than two and not
more than ten other Members  to be appointed by the Central Government:
Provided that the Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson and  a Member
during the first year of the establishment of the Commission.
 (2) The  Chairperson  and  every other Member shall be  a  person  of ability,  integrity
and standing and who, has been, or is qualified to  be,  a  judge  of  a High Court, or, has
special  knowledge  of,  and  professional   experience   of  not  less   than  fifteen   years   in
international  trade,  economics,  business, commerce,  law,  finance,  accountancy,  manage-
ment, industry, public affairs, administration  or  in  any other matter which, in the opinion of
the Central  Government,  may be useful to the Commission.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole-time Members.
9. The Chairperson  and  other Members shall be selected in the manner as may be
prescribed.
10. (1)  The Chairperson  and  every other Member shall hold office as such  for  a
term  of  five years from the date on which he enters upon his  office and shall be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such after he has
attained,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-seven years;
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-five years.
*                          *                              *                            *                            *
12.  The  Chairperson  and other Members shall not,  for  a  period  of one year from
the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any employment in, or connected with the
management or administration of, any enterprise which has been a party to a proceeding
before the Commission under this Act:
Provided  that  nothing contained in this section shall apply  to  any  employment
under the Central Government or a State Government or local  authority or in any statutory
authority or any corporation established  by  or  under  any  Central, State or Provincial Act
or  a  Government  company  as  defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
Definitions.
Composition of
Commission.
Selection of
Chairperson and
other Members.
Term of office
of Chairperson
and other
Members.
Restriction  on
employment of
Chairperson
and other
Members  in
certain  cases.
1  of  1956.
29
Abuse of
dominant
position.

30
13. The Central Government shall designate any Member as Member Administration
who  shall exercise such financial and administrative powers as may be  vested in him under
the rules made by the Central Government:
Provided  that  the  Member  Administration shall  have  authority  to  delegate  such
of his financial and administrative powers as  he  may  think  fit  to  any  other officer of the
Commission  subject  to  the  condition  that  such officer shall, while exercising such
delegated  powers  continue  to  act  under the  direction,  superintendence  and  control of
the Member Administration.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
16. (1) The Central Government  may,  by  notification,  appoint  a   Director  General
and  as  many  Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General or such other  advis-
ers,  consultants  or  officers,  as it may think fit,  for  the  purposes  of  assisting  the
Commission in  conducting  inquiry  into  contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
and for the conduct  of cases before the Commission and for performing such other func-
tions  as are, or may be, provided by or under this Act.
(2) Every Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors General or  such  other
advisers,  consultants and officers, shall  exercise  his  powers,  and discharge his functions,
subject to the general  control,  supervision and direction of the Director General.
(3) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of  service  of  the  Director
General and Additional, Joint, Deputy and  Assistant Directors  General  or such other advis-
ers, consultants  or  officers, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4)  The Director General and Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors Gen-
eral or such other advisers, consultants or officers shall be appointed from amongst persons
of integrity and outstanding ability and who have experience in investigation, and knowl-
edge of accountancy, management, business, public administration, international trade, law
or economics and such other qualifications as may be prescribed.
17. (1) The  Commission  may  appoint  a  Registrar and  such  officers  and  other
employees  as it considers necessary for the efficient performance  of its functions under this
Act.
(2)  The  salaries  and  allowances payable to  and  other  terms  and conditions  of
service  of  the  Registrar  and  officers  and  other employees  of the Commission and the
number of such officers and other employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
19. (1)   The   Commission  may   inquire  into  any   alleged  contravention  of  the
provisions  contained in  sub-section  (1)  of  section  3 or sub-section (1) of section 4 either
on its own motion or  on—
(a)  receipt  of  a  complaint,  accompanied by such  fee  as  may  be  determined
by  regulations,  from  any   person,  consumer  or  their  association or trade associa-
tion;  or
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
 21. (1) Where in the course of  a  proceeding  before  any statutory  authority an
issue is raised by  any party  that  any decision which such statutory authority has
taken  or proposes  to take, is or would be, contrary to any of the provisions of this
Act,  then  such  statutory authority may make  a  reference  in respect of such issue to
the Commission.
(2)  On  receipt of a reference under sub-section ( 1), the  Commission shall,  after
hearing the parties to the proceedings, give its opinion  to  such statutory authority which
shall thereafter pass such order on  the issues referred to in that sub-section as it deems fit:
Financial and
administrative
powers of
Member
Administra-
tion.
Appointment
of  Director
General, etc.
Registrar and
officers and
other
employees of
Commission.
Inquiry  into
certain
agreements
and  dominant
position  of
enterprise.
Reference  by
statutory
authority.

31
Provided that the Commission shall give its opinion under this section within sixty
days of receipt of such reference.
22. (1) The jurisdiction, powers and authority  of the Commission may be exercised
by Benches thereof.
 (2) The Benches shall be constituted by the Chairperson and each Bench  shall con-
sist of not less than two Members.
  (3) Every Bench shall consist of at least one Judicial Member.
 Explanation.—For  the purposes of this sub-section, “Judicial  Member”  means  a
Member who is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of  a High Court.
 (4) The  Bench  over  which the Chairperson  presides  shall  be  the  Principal Bench
and the other Benches shall be known as the Additional  Benches.
 (5) There shall be constituted by the Chairperson one or more Benches  to be called
the Mergers Bench or Mergers Benches, as the case may be,  exclusively to deal with mat-
ters referred to in sections 5 and 6.
 (6) The places at which the Principal Bench, other Additional Bench or Mergers
Bench  shall  ordinarily sit, shall be such  as  the  Central Government may, by notification,
specify.
23. (1) Where any  Benches are constituted, the Chairperson may, from time to  time,
by  order,  make provisions as to the distribution of the business  of the  Commission amongst
the Benches and specify the matters, which  may be dealt with by each Bench.
(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within  the purview  of  the
business allocated to a Bench, the decision  of  the Chairperson thereon shall be final.
(3) The Chairperson may—
(i) transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench;  or
(ii) authorise  the  Members  of  one Bench  to  discharge  also  the functions of
the Members of other Bench:
Provided  that the Chairperson shall transfer, with the prior approval of  the  Central
Government, a Member from one Bench situated  in  one city to another Bench situated in
another city.
(4) The Chairperson may, for the purpose of securing that any case or  matter which,
having regard to the nature of the questions  involved,  requires or is required in his opinion
or under the rules made by the  Central  Government in this behalf, to be decided by a Bench
composed  of  more than two Members, issue such general or special orders as  he may deem
fit.
24. If  the  Members of a Bench differ in opinion on  any  point,  they  shall state the
point or points on which they differ, and make a  reference to the Chairperson who shall
either hear the point or points  himself  or refer the case for hearing on such point or points
by  one  or more of the other Members and such point or points shall be decided  according
to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard  the case, including those who
first heard it.
25. An  inquiry shall  be  initiated  or  a  complaint be instituted or a reference be made
under this Act before a  Bench within the local limits of whose jurisdiction—
(a)  the respondent, or each of the respondents, where there are  more  than  one,
at the time of the initiation of inquiry or institution  of  the complaint or making of
reference, as the case may be, actually and  voluntarily  resides,  or carries on business,
or personally works  for gain;  or
Benches of
Commission.
Distribution of
business of
Commission
amongst
Benches.
Procedure  for
deciding  a
case where
Members of a
Bench  differ
in opinion.
Jurisdiction of
Bench.

32
(b) any of the respondents, where there are more than one, at the time  of the
initiation of the inquiry or institution of complaint or making  of  reference, as the case
may be, actually and voluntarily resides or  carries  on business or personally works
for gain provided that in such  case either the leave of the Bench is given, or the
respondents who do  not  reside,  or  carry on business, or personally work for  gain,  as
aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution;  or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
 Explanation.—A  respondent,  being a person referred to in  sub-clause  (iii)  or sub-
clause (vi) or sub-clause (vii) or sub-clause (viii)  of  clause  (l) of section 2, shall be deemed
to carry on business at  its  sole  or  principal  place of business in India or  at  its  registered
office  in  India  or where it has also a subordinate office  at  such place.
26. (1) On receipt of a complaint or a reference from the Central Government or a
State  Government or a statutory authority or on its own knowledge  or  information, under
section 19, if the Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie case, it shall
direct the Director General  to  cause  an investigation to be made into the matter.
(2)  The  Director  General  shall,  on  receipt  of  direction  under sub-section ( 1),
submit a report on his findings within such period as may be specified by the Commission.
(3)  Where  on receipt of a complaint under clause (a) of  sub-section  (1)  of section
19, the Commission is of the opinion that there exists  no  prima facie case, it shall dismiss
the complaint and may pass such orders as it deems fit, including imposition of costs, if
necessary.
(4)  The Commission shall forward a copy of the report referred to  in sub-section  (2)
to the parties concerned or to the Central Government or  the  State Government or the
statutory authority, as the case  may be.
(5)  If the report of the Director General relates on a complaint  and  such  report
recommends that there is no contravention of any of  the  provisions  of this Act, the com-
plainant shall be given an opportunity  to rebut the findings of the Director General.
(6)  If, after hearing the complainant, the Commission agrees with the  recommenda-
tion  of  the  Director  General,   it  shall  dismiss   the complaint.
(7)  If,  after  hearing  the complainant, the Commission  is  of  the  opinion  that
further  inquiry  is called for, it  shall  direct  the complainant to proceed with the complaint.
(8)  If the report of the Director General relates on a reference made  under sub-
section (1) and such report recommends that there  is  no contravention  of  the  provisions of
this Act, the  Commission  shall  invite  comments of the Central Government or the State
Government  or the  statutory  authority, as the case may be, on such report  and  on  receipt
of such comments, the Commission shall return the reference if  there  is  no  prima  facie
case or proceed with the  reference  as  a  complaint if there is a prima facie case.
(9)  If the report of the Director General referred to in  sub-section  (2) recommends
that there is contravention of any of the provisions of  this Act, and the Commission is of the
opinion that further inquiry is  called  for,  it shall inquire into such contravention  in  accor-
dance  with the provisions of this Act.
27. Where after inquiry the Commission finds that  any  agreement  referred  to in
section 3 or action of an enterprise  in  a  dominant position, is in contravention of section 3
or section 4, as the  case may be, it may pass all or any of the following orders, namely:—
* * * * *
(c) award compensation to parties in accordance with the  provisions  contained
in section 34;
* * * * *
(f)  recommend  to  the  Central Government for  the  division  of  an  enterprise
enjoying dominant position;
(g) pass such other order as it may deem fit.
* * * * *
Procedure for
inquiry on
complaints
under section
19.
Orders by
Commission
after  inquiry
into  agreements
or  abuse  of
dominant
position.

33
28. (1) The Central Government, on recommendation under clause (f) of section 27,
may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, by
order in writing, direct division of an enterprise enjoying dominant position to ensure that
such enterprise does not abuse its dominant position.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generally of the foregoing powers, the
order referred to in sub-section ( 1) may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
(d) the payment of compensation to any person who suffered any loss due to
dominant position of such enterprise;
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
29. (1) Where the Commission is of the opinion that a combination is likely to cause,
or has caused an appreciable adverse effect on competition within the relevant market in
India, it shall issue a notice to show cause to the parties to combination calling upon them to
respond within thirty days of the receipt of the notice, as to why investigation in respect of
such combination should not be conducted.
(2) The Commission, if it is prima facie of the opinion that the combination has, or is
likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall, within seven working
days from the date of receipt of the response of the parties to the combination, direct the
parties to the said combination to publish details of the combination within ten working days
of such direction, in such manner, as it thinks appropriate, for bringing the combination to
the knowledge or information of the public and persons affected or likely to be affected by
such combination.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
30. Where any person or enterprise has given a notice under sub-section (2) of section
6, the Commission shall inquire—
(a) whether the disclosure made in the notice is correct;
(b)  whether the combination has, or is likely to have, an appreciable adverse
effect on competition.
* * * * *
32. The Commission shall, notwithstanding that,—
(a)  an  agreement  referred  to in section 3 has  been  entered  into  outside India;
or
(b) any party to such agreement is outside India;  or
(c) any enterprise abusing the dominant position is outside India;  or
(d) a combination has taken place outside India;  or
(e) any party to combination is outside India;  or
(f)  any  other  matter  or practice or action  arising  out  of  such  agreement or
dominant position or combination is outside India,
 have  power  to  inquire  into such agreement  or  abuse  of  dominant position  or  combina-
tion  if such agreement or dominant  position  or combination  has, or is likely to have, an
appreciable adverse  effect on competition in the relevant market in India.
33.  (1) Where during an inquiry before  the Commission, it is proved to the satisfac-
tion of the Commission, by  affidavit  or  otherwise, that an act in contravention of  sub-
section  (1)  of section 3 or sub-section (1) of section 4 or section 6 has been  committed  and
continues to be committed or that such act is about  to  be  committed,  the  Commission
may,  by  order,  grant  a  temporary  injunction  restraining any party from carrying on such
act until  the  conclusion  of  such inquiry or until further orders,  without  giving  notice to
the opposite party, where it deems it necessary.
Acts taking
place outside
India but having
an effect on
competition in
India.
Division of
enterprise
enjoying
dominant
position.
Procedure for
investigation of
combinations.
Inquiry into
disclosures
under sub-
section (2) of
section 6.
Power to grant
interim relief.

34
(2) Where during the inquiry before the Commission it is proved to the  satisfaction  of
the Commission by affidavit or otherwise that  import  of  any goods is likely to contravene
sub-section (1) of section 3  or sub-section  ( 1) of section 4 or section 6, it may, by order,
grant  a  temporary injunction restraining any party from importing such  goods until  the
conclusion of such inquiry or until further orders, without giving notice to the opposite
party, where it deems it necessary and a copy  of such order granting temporary injunction
shall be sent to the concerned authorities.
(3) The provisions of rules 2A to 5 (both inclusive) of Order XXXIX of  the  First
Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall, as far as may be, apply to a temporary
injunction issued by the  Commission  under  this  Act, as they apply  to  temporary  injunc-
tion  issued  by a civil court, and any reference in any such rule to a suit  shall  be  construed
as  a  reference   to  any  inquiry  before  the  Commission.
34. (1) Without prejudice to any  other  provisions  contained in this Act, any person
may make an  application  to  the Commission for an order for the recovery of compensation
from  any  enterprise for any loss or damage shown to have been suffered, by  such  person
as  a result of any contravention of the  provisions  of  Chapter II, having been committed by
such enterprise.
(2) The Commission may, after an inquiry made into the allegations mentioned in the
application made under sub-section ( 1), pass an order  directing  the  enterprise  to make
payment to the applicant,  of  the  amount  determined  by  it  as  realisable  from  the
enterprise  as  compensation  for  the  loss or damage caused to the  applicant  as  a  result  of
any contravention of the provisions of Chapter  II  having  been committed by such enter-
prise.
 (3)  Where any loss or damage referred to in sub-section (1) is caused  to  numerous
persons  having the same interest, one or more  of  such  persons   may,  with  the  permission
of  the  Commission,  make   an  application  under  that sub-section for and on behalf of, or
for  the  benefit  of, the persons so interested, and thereupon, the  provisions  of  rule  8  of
Order 1 of the First Schedule to the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908, shall apply subject to
the  modification  that  every reference therein to a suit or decree shall be construed as  a
reference to the application before the Commission and the order of  the Commission thereon.
35. A complainant or defendant or  the  Director  General may either appear in person
or authorise one or more  chartered  accountants  or company secretaries or cost accountants
or  legal  practitioners  or any of his or its officers to present his  or  its case before the
Commission.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a)  “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in  clause
(b)  of  sub-section  (1)  of   section  2  of  the  Chartered Accountants  Act, 1949 and
who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that
Act;
(b) “company secretary” means a company secretary as defined in clause (c)  of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries  Act,  1980  and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
(c) “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in clause (b)  of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act,  1959  and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under  sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
(d) “legal  practitioner” means an advocate, vakil or an attorney  of  any High
Court, and includes a pleader in practice.
36. (1)  The Commission  shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the  Code
of  Civil  Procedure,  1908, but shall be  guided  by  the  principles  of natural justice and,
subject to the other provisions of this  Act  and  of  any  rules made by  the  Central  Govern-
ment,  the  Commission  shall have powers to regulate its own procedure  including  the
places at which they shall have their sittings, duration of  oral  hearings when granted, and
times of its inquiry.
Power to
award
compensa-
tion.
Appearance
before
Commission.
Power of
Commission to
regulate its
own procedure.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
38 of 1949.
56 of 1980.
23 of 1959.
5 of 1908.

35
(2)  The  Commission shall have, for the purposes of  discharging  its  functions  under
this Act, the same powers as are vested in  a  civil  court  under  the  Code of Civil Procedure,
1908,  while  trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining  him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) subject  to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the  Indian Evidence
Act,  1872, requisitioning any public record  or document or copy of such record or
document from any office;
(f) dismissing an application in default or deciding it ex parte;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3)  Every  proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to  be  a  judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and for  the purposes of section 196
of the Indian Penal Code  and  the Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of  section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973.
(4)  The  Commission  may call upon such experts, from the  fields  of  economics,
commerce,  accountancy,  international trade or  from  any  other  discipline  as it deems
necessary, to assist the Commission  in  the conduct of any inquiry or proceeding before it.
(5) The Commission may direct any person—
(a)  to  produce  before the Director General or the Registrar  or  an  officer
authorised by it, such books, accounts or other documents  in  the  custody or under the
control of such person so directed as may be  specified  or described in the direction,
being documents relating  to  any  trade, the examination of which may be required for
the  purposes  of this Act;
(b) to furnish to the Director General or the Registrar or any officer  authorised
by it, as respects the trade or such other information  as  may  be in his possession in
relation to the trade carried on by  such  person, as may be required for the purposes of
this Act.
 (6) If the Commission is of the opinion that any agreement referred to  in section 3 or
abuse of dominant position referred to in section 4 or  the  combination  referred to in section
5 has caused or is likely  to  cause  an  appreciable adverse effect on competition in  the
relevant market in India and it is necessary to protect, without further delay,  the  interests of
consumers and other market participants in India, it  may  conduct  an inquiry or adjudicate
upon any matter under this  Act after giving a reasonable oral hearing to the parties con-
cerned.
37. Any person aggrieved by an order  of  the Commission from which an appeal is
allowed by this Act but  no  appeal  has  been preferred, may, within thirty days from the date
of  the  order,  apply to the Commission for review of its order  and  the  Commission may
make such order thereon as it thinks fit:
Provided  that the Commission may entertain a review application after  the  expiry of
the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that  the  applicant  was prevented by sufficient
cause from preferring  the  application in time:
Provided further that no order shall be modified  or  set  aside  without giving an
opportunity of being  heard  to  the  person  in  whose favour the order is given and the
Director  General  where he was a party to the proceedings.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
39. Every order passed  by  the  Commission  under this Act shall be enforced by the
Commission in  the  same  manner  as if it were a decree or order made by a High Court  or
Review of
orders of
Commission.
Execution of
orders of
Commission.
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.

36
the  principal  civil court in a suit pending therein and it  shall  be  lawful  for  the Commis-
sion to send, in the event of its inability  to  execute it, such order to the High Court or the
principal civil court,  as the case may be, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of an order against a person referred to in sub-clause (iii)  or sub-
clause (vi) or sub-clause (vii) of clause (1) of section  2, the registered office or the
sole or principal place of business of the  person in India or where the person has also
a subordinate office, that subordinate office, is situated;
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the place, where the  person
concerned voluntarily resides or carries on  business  or personally works for gain, is
situated,
and  thereupon  the court to which the order is so sent shall  execute  the order as if it were a
decree or order sent to it for execution.
40. Any  person  aggrieved by any decision or order  of  the  Commission  may file an
appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty  days  from  the  date  of  communication of the
decision  or  order  of  the  Commission  to him on one or more of the grounds specified in
section  100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided  that  the  Supreme Court may, if it is  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing  the  appeal  within  the said period, allow it to be
filed within a further  period  not exceeding sixty days:
Provided  further  that  no appeal shall lie against any  decision  or  order of the
Commission made with the consent of the parties.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
CHAPTER VI
P
ENALTIES
42. (1) Without prejudice  to  the  provisions  of this Act, if any person contravenes,
without  any  reasonable  ground,  any order of the Commission, or any condition  or  restric-
tion  subject  to  which any approval,  sanction  direction  or  exemption  in relation to any
matter has been accorded, given, made or  granted  under this Act or fails to pay the penalty
imposed under this  Act,  he  shall  be liable to be detained in civil prison for  a  term  which
may  extend to one year, unless in the meantime the  Commission  directs  his  release  and
he shall also be liable to  a  penalty  not  exceeding rupees ten lakhs.
(2)  The  Commission may, while making an order under this Act,  issue  such direc-
tions to any person or authority, not inconsistent with this  Act,   as   it  thinks  necessary  or
desirable,   for   the   proper  implementation  or execution of the order, and any person who
commits  breach  of,  or  fails to comply with, any obligation imposed  on  him  under  such
direction, may be ordered by the Commission to be detained  in  civil  prison  for  a term not
exceeding one year  unless  in the meantime the Commission  directs his release and he shall
also be liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees ten lakhs.
43.  If any person fails to comply with a direction given  by—
(a) the Commission under sub-section (5) of section 36;  or
(b) the  Director  General  while exercising powers  referred  to  in  sub-
section (2) of section 41,
the  Commission  shall impose on such person a penalty of  rupees  one  lakh for each day
during which such failure continues.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
Appeal.
Contravention
of orders of
Commission.
Penalty  for
failure  to
comply with
directions  of
Commission
and Director
General.
5 of 1908.

37
46. The Commission may, if it is satisfied that any producer, seller, distributor, trader
or service provider included in any cartel, which is alleged to have violated section 3, has
made a full and true disclosure in respect of the alleged violations and such disclosure is
vital, impose upon such producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider a lesser penalty
as it may deem fit, than leviable under this Act or the rules or the regulations:
Provided that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the Commission in cases where
proceedings for the violation of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations
have been instituted or any investigation has been directed to be made under section 26
before making of such disclosure:
Provided further that lesser penalty shall be imposed by the Commission only in respect
of a producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider included in the cartel, who first
made the full, true and vital disclosures under this section:
Provided also that the Commission may, if it satisfied that such producer, seller,
distributor, trader or service provider included in the cartel had in the course of proceedings,—
(a) not compiled with the condition on which the lesser penalty was imposed by
the Commission; or
(b) had given false evidence; or
(c) the disclosure made is not vital,
and thereupon such producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider may be tried for
the offence with respect to which the lesser penalty was imposed and shall also be liable to
the imposition of penalty to which such person has been liable, had lesser penalty not been
imposed.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VII
C
OMPETITON ADVOCACY
49. (1) In formulating a policy on competition (including review of laws related to
competition), the Central Government may make a reference to the Commission for its opinion
on possible effect of such policy on competition and on receipt of such a reference, the
Commission shall within sixty days of making such reference, give its opinion to the Central
Government, which may thereafter formulate the policy as it deems fit.
* * * * *
51. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be  called the “Competition Fund” and
there shall be credited thereto—
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
(b)  the  monies received as costs from parties to proceedings  before  the Com-
mission;
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
(d)  the interest accrued on the amounts referred to in clauses (a) to  (c).
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
52. (1) * * * * *
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the orders of the
Commission, being matters appealable to the Supreme Court, shall not be subject to audit
under this section.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
Power to
impose lesser
penalty.
Competition
advocacy.
Constitution of
Fund.
Accounts and
audit.

38
57. No information relating  to  any enterprise, being an information which has been
obtained by or  on  behalf  of  the Commission for the purposes of  this  Act,  shall,  without
the  previous  permission in writing of  the  enterprise,  be  disclosed  otherwise  than in
compliance with or for the  purposes  of  this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
58.  The Chairperson  and  other Members and the Director General, Additional, Joint,
Deputy  or  Assistant  Directors General and Registrar and officers and  other  employees  of
the  Commission  shall  be  deemed,  while  acting   or  purporting  to act in pursuance of any
of the provisions of this  Act,  to  be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian  Penal Code.
59. No suit, prosecution or  other  legal  proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government  or  Commission or any officer of the Central Government or the Chairperson
or  any  Member or the Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy  or  Assistant  Directors
General  or  Registrar   or  officers  or  other  employees  of the Commission for anything
which is in good faith  done  or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations
made  thereunder.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
61. No civil court  shall  have  jurisdiction  to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect  of  any  matter which the Commission is empowered by or under this Act  to  deter-
mine  and  no injunction shall be granted by a any court  or  other  authority  in respect of any
action taken or to be taken in  pursuance  of any power conferred by or under this Act.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
63. (1) *               *                           *                            *                            *
 (2)  In  particular,  and without prejudice to the generality  of  the foregoing  power,
such  rules  may  provide for all  or  any  of  the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which the Chairperson and other Members shall be selected
under secion 9;
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
(c) the financial and administrative powers which may be vested in the Member
Administration under section 13;
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
(e) the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Director
General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General or such other advisers,
consultants or officers under sub-section (3) of section 16;
(f) the qualifications for appointment of the Director General, Additional, Joint,
Deputy or Assistant Directors General or such other advisers, consultants or officers
under sub-section (4) of section 16;
(g)  the  salaries and allowances and other terms and  conditions  of  service of
the Registrar and officers and other employees payable, and  the  number  of such
officers and employees under sub-section  (2)  of section 17;
(h) for securing any case or matter which requires to be decided by a Bench
composed of more than two Memebrs under sub-section (4) of section 23;
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
(n) the manner in which the monies transferred to the Central Government shall be
dealt with by that Government under the fourth proviso to sub-section (2) of section 66;
Members,
Director
General,
Registrar,
officers and
other
employees, etc.,
of Commission
to be public
servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Exclusion of
jurisdiction of
civil courts.
Power to make
rules.
Restriction on
disclosure of
information.
45 of 1860.

39
64. (1)*              *                             *                            *                            *
(2) In  particular,  and without prejudice to the generality  of  the  foregoing  provisions,
such regulations may provide for all or any  of  the following matters, namely:—
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
(d)  the  fee which may be determined under clause ( a) of  sub-section ( 1) of
section 19;
(e)  any  other matter in respect of which provision is to be, or  may be, made by
regulations.
*                        *                              *                            *                            *
66. (1) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 is hereby repealed
and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission established under sub-
section (1) of section 5 of the said Act (hereinafter referred to as the repealed Act) shall
stand dissolved.
(2) On the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission,
the person appointed as the Chairman of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission and every other person appointed as Member and Director General of
Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General of
Investigation and Registration and any officer and other employee of that Commission and
holding office as such immediately before such dissolution shall vacate their respective
offices and such Chairman and other Members shall be entitled to claim compensation not
exceeding three months' pay and allowances for the premature termination of term of their
office or of any contract of service:
Provided that the Director  General of Investigation and Registration,  Additional,
joint, Deputy or Assisstant Directors General of Investigation and Registration or any officer
or other employee who has been, immediately  before the dissolution of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission appointed on deputation basis to the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall, on such dissolution, stand reverted to his
parent cadre, Ministry or Department, as the case may be:
Provided further that the Director General of Investigation and Registration,
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Director General of Investigation and Registration
or any officer or other employee who has been, immediately before the dissolution of the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, employed on regular basis by
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall become, on and from
such dissolution, the officer and employee, respectively, of the Central Government with
the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like matters as would have
been admissible to him if the rights in relation to such Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission had not been transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government
and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Central Government is
duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment are duly
altered by that Government:
Provided also that notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any
Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Directors General of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee,
employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, to the Central
Government shall not entitle such Director General of Investigation and Registration,
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration
or any officer or other employee any compensation under this Act or any other law for the
time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other
authority:
Power to make
regulations.
Repeal and
saving.
54 of 1969.
14 of 1947.

40
Provided also that where the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission
has established a provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the
Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Directors General of Investigation and Registration or the officers and other employees
employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, the monies relatable
to the officers and other employee whose services have been transferred by or under this Act
to the Central Government shall, out of the monies standing, on the dissolution of the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission to the credit of such provident
fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central
Government and such monies which stand so transferred shall be dealt with by the said
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) All cases  pertaining  to   monopolistic  trade  practices   or  restrictive trade
practices  pending   before  the  Monopolies  and  Restrictive  Trade Practices Commission
on or before the  commencement  of  this Act, including such cases, in which any unfair trade
practice  has   also been alleged, shall, on such commencement, stand transferred  to  the
Competition Commission of India and shall be  adjudicated  by  that   Commission in accor-
dance with the provisions of the repealed Act  as if that Act had not been repealed.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 3), all cases pertaining to unfair trade
practices other than those referred to in clause ( x) of sub-section (1) of section 36A of the
Monopolies and Restricive Trade Practices Act, 1969 and pending before the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission on or before the commecnement of this Act
shall, on such commencement, stand transferred to the National Commission constituted
under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and the National Commission shall dispose of
such cases as if they were cases filed under that Act:
Provided that the national Commission may, if it considers appropriate, transfer any
case transferred to it under this sub-section, to the concerned State Commission established
under section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and that State Commission shall
dispose of such case as if it was filed under that Act.
(5) All cases pertaining to unfair trade practices referred to in clause ( x) of sub-
section (1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 and
pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission on or before
the commencement of this Act shall, on such commencement, stand transferred to the Com-
petition Commission of India, and the Competition Commission of India shall dispose of
such cases as if they were cases filed under that Act.
* * * * *
54 of 1969.
68 of 1986.
68 of 1986.
54 of 1969.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Competition Act, 2002.
————
(Shir Prem Chand Gupta, Minister of Company Affairs)
MGIPMRND—5908LS1(S3)—02.03.2006.