AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

03 DEC 700

Bill No. 18 of 2004

THE CHILLI GROWERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2004
By
Suri R. Sampasiva Rao, M.P.
A
BILL,
10 provide for the protection and welfare of chilli growers.

Br: itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fitth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Chilli Growers (Welfare) Act,2004. Short title
sine आते
(2) Itextends to the whole of India. coimecarik

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
5 inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.
(a) "chilli grower" means any person who cultivates chilli;

(0) "small and marginal chilli growers" shall mean chilli growers who are declared
as such under this Act; and

10 (c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.



Central
Government
to procure
chilli and fix
femunerative
Price thereot

Export of
excess chilli

Insurance

Establishment
of Chilli
Growers

Power to
make rules

eS

4. The Central Government shall endeavour to export all the excess chilli produced in
the Country during a y

5. The entire quantity of chilli grown by the small and marginal chilli growers shalt
be compulso: ‘sured free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities,
decline in yields of chilli produced, fallin prices of chilli and such other eventualities. ng
may be prescribed.

6. (1) The Central Government shall establish a fund to be known as the Chilli
Growers Welfare Fund.

(2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contribute to the fund
in such ratio, as may be prescribed.

(3) The fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:

(2) to extend financial help to small and marginal chilli growers in such
cases, as may be prescribed:

(i) giving financial assistance to chilli growers for purchasing chilli seeds,
Pesticides and fertilizers and in cases of low yields or fall in prices of chillies op
destruction of their crops due to rains, cyclones and floods.

7. The Central Government may. by notification in the official gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act

10

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Chilli is grown in many parts of'the country. The production of chilli is the highest in
Andbra Pradesh, Mowever, incidence of leaf curl and bacterial wilt adversely atte
(५ ies of chilli and the limited
availabilty of hybrid technology has also affected the production of chilli, India has immense
potential ow chillies, However. the cost of cultivation of chilli is high mainly because of
high cost of labour and plant protection chemicals, The chilli growing farmer invests huge
amount of money on its cultivation: but the remunerative price which he getsis not sufficient
for him. The result is that the chilli grower does not sell his prod i ly. The: main
reason behind the chilli growers. getting non-remunerative prices 1५.७
stock of chilli in the market. There is, therefore; an urvent need to brin;
chilli growers of Government's heljyin the evento excess production or tial
and also to ensure that their minimum needs are looked alter by the Government. The creation
of the proposed fund and the provision of insurance cover will help the chilli growers
immensely.

he Bill seeks to achieve the above objective,

New कक: R. SAMBASIVA RAO’
June 22.2004,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the purchase of chilli from chilli growers by the
Central Government through the Spices Board.

Clause 5 provides that the entire chilli grown by small and marginal chilli growers
shall be compulsorily insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural
calamities. etc.

Clause 6 provides for the establishment of a Chilli Growers Welfare Fund to
which the Central Government and State Governments shall contribute in such ratio as
may be prescribed.

‘The Bill. therefore, ifenacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees three hundred
crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees four hundred crore is also
likely to be involved


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA,

A
BILL.
to provide for the protection and welfare of chilli growers

(Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—830LS—28.06 2004,