1
THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYY A SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different States.
2. In the Special Marriage Act, 1954, in section 4, after clause (c), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(a) parents of both the parties to the marriage have given their consent to the
marriage:
Provided that in case of absence of the consent of parents of the female, the age of
the female for the solemnization of the marriage shall be twenty-one years;".
Bill No. 18 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
43 of 1954. Amendment
of section 4.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has traditional values and the children grow up with customs and moral
values. But, the number of inter-caste marriages by persuading and misguiding the girls in
the country is increasing day by day. Among these, the number of girls having inter-caste
marriage between the age of eighteen to twenty-one years is the maximum. The situation gets
worse when the girls who enter into inter-caste marriage in a frivolous manner are tortured
and their life becomes hell.
The age of eighteen years for girls is such an age when the process of mental, emotional
and intellectual development gets pace and the mind does not focus on one thing. Their
mind are filled with questions and the slightest binding on freedom seems them obstructing
and force them on undertaking the things right or wrong in their own way only.
Since marriage is a very important part of the life, it is necessary that if a girl does inter-
caste marriage, the consent of her parents must be taken keeping in view her future life or the
age stipulated for marriage of a girl which at present is 18 years be made 21 years so that she
could be ponder over the correctness of inter-caste marriage very efficiently.
Thus, the Bill seeks to amend the Special Marriage Act, 1954 with a view to save the life
of such innocent girls who enter into inter-caste marriage by persuasion or frivolity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL  CHINAYYA  SHETTY
December 29, 2017.
2

Conditions
relating to
solemnization
of special
marriages.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954
(43 OF 1954)
* * * *
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law  for the time being in force
relating to the solemnization of marriages, a marriage between any two persons may be
solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the following conditions are fulfilled,
namely:—
(a) * * * *
(b) * * * *
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of
eighteen years;
* * * *
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3661LS(S3)—23.01.2018.