1
THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971, in
Explanation 4, after clause (1) the following clause shall be added at the end, namely:—
‘‘(m)  display by any regional or  national political party of its election symbol in
the centre or any other part of the Indian National Flag.’’
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No. 18 of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
69 of 1971.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Shri Pingali Venkaiyananda Ji envisaged Indian National Flag and it was adopted in its
present form by the Constituent Assembly of India in its meeting held on 22nd July, 1947, i.e.
a few days before the independence of India on 15th August, 1947 and thereafter it
was adopted by the Indian Republic. In our country "Tricolour" refers to the
Indian National Flag.
Indian National Flag represents the expectations and aspirations of the citizens of the
country. It is not only the symbol of our national pride, but also a symbol of dignity and
respect of the country. Personnel of the Armed Forces including many citizens have sacrificed
their lives to keep the dignity of tricolour intact over the period of the last six decades. Our
National Flag represents expectations and aspirations of the people of the whole  country.
Therefore, it is necessary that no regional or national political party of the country should
display the National Flag in its election symbol.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act,
1971 to maintain honour to the Indian National Flag.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL  CHINAYYA  SHETTY
November 27, 2019.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR ACT, 1971
[69 OF 1971]
Whoever in any public place or in any other place within public view burns, mutilates,
defaces, defiles, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon or otherwise shows disrespect to or
brings into contempt  (whether by words, either spoken or written, or by acts) the Indian
National Flag or the Constitution of India or any part thereof, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation 1. — Comments expressing disapprobation or criticism of the Constitution
or of the Indian National Flag or of any measures of the Government with a view to obtain an
amendment of the Constitution of India or an alteration of the Indian National Flag by lawful
means do not constitute an offence under this section.
* * * * *
Explanation 4. — The disrespect to the Indian National Flag means and includes—
(a) a gross affront or indignity offered to the Indian National Flag; or
* * * * *
(1) intentionally displaying the Indian National Flag with the "saffron" down.
* * * * *
Insults to
Indian
National
Flag and
Constitution
of India.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4502LS(S3)—13.01.2020.