1
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 7 of  2016
5
THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA (ESTABLISHMENT OF
 A PERMANENT BENCH AT THIRUV ANANTHAPURAM)
BILL, 2016
By
DR. A. SAMPATH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of India at
Thiruvananthapuram.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-Seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court of India (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Thiruvananthapuram) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of India
at Thiruvananthapuram and such Judges of the Supreme Court, being not less than five in
number, as the Chief Justice of India may from time to time nominate, shall sit at
Thiruvananthapuram in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being
vested in the Supreme Court in respect of cases arising in the southern, south-eastern and
south-western States of the country.
Establishment of
a Permanent
Bench of Supreme
Court at
Thiruvananthapuram.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The appellants are already burdened and are further shunned to face the ordeal of
having the litigations to travel thousands of kilometeres to the seat of the Supreme Court
in New Delhi for their hearing, and follow up of their cases. From the farthest places of
South India, it is burdensome, financially, physically as well as mentally.
The number of pending court cases in the country has crossed more than three crore
now. Figures on the chronic backlog of court cases are an indictment of the country's
beleaguered legal system. The plight of persons awaiting trial needs to be understood and
addressed. It is not only the wastage of time, but also an increased financial burden that
makes the process inconvenient, cumbersome and expensive thereby ascertaining the fact
that "Justice delayed is justice denied".
Article 130 of the Constitution envisages that the Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or
in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India, may, with the approval of the
President, from time to time, appoint. The language of the article clearly indicates that there
was an intention of the founding fathers of the Constitution to have more than one seat of
the Supreme Court and hence it is one of the "mores of the day".
Hence, the Bill seeks to establish a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court in
Thiruvananthapuram district in the State of Kerala. Geographically, Kerala is a strategic
location for a permanent Bench as it is easily accessible for litigants of southern,
south-eastern and south-western States. This will provide for a robust mechanism not only
to manage pendencey of court cases but simultaneously makes the justice opportune,
public-friendly and efficient without any regional disparity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A. SAMPATH
November 17, 2015.
————
THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A  PERMANENT BENCH
AT THIRUVANANTHAPURAM) BILL, 2016
BY
DR. A. SAMPATH, M.P.
[Copy of letter No. K-15019/17/2015-US.I dated 30 December, 2015 from
Shri Sadananda Gowda, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Supreme Court of
India (Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Thiruvananthapuram) Bill, 2016 by
Dr. A. Sampath, M.P., recommends the introduction of the Bill under article 117(1) and
consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution, in Lok Sabha.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court of India at Thiruvananthapuram. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought
into operation, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not
possible to estimate, at this stage, the exact amount of expenditure that will be involved.
However, a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is likely to be involved
per annum for the purpose of payment of allowance to the Judges of the Bench and payment
of salaries to the Court servants.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore may be involved
for the construction of building of the Court, etc. and appointment of staff members.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court at
Thiruvananthapuram.
————
(Dr. A. Sampath, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4189LS(S3)—12-02-2016.