THE  RURAL  ELECTRIFICATION  BILL,  2007
By
SHRI RAMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Rural Electrification Authority to ensure
uninterrupted electricity supply to farmers for their agricultural activities
and  at least one single point light connection to every household in
rural  areas and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rural Electrification Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Rural Electrification Authority established under
section 3;
(b) “Electricity” means electric energy generated, transmitted, supplied or traded
for any purpose except the transmission of a message; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title
and extent.
Bill No. 18 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.5
10

2
Establishment
of Rural
Electrification
Authority.
Functions and
duties of the
Authority.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish an authority to be known as the Rural
Electrification Authority having its headquarters at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra.
(2) The Authority shall consist of five members to be appointed by the Central
Government of whom at least two members shall be from amongst the farmers to be nominated
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint one of the members as the Chairperson of
the Authority.
(4) The Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Central Government.
(5) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and other members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority may appoint a Secretary and such other officers and employees as
it considers necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act and on such
terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall perform such functions and duties as the Central Government
may prescribe or direct, and in particular the following—
(i) develop a sound, adequate and uniform national policy in order to provide,—
(a) uninterrupted power supply to the farmers for irrigation and other
agricultural purposes;
(b) uninterrupted power supply to the village and cottage industries and
village artisans engaged in self-employment in villages; and
(c) at least one single point connection of electricity in every dwelling
unit of each village in the country.
(ii) establish new power generating station in such areas as it may consider
necessary;
(iii) invite and encourage private sector in establishing power units exclusively
for the rural areas in the country;
(iv) carry out surveys and to collect and record data concerning the generation,
distribution and utilisation of power in the rural sector and the development of power
resources in the rural areas; and
(v)  co-ordinate the activities of the national and state planning agencies in
relation to the control and utilisation of power resources for the rural sector.
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the
Authority may also provide for—
(i) supply of electricity to the farmers at such subsidised rates, as may be
prescribed, from time to time; and
(ii) single point light connection and supply of electricity free of cost to the
dwelling units of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes
in rural areas.
5. (1) The Authority shall set up a Fund to be known as the Rural Electricity
Development Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by
way of donation, contribution, assistance or otherwise by the Authority.
Rural
Electricity
Development
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(4)  All payments by the Authority towards rural electrification expenditure and for
its administrative expenditure shall be made from the fund.
6. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, adequate funds for the rural electrification works to be
undertaken by the Authority.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Provisions to
be in addition
to and not in
derogation of
any other Act.
Power to
make rules.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There is an acute shortage of power in our country which is the primary cause of our
backwardness. As a result of power shortage, both the industrial sector and the agricultural
sector cannot make progress at the desired levels resulting ultimately in backwardness. Our
Power stations whether they are thermal, hydel or atomic are generating electricity much
below their capacity whereas the demand for electricity is increasing day-by-day in all the
sectors. It has been observed that while distributing the generated electricity, the Electricity
Boards and Undertakings give priority to the urban areas and the industrial sector thereby
neglecting the rural areas particularly the agricultural sector. Very often it has been seen that
the electricity meant for rural areas is diverted to the urban areas. Hue and cry is raised by the
people and by the print and the electronic media if there is a load shedding for a few hours in
the cities but nobody bothers when the electricity is cut off in the rural areas for months
together even if the crops of the hapless farmers are dying in the absence of water as he
cannot run the tubewell without electricity. Since more than seventy-five per cent. of our
population is engaged in agriculture and agriculture-based small and cottage industries, it is
our duty to give uninterrupted electricity supply to the agricultural sector. It is also necessary
to provide at least one point electric connection to every household including every hut in
the country to remove the darkness prevailing there. To achieve these objectives, it is
proposed to establish a Rural Electrification Authority to provide electricity exclusively to
the rural areas and uninterrupted electricity supply to the agricultural sector and give at least
single point light connection to every household in the villages.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMDAS  ATHAWALE
December 15, 2006.
4
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \ 229LS.PM65

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Rural Electrification
Authority. Clause 4 provides, inter alia, that Authoritry  shall establish power stations and
provide at least one power connection to every rural household. Clause 5 provides for
setting up of a Rural Electricity Development Fund. Clause 6 provides that Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will  involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
annual expenditure of rupees five hundred crores will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores is also  likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power, therefore, is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Rural Electrification Authority to ensure
uninterrupted electricity supply to farmers for their agricultural activities
and  atleast one single point light connection to every household in
rural  areas and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—229LS(S-3)—14.02.2007.