S3\f\Bill 2022\LS\12LS\12LS(Fin. Bill)
Bill No. 18-F of  2022
ORIGINAL
THE FINANCE BILL, 2022
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 25 MARCH, 2022
RAJYA SABHA ON 29 MARCH, 2022)
ASSENTED  TO
 ON 30 MARCH, 2022
ACT NO. 6 OF 2022

THE FINANCE BILL, 2022
——————
ARRANGEMENT  OF  CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
CHAPTER  II
RA TES OF INCOME-TAX
2. Income-tax.
CHAPTER  III
DIRECT TAXES
Income-tax
3. Amendment of section 2.
4. Amendment of section 10.
5. Amendment of section 11.
6. Amendment of section 12A.
7. Amendment of section 12AB.
8. Amendment of section 13.
9. Amendment of section 14A.
10. Amendment of section 17.
11. Amendment of section 35.
12. Amendment of section 37.
13. Amendment of section 40.
14. Amendment of section 43B.
15. Amendment of section 50.
16. Amendment of section 56.
17. Amendment of section 68.
18. Amendment of section 79.
19. Insertion of new section 79A.
20. Amendment of section 80CCD.
21. Amendment of section 80DD.
22. Amendment of section 80-IAC.
23. Amendment of section 80LA.
24. Amendment of section 92CA.
25. Amendment of section 94.
26. Amendment of section 115BAB.
27. Amendment of section 115BBD.
28. Insertion of new sections 115BBH and 115BBI.
29. Amendment of section 115JC.
Bill No. 18-F of  2022

(ii)
CLAUSES
30. Amendment of section 115JF.
31. Amendment of section 115TD.
32. Amendment of section 115TE.
33. Amendment of section 115TF.
34. Amendment of section 119.
35. Amendment of section 132.
36. Amendment of section 132B.
37. Amendment of section 133A.
38. Amendment of section 139.
39. Insertion of new section 140B.
40. Amendment of section 143.
41. Amendment of section 144.
42. Amendment of section 144B.
43. Amendment of section 144C.
44. Amendment of section 148.
45. Amendment of section 148A.
46. Insertion of new section 148B.
47. Amendment of section 149.
48. Amendment of section 153.
49. Amendment of section 153B.
50. Amendment of section 155.
51. Insertion of new section 156A.
52. Amendment of section 158AA.
53. Insertion of new section 158AB.
54. Amendment of section 170.
55. Insertion of new section 170A.
56. Amendment of section 179.
57. Amendment of section 194-IA.
58. Amendment of section 194-IB.
59. Insertion of new section 194R.
60. Insertion of new section 194S.
61. Amendment of section 201.
62. Amendment of section 206AB.
63. Amendment of section 206C.
64. Amendment of section 206CCA.
65. Amendment of section 234A.
66. Amendment of section 234B.
67. Insertion of new section 239A.
68. Amendment of section 245MA.
69. Amendment of section 246A.
70. Amendment of section 248.
71. Amendment of section 253.
72. Amendment of section 255.
73. Amendment of section 263.
74. Amendment of section 271AAB.
75. Amendment of section 271AAC.
76. Amendment of section 271AAD.
77. Insertion of new section 271AAE.
78. Amendment of section 271C.

(iii)
79. Amendment of section 272A.
80. Amendment of section 276AB.
81. Amendment of section 276B.
82. Amendment of section 276CC.
83. Amendment of section 278A.
84. Amendment of section 278AA.
85. Substitution of new section for section 285B.
CHAPTER IV
INDIRECT TAXES
Customs
86. Amendment of section 2.
87. Substitution of new section for section 3.
88. Amendment of section 5.
89. Amendment of section 14.
90. Amendment of section 28E.
91. Amendment of section 28H.
92. Amendment of section 28-I.
93. Amendment of section 28J.
94. Insertion of new section 110AA.
95. Insertion of new section 135AA.
96. Amendment of section 137.
97. Validation of certain actions taken under Customs Act.
Customs Tariff
98. Amendment of First Schedule.
Excise
99. Amendment of Fourth Schedule.
Central Goods and Services Tax
100. Amendment of section 16.
101. Amendment of section 29.
102. Amendment of section 34.
103. Amendment of section 37.
104. Substitution of new section for section 38.
105. Amendment of section 39.
106. Substitution of new section for section 41.
107. Omission of sections 42, 43 and 43A.
108. Amendment of section 47.
109. Amendment of section 48.
110. Amendment of section 49.
111. Amendment of section 50.
112. Amendment of section 52.
113. Amendment of section 54.
114. Amendment of section 168.
115. Amendment of notification issued under section 146 of Central Goods and Services Tax Act read with section 20 of
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, retrospectively.
116. Amendment of notification issued under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 50, sub-section ( 12) of section 54 and
section 56 of Central Goods and Services Tax Act, retrospectively.
C
LAUSES

(iv)
117. Retrospective exemption from, or levy or collection of  central tax in certain cases.
118. Retrospective effect to notification issued under sub-section (2) of section 7 of Central Goods and Services Tax Act.
Integrated Goods and Services Tax
119. Amendment of notification issued under section 20 of Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, read with sub-sections
(1) and ( 3) of section 50, sub-section ( 12) of section 54 and section 56 of Central Goods and Services Tax Act,
retrospectively.
120. Retrospective exemption from, or levy or collection of  integrated tax in certain cases.
121. Retrospective effect to notification issued under clause (i) of section 20 of Integrated Goods and Services Tax read with
sub-section (2) of section 7 of Central Goods and Services Tax Act.
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax
122. Amendment of notification issued under section 21 of Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act read with
sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 50, sub-section (12) of section 54 and section 56 of Central Goods and Services Tax
Act, retrospectively.
123. Retrospective exemption from, or levy or collection of  Union territory tax in certain cases.
124. Retrospective effect to notification issued under clause ( i) of section 21 of Union Territory Goods and Services Tax
Act read with sub-section (2) of section 7 of Central Goods and Services Tax Act.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
PART I
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934
125. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.
PART II
AMENDMENT TO THE FINANCE ACT, 2001
126. Amendment of Seventh Schedule.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE.
THE NINTH SCHEDULE.
C
LAUSES

1
THE  FINANCE  BILL, 2022
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government for the
financial year 2022-2023.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 2022.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,—
(a) sections 2 to 85 shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 2022;
(b) sections 100 to 114 shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
CHAPTER II
RATES OF INCOME-TAX
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and (3), for the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2022, income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified
in Part I of the First Schedule and such tax shall be increased by a surcharge, for the
purposes of the Union, calculated in each case in the manner provided therein.
Bill No. 18-F of  2022
Short title and
commencement.
Income-tax.

2
43 of 1961.
(2) In the cases to which Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule applies, where the
assessee has, in the previous year, any net agricultural income exceeding five thousand
rupees, in addition to total income, and the total income exceeds two lakh fifty thousand
rupees, then,—
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided
in clause (b) (that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total
income after the first two lakh fifty thousand rupees of the total income but without
being liable to tax), only for the purpose of charging income-tax in respect of the total
income; and
(b) the income-tax chargeable shall be calculated as follows:—
(i) the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated
and the amount of income-tax shall be determined in respect of the aggregate
income at the rates specified in the said Paragraph A, as if such aggregate
income were the total income;
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be increased by a sum of two lakh
fifty thousand rupees, and the amount of income-tax shall be determined in
respect of the net agricultural income as so increased at the rates specified in
the said Paragraph A, as if the net agricultural income as so increased were the
total income;
(iii) the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with sub-clause
(i) shall be reduced by the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with
sub-clause (ii) and the sum so arrived at shall be the income-tax in respect of
the total income:
Provided that in the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is of the
age of sixty years or more but less than eighty years at any time during the previous year,
referred to in item (II) of Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule, the provisions of this
sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "two lakh fifty thousand rupees", the words
"three lakh rupees" had been substituted:
Provided further that in the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is
of the age of eighty years or more at any time during the previous year, referred to in item
(III) of Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule, the provisions of this sub-section shall
have effect as if for the words "two lakh fifty thousand rupees", the words "five lakh
rupees" had been substituted.
(3) In cases to which the provisions of Chapter XII or Chapter XII-A or section 115JB
or section 115JC or Chapter XII-FA or Chapter XII-FB or sub-section (1A) of section 161 or
section 164 or section 164A or section 167B of the Income-tax Act, 1961, (hereinafter referred
to as the Income-tax Act) apply, the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that
Chapter or that section, and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section ( 1) or the
rates as specified in that Chapter or section, as the case may be:
Provided that the amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions
of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the Income-tax Act shall be increased by
a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, as provided in Paragraph A, B, C, D or E, as the
case may be, of Part I of the First Schedule, except in case of a domestic company whose
income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAA or section 115BAB of the Income-tax Act
or in case of co-operative society whose income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAD
of the Income-tax Act:

3
Provided further that in respect of any income chargeable to tax under section 115A,
115AB, 115AC, 115ACA, 115AD, 115B, 115BA, 115BB, 115BBA, 115BBC, 115BBD, 115BBF,
115BBG , 115E, 115JB or 115JC of the Income-tax Act, the amount of income-tax computed
under this sub-section shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union,
calculated,—
(a) in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or association of
persons or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical
person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act,
not having any income under section 115AD of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) having a total income exceeding fifty lakh rupees but not exceeding
one crore rupees, at the rate of ten per cent. of such income-tax;
(ii) having a total income exceeding one crore rupees, but not exceeding
two crore rupees, at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such income-tax;
(iii) having a total income exceeding two crore rupees, but not exceeding
five crore rupees, at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such income-tax; and
(iv) having a total income exceeding five crore rupees, at the rate of
thirty-seven per cent. of such income-tax;
(aa) in the case of individual or every association of persons or body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to
in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, having income
under section 115AD of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) having a total income exceeding fifty lakh rupees but not exceeding
one crore rupees, at the rate of ten per cent. of such income-tax;
(ii) having a total income exceeding one crore rupees, but not exceeding
two crore rupees, at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such income-tax;
(iii) having a total income [excluding the income by way of dividend or
income of the nature referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section
115AD of the Income-tax Act] exceeding two crore rupees but not exceeding
five crore rupees, at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such income-tax;
(iv) having a total income [excluding the income by way of dividend or
income of the nature referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 115AD of the Income-tax Act] exceeding five crore rupees, at the rate of
thirty-seven per cent. of such income-tax; and
(v) having a total income [including the income by way of dividend or
income of the nature referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 115AD of the Income-tax Act] exceeding two crore rupees, but is not
covered in sub-clauses ( iii) and ( iv), at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such
income-tax:
Provided that in case where the total income includes any income by way
of dividend or income chargeable under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 115AD of the Income-tax Act, the rate of surcharge on the income-tax
calculated on that part of income shall not exceed fifteen per cent.;
(b) in the case of every co-operative society except a co-operative society
whose income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAD of the Income-tax Act or
firm or local authority, at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax, where the
total income exceeds one crore rupees;

4
(c) in the case of every domestic company except such domestic company
whose income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAA or section 115BAB of the
Income-tax Act,—
(i) at the rate of seven per cent. of such income-tax, where the total
income exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax, where the total
income exceeds ten crore rupees;
(d) in the case of every company, other than a domestic company,—
(i) at the rate of two per cent. of such income-tax, where the total income
exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of five per cent. of such income-tax, where the total income
exceeds ten crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of persons mentioned in ( a) and ( aa) above, having
total income chargeable to tax under section 115JC of the Income-tax Act, and such income
exceeds,—
(i) fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees, the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge thereon shall not exceed the total amount
payable as income-tax on a total income of fifty lakh rupees by more than the
amount of income that exceeds fifty lakh rupees;
(ii) one crore rupees but not exceed two crore rupees, the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge thereon shall not exceed the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of one crore rupees by
more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees;
(iii) two crore rupees but not exceed five crore rupees, the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge thereon shall not exceed the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of two crore rupees by
more than the amount of income that exceeds two crore rupees;
(iv) five crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge
thereon shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge
on a total income of five crore rupees by more than the amount of income that
exceeds five crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of persons mentioned in (b) above, having total income
chargeable to tax under section 115JC of the Income-tax Act, and such income exceeds one
crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax on such income and surcharge thereon
shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total income of one crore
rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of every company having total income chargeable to tax
under section 115JB of the Income-tax Act, and such income exceeds one crore rupees but
does not exceed ten crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax on such income
and surcharge thereon, shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total
income of one crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore
rupees:
Provided also that in the case of every company having total income chargeable to tax
under section 115JB of the Income-tax Act, and such income exceeds ten crore rupees, the

5
total amount payable as income-tax on such income and surcharge thereon, shall not exceed
the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of ten crore rupees
by more than the amount of income that exceeds ten crore rupees:
Provided also that in respect of any income chargeable to tax under clause ( i) of
sub-section (1) of section 115BBE of the Income-tax Act, the amount of income-tax computed
under this sub-section shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union,
calculated at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided also that in case of every domestic company whose income is chargeable to
tax under section 115BAA or section 115BAB of the Income-tax Act, the income-tax computed
under this sub-section shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union,
calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided also that in case of every individual or Hindu undivided family, whose
income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, the income-tax
computed under this sub-section shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the
Union, as provided in Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule:
Provided also that in case of every resident co-operative society, whose income is
chargeable to tax under section 115BAD of the Income-tax Act, the income-tax computed
under this sub-section shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union,
calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of such "advance tax".
(4) In cases in which tax has to be charged and paid under sub-section (2A) of section
92CE or section 115QA or section 115TA or section 115TD of the Income-tax Act, the tax
shall be charged and paid at the rates as specified in those sections and shall be increased
by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. of
such tax.
(5) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under sections 193, 194A, 194B, 194BB,
194D, 194LBA, 194LBB, 194LBC and 195 of the Income-tax Act, at the rates in force, the
deductions shall be made at the rates specified in Part II of the First Schedule and shall be
increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, calculated in cases wherever
prescribed, in the manner provided therein.
(6) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under sections 192A, 194, 194C, 194DA,
194E, 194EE, 194F, 194G, 194H, 194-I, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194-IC, 194J, 194LA, 194LB, 194LBA,
194LBB, 194LBC, 194LC, 194LD, 194K, 194M, 194N, 194-O, 194Q, 194R, 194S, 196A, 196B,
196C and 196D of the Income-tax Act, the deductions shall be made at the rates specified in
those sections and shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union,—
(a) in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or association of
persons, except in case of an association of persons consisting of only companies as
its members, or body of individuals,whether incorporated or not, or every artificial
juridical person referred to in sub-clause ( vii) of clause ( 31) of section 2 of the
Income-tax Act, being a non-resident, except in case of deduction on income by way
of dividend under section 196D of that Act, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. of such tax, where the income or the aggregate
of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction exceeds
fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees;

6
(ii) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees;
(iii) at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such tax, where the income or
the aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the
deduction exceeds two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees;
(iv) at the rate of thirty-seven per cent. of such tax, where the income or
the aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the
deduction exceeds five crore rupees;
(aa) in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or association of
persons, except in case of an association of persons consisting of only companies as
its members, or body of individuals,  whether incorporated or not, or every artificial
juridical person referred to in sub-clause ( vii) of clause ( 31) of section 2 of the
Income-tax Act, being a non-resident, in case of deduction on income by way of
dividend under section 196D of that Act, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. of such tax, where the income or the aggregate
of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction exceeds
fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds one crore rupees;
(ab) in the case of an association of persons consisting of only companies as
its members, being a non-resident, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. of such tax, where the income or the aggregate
of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction exceeds
fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds one crore rupees;
(b) in the case of every co-operative society, being a non-resident, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of seven per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of twelve per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds ten crore rupees;
(c) in the case of every firm, being a non-resident, calculated at the rate of
twelve per cent. of such tax, where the income or the aggregate of such incomes paid
or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction exceeds one crore rupees;
(d) in the case of every company, other than a domestic company, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of two per cent. of such tax, where the income or the aggregate
of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction exceeds
one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;

7
(ii) at the rate of five per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds ten crore rupees.
(7) In cases in which tax has to be collected under the proviso to section 194B of the
Income-tax Act, the collection shall be made at the rates specified in Part II of the First
Schedule, and shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, calculated,
in cases wherever prescribed, in the manner provided therein.
(8) In cases in which tax has to be collected under section 206C of the Income-tax Act,
the collection shall be made at the rates specified in that section and shall be increased by
a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union,—
(a) in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or association of
persons, except in case of an association of persons consisting of only companies as
its members, or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial
juridical person referred to in sub-clause ( vii) of clause ( 31) of section 2 of the
Income-tax Act, being a non-resident, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the aggregate
of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to the collection
exceeds fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the
aggregate of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to the
collection exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees;
(iii) at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such tax, where the income or
the aggregate of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to
the collection exceeds two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees;
(iv) at the rate of thirty-seven per cent. of such tax, where the income or
the aggregate of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to
the collection exceeds five crore rupees;
(aa) in the case of an association of persons consisting of only companies as
its members, being a non-resident, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the aggregate
of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to the collection
exceeds fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the
aggregate of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to the
collection exceeds one crore rupees;
(b) in the case of every co-operative society, being a non-resident, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of seven per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the
aggregate of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to the
collection exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of twelve per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the
aggregate of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to the
collection exceeds ten crore rupees;
(c) in the case of every firm, being a non-resident, calculated at the rate of
twelve per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the aggregate of such amounts
collected or likely to be collected and subject to the collection exceeds one crore
rupees;

8
(d) in the case of every company, other than a domestic company, calculated,—
(i) at the rate of two per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the
aggregate of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to the
collection exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of five per cent. of such tax, where the amount or the
aggregate of such amounts collected or likely to be collected and subject to the
collection exceeds ten crore rupees.
(9) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (10), in cases in which income-tax has to
be charged under sub-section ( 4) of section 172 or sub-section ( 2) of section 174 or
section 174A or section 175 or sub-section ( 2) of section 176 of the Income-tax Act or
deducted from, or paid on, income chargeable under the head "Salaries" under section 192
of the said Act or deducted under section 194P of the said Act or in which the "advance tax"
payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be computed at the rate or rates in
force, such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be charged, deducted or
computed at the rate or rates specified in Part III of the First Schedule and such tax shall be
increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, calculated in such cases and in
such manner as provided therein:
Provided that in cases to which the provisions of Chapter XII or Chapter XII-A or
section 115JB or section 115JC or Chapter XII-FA or Chapter XII-FB or sub-section (1A) of
section 161 or section 164 or section 164A or section 167B of the Income-tax Act apply,
"advance tax" shall be computed with reference to the rates imposed by this sub-section or
the rates as specified in that Chapter or section, as the case may be:
Provided further that the amount of "advance tax" computed in accordance with the
provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the Income-tax Act shall be
increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, as provided in Paragraph A, B, C,
D or E, as the case may be, of Part III of the First Schedule except in case of a domestic
company whose income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAA or section 115BAB of
the Income-tax Act or in case of a resident co-operative society whose income is chargeable
to tax under section 115BAD of the Income-tax Act:
Provided also that in respect of any income chargeable to tax under sections 115A,
115AB, 115AC, 115ACA, 115AD, 115B, 115BA, 115BB, 115BBA, 115BBC, 115BBF, 115BBG,
115BBH, 115BBI, 115E, 115JB or 115JC of the Income-tax Act, "advance tax" computed
under the first proviso shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union,
calculated,—
(a) in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or association of
persons, except in a case of an association of persons consisting of only companies
as its members, or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial
juridical person referred to in sub-clause ( vii) of clause ( 31) of section 2 of the
Income-tax Act, not having any income under section 115AD of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees;
(iii) at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such "advance tax", where the
total income exceeds two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees;
(iv) at the rate of thirty-seven per cent. of such "advance tax", where the
total income exceeds five crore rupees;

9
(aa) in the case of individual or every association of persons, except in case of
an association of persons consisting of only companies as its members, or body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to
in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, having income
under section 115AD of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds fifty lakh rupees, but does not exceed one crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees;
(iii) at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such "advance tax", where the
total income [excluding the income by way of dividend or income of the nature
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 115AD of the Income-tax
Act] exceeds two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees;
(iv) at the rate of thirty-seven per cent. of such "advance tax", where the
total income [excluding the income by way of dividend or income of the nature
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 115AD of the Income-tax
Act] exceeds five crore rupees;
(v) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income [including the income by way of dividend or income of the nature
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 115AD of the Income-tax
Act] exceeds two crore rupees but is not covered in sub-clauses ( iii) and (iv):
Provided that in case where the total income includes any income by way of
dividend or income chargeable under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 115AD
of the Income-tax Act, the rate of surcharge on the advance tax calculated on that part
of income shall not exceed fifteen per cent.;
(ab) in the case of an association of persons consisting of only companies as
its members, being a non-resident,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds fifty lakh rupees, but does not exceed one crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds one crore rupees;
(b) in the case of every co-operative society except such co-operative society
whose income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAD of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) at the rate of seven per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of twelve per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds ten crore rupees;
(c) in the case of every firm or local authority at the rate of twelve per cent. of
such "advance tax", where the total income exceeds one crore rupees;
(d) in the case of every domestic company except such domestic company
whose income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAA or section 115BAB of the
Income-tax Act,—
(i) at the rate of seven per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;

10
(ii) at the rate of twelve per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds ten crore rupees;
(e) in the case of every company, other than a domestic company,—
(i) at the rate of two per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(ii) at the rate of five per cent. of such "advance tax", where the total
income exceeds ten crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of persons mentioned in ( a) and ( aa) above,
having total income chargeable to tax under section 115JC of the Income-tax Act, and
such income exceeds,—
(a) fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees, the total
amount payable as "advance tax" on such income and surcharge thereon shall
not exceed the total amount payable as "advance tax" on a total income of fifty
lakh rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds fifty lakh rupees;
(b) one crore rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees, the total
amount payable as "advance tax" on such income and surcharge thereon shall
not exceed the total amount payable as "advance tax" on a total income of one
crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees;
(c) two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees, the total
amount payable as "advance tax" on such income and surcharge thereon shall
not exceed the total amount payable as "advance tax" on a total income of two
crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds two crore rupees;
(d) five crore rupees, the total amount payable as "advance tax" on such
income and surcharge thereon shall not exceed the total amount payable as
"advance tax" on a total income of five crore rupees by more than the amount of
income that exceeds five crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of persons mentioned in (ab) above, having total
income chargeable to tax under section 115JC of the Income-tax Act, and such income
exceeds,—
(a) fifty lakh rupees, but does not exceed one crore rupees, the total
amount payable as "advance tax" on such income and surcharge thereon shall
not exceed the total amount payable as "advance tax" on a total income of fifty
lakh rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds fifty lakh rupees;
 (b) one crore rupees, the total amount payable as "advance tax" on such
income and surcharge thereon shall not exceed the total amount payable as
"advance tax" on a total income of one crore rupees by more than the amount of
income that exceeds one crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of persons mentioned in ( b) above, having total
income chargeable to tax under section 115JC of the Income-tax Act, and such income
exceeds,—
(a) one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees, the total
amount payable as "advance tax" on such income and surcharge thereon, shall
not exceed the total amount payable as "advance tax" on a total income of
one crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore
rupees;

11
(b) ten crore rupees, the total amount payable as "advance tax" on such
income and surcharge thereon, shall not exceed the total amount payable as
"advance tax" and surcharge on a total income of ten crore rupees by more than
the amount of income that exceeds ten crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of persons mentioned in (c) above, having total income
chargeable to tax under section 115JC of the Income-tax Act, and such income exceeds one
crore rupees, the total amount payable as "advance tax" on such income and surcharge
thereon shall not exceed the total amount payable as "advance tax" on a total income of one
crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of every company having total income chargeable to tax
under section 115JB of the Income-tax Act, and such income exceeds one crore rupees but
does not exceed ten crore rupees, the total amount payable as "advance tax" on such
income and surcharge thereon, shall not exceed the total amount payable as "advance tax"
on a total income of one crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one
crore rupees:
Provided also that in the case of every company having total income chargeable to tax
under section 115JB of the Income-tax Act, and such income exceeds ten crore rupees, the
total amount payable as "advance tax" on such income and surcharge thereon, shall not
exceed the total amount payable as "advance tax" and surcharge on a total income of ten
crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds ten crore rupees:
Provided also that in respect of any income chargeable to tax under clause (i) of sub-
section (1) of section 115BBE of the Income-tax Act, the "advance tax" computed under the
first proviso shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, calculated at
the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such "advance tax":
Provided also that in case of every domestic company whose income is chargeable to
tax under section 115BAA or section 115BAB of the Income-tax Act, the "advance tax"
computed under the first proviso shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the
Union, calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of such "advance tax":
Provided also that in case of every individual or Hindu undivided family, whose
income is chargeable to tax under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, the "advance tax"
computed under the first proviso shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the
Union, as provided in Paragraph A of Part III of the First Schedule:
Provided also that in case of every resident co-operative society whose income is
chargeable to tax under section 115BAD of the Income-tax Act, the "advance tax" computed
under the first proviso shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union,
calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of such "advance tax".
(10) In cases to which Paragraph A of  Part III of the First Schedule applies, where the
assessee has, in the previous year or, if by virtue of any provision of the Income-tax Act,
income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a period other than the previous year,
in such other period, any net agricultural income exceeding five thousand rupees, in addition
to total income and the total income exceeds two lakh fifty thousand rupees, then, in
charging income-tax under sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 174A or section 175 or
sub-section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or in computing the "advance tax" payable
under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act, at the rate or rates in force,—

12
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided
in clause (b) [that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total
income after the first two lakh fifty thousand rupees of the total income but without
being liable to tax], only for the purpose of charging or computing such income-tax or,
as the case may be, "advance tax" in respect of the total income; and
(b) such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be so charged or
computed as follows:—
(i) the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated
and the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" shall be determined in respect of
the aggregate income at the rates specified in the said Paragraph A, as if such
aggregate income were the total income;
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be increased by a sum of two lakh
fifty thousand rupees, and the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" shall be
determined in respect of the net agricultural income as so increased at the rates
specified in the said Paragraph A, as if the net agricultural income were the total
income;
(iii) the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" determined in accordance
with sub-clause (i) shall be reduced by the amount of income-tax or, as the case
may be, "advance tax" determined in accordance with sub-clause ( ii) and the
sum so arrived at shall be the income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax"
in respect of the total income:
Provided that in the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is of the
age of sixty years or more but less than eighty years at any time during the previous year,
referred to in item (II) of Paragraph A of Part III of the First Schedule, the provisions of this
sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "two lakh fifty thousand rupees", the words
"three lakh rupees" had been substituted:
Provided further that in the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is
of the age of eighty years or more at any time during the previous year, referred to in
item (III) of Paragraph  A of Part III of the First Schedule, the provisions of this sub-section
shall have effect as if for the words "two lakh fifty thousand rupees", the words "five lakh
rupees" had been substituted:
Provided also that the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" so arrived at, shall be
increased by a surcharge for the purposes of the Union, calculated in each case, in the
manner provided therein.
(11) The amount of income-tax as specified in sub-sections (1) to (3) and as increased
by the applicable surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, calculated in the manner provided
therein, shall be further increased by an additional surcharge, for the purposes of the
Union, to be called the "Health and Education Cess on income-tax", calculated at the rate of
four per cent. of such income-tax and surcharge so as to fulfil the commitment of the
Government to provide and finance quality health services and universalised quality basic
education and secondary and higher education.
(12) The amount of income-tax as specified in sub-sections (4) to (10) and as increased
by the applicable surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, calculated in the manner provided
therein, shall be further increased by an additional surcharge, for the purposes of the
Union, to be called the "Health and Education Cess on income-tax", calculated at the rate of
four per cent. of such income-tax and surcharge so as to fulfil the commitment of the
Government to provide and finance quality health services and universalised quality basic
education and secondary and higher education:

13
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to cases in which tax
is to be deducted or collected under the sections of the Income-tax Act mentioned in
sub-sections (5), (6), (7) and (8), if the income subjected to deduction of tax at source or
collection of tax at source is paid to a domestic company and any other person who is
resident in India.
(13) For the purposes of this section and the First Schedule,—
(a) "domestic company" means an Indian company or any other company
which, in respect of its income liable to income-tax under the Income-tax Act, for the
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2018, has made the prescribed
arrangements for the declaration and payment within India of the dividends (including
dividends on preference shares) payable out of such income;
(b) "insurance commission" means any remuneration or reward, whether by
way of commission or otherwise, for soliciting or procuring insurance business
(including business relating to the continuance, renewal or revival of policies of
insurance);
(c) "net agricultural income" in relation to a person, means the total amount of
agricultural income, from whatever source derived, of that person computed in
accordance with the rules contained in Part IV of the First Schedule;
(d) all other words and expressions used in this section and the First Schedule
but not defined in this sub-section and defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the
meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.
CHAPTER III
DIRECT TAXES
Income-tax
3. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in clause (12A), for the words "in the written form or as print-outs of data
stored in", the words "in the written form or in electronic form or in digital form or as
print-outs of data stored in such electronic form or in digital form or in" shall be
substituted;
(b) in clause ( 42C), for the word "sales" occurring at the end and before
Explanation 1, the word "transfer" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have
been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2021;
(c) after clause (47), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(47A) "virtual digital asset" means—
(a) any information or code or number or token (not being Indian
currency or foreign currency), generated through cryptographic means or
otherwise, by whatever name called, providing a digital representation of
value exchanged with or without consideration, with the promise or
representation of having inherent value, or functions as a store of value or
a unit of account including its use in any financial transaction or investment,
but not limited to investment scheme; and can be transferred, stored or
traded electronically;
(b) a non-fungible token or any other token of similar nature, by
whatever name called;
(c) any other digital asset, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette specify:
Amendment
of section 2.

14
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, exclude any digital asset from the definition of virtual
digital asset subject to such conditions as may be specified therein.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) "non-fungible token" means such digital asset as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify;
(b) the expressions "currency", "foreign currency" and "Indian
currency" shall have the same meanings as respectively assigned
to them in clauses ( h), ( m) and ( q) of section 2 of the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999.'.
4. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023,—
(i) in clause (4D), in the Explanation, in clause (c), in sub-clause (i), in
item (III), for the words "non-residents; or", the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
"non-residents:
Provided that the condition specified in this item shall not apply where
any unit holder or holders, being non-resident during the previous year when
such unit or units were issused, becomes resident under clause (1) or clause (1A)
of section 6 in any previous year subsequent to that year, if the aggregate value
and number of the units held by such resident unit holder or holders do not
exceed five per cent. of the total units issued and fulfil such other conditions as
may be prescribed; or”;
(ii) in clause ( 4E), after the words "non-deliverable forward contracts",
the words "or offshore derivative instruments or over-the-counter derivatives,"
shall be inserted;
(iii) in clause (4F),—
(I) after the word "aircraft", the words "or a ship" shall be inserted;
(II) for the Explanation , the following Explanation  shall be
substituted, namely:—
'Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) "aircraft" means an aircraft or a helicopter, or an engine
of an aircraft or a helicopter, or any part thereof;
(ii) "ship" means a ship or an ocean vessel, engine of a
ship or ocean vessel, or any part thereof;';
(iv) after clause (4F), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(4G) any income received by a non-resident from portfolio of
securities or financial products or funds, managed or administered by any
portfolio manager on behalf of such non-resident, in an account maintained
with an Offshore Banking Unit in any International Financial Services
Centre, as referred to in sub-section ( 1A) of section 80LA, to the extent
such income accrues or arises outside India and is not deemed to accrue
or arise in India.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, "portfolio manager"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( z
) of
sub-regulation (1) of regulation (2) of the International Financial Services
Centres Authority (Capital Market Intermediaries) Regulations, 2021, made
under the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019;';
(v) in clause (8), after sub-clause (b), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to such
remuneration and income of the previous year relevant to the assessment
year beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 2023;";
Amendment
of section 10.
42 of 1999.
50 of 2019.

15
(vi) in clause ( 8A), after sub-clause ( b) and before the Explanation, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to such
remuneration, fee and income of the previous year relevant to the
assessment year beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 2023.";
(vii) in clause ( 8B), after sub-clause ( b), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to such
remuneration and income of the previous year relevant to the assessment
year beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 2023;";
(viii) after clause (9), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to such
income of the previous year relevant to the assessment year beginning on
or after the 1st day of April, 2023;";
(b) in clause (23C),—
(i) in sub-clauses ( iv), ( v), ( vi) and ( via), for the words "prescribed
authority", the words "Principal Commissioner or Commissioner" shall be
substituted;
(ii) in the third proviso,—
(I) after Explanation 1, the following Explanations shall be inserted
and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2021, namely:—
"Explanation 1A.—For the purposes of this proviso, where
the property held under  a trust or institution referred to in clause (v)
includes  any temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or other place
notified under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 80G , any sum
received by such trust or institution as a voluntary contribution  for
the purpose of renovation or repair of such temple, mosque,
gurdwara, church or other place, may, at its option, be treated by
such trust or institution  as forming part of the corpus of that trust or
institution, subject to the condition that the trust or institution,—
(a) applies such corpus only for the purpose for which
the voluntary contribution was made;
(b) does not apply such corpus for making contribution
or donation to any person;
(c) maintains such corpus as separately identifiable; and
(d) invests or deposits such corpus in the forms and
modes specified under sub-section (5) of section 11.
Explanation 1B.—For the purposes of Explanation 1A, where
any trust or institution referred to in sub-clause (v) has treated any
sum received by it as forming part of the corpus, and subsequently
any of the conditions specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b
) or
clause (c) or clause ( d) of the said Explanation is violated, such

16
sum shall be deemed to be the income of such trust or institution of
the previous year during which the violation takes place.";
(II) after Explanation 2, the following Explanations shall be inserted
with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
"Explanation 3.—For the purposes of determining the amount
of application under this proviso, where eighty-five per cent. of the
income referred to in clause (a) of this proviso is not applied wholly
and exclusively to the objects for which the fund or institution or
trust or any university or other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause ( iv) or
sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) is established,
during the previous year but is accumulated or set apart, either in
whole or in part, for application to such objects, such income so
accumulated or set apart shall not be included in the total income of
the previous year of the person in receipt of the income, if the
following conditions are complied with, namely:—
(a) such person furnishes a statement in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed, to the Assessing Officer stating
the purpose for which the income is being accumulated or set
apart and the period for which the income is to be accumulated
or set apart, which shall in no case exceed five years;
(b) the money so accumulated or set apart is invested or
deposited in the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5)
of section 11; and
(c) the statement referred to in clause (a) is furnished on
or before the due date specified under sub-section ( 1) of
section 139 for furnishing the return of income for the previous
year:
Provided that in computing the period of five years
referred to in clause (a), the period during which the income
could not be applied for the purpose for which it is so
accumulated or set apart, due to an order or injunction of any
court, shall be excluded.
Explanation 4.—Any income referred to in Explanation 3,
which,—
(a) is applied for purposes other than wholly and
exclusively to the objects for which the fund or institution or
trust or any university or other educational institution or any
hospital or other medical institution referred to in
sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or
sub-clause (via) is established or ceases to be accumulated or
set apart for application thereto; or
(b) ceases to remain invested or deposited in any of the
forms or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 11; or
(c) is not utilised for the purpose for which it is so
accumulated or set apart during the period referred to in
clause (a) of Explanation 3; or

17
(d) is credited or paid to any trust or institution registered
under section 12AA or section 12AB or to any fund or
institution or trust or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical institution referred
to in sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or
sub-clause (via),
shall be deemed to be the income of such person of the previous
year,—
(i) in which it is so applied or ceases to be so accumulated or
set apart under clause (a); or
(ii) in which it ceases to remain so invested or deposited
under clause (b); or
(iii) being the last previous year of the period, for which
the income is accumulated or set apart under clause ( a) of
Explanation 3, but not utilised for the purpose for which it is so
accumulated or set apart under clause (c); or
(iv) in which it is credited or paid to any fund or institution or
trust or any university or other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution under clause (d).
Explanation 5.—Notwithstanding anything contained in
Explanation 4, where due to circumstances beyond the control of
the person in receipt of the income, any income invested or deposited
in accordance with the provisions of clause ( b) of Explanation 3
cannot be applied for the purpose for which it was accumulated or
set apart, the Assessing Officer may, on an application made to him
in this behalf, allow such person to apply such income for such
other purpose in India as is specified in the application by that
person and as is in conformity with the objects for which the fund or
institution or trust or any university or other educational institution
or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause
(via) is established; and thereupon the provisions of Explanation 4
shall apply as if the purpose specified by that person in the
application under this Explanation were a purpose specified in the
notice given to the Assessing Officer under clause ( a) of
Explanation 3:
Provided that the Assessing Officer shall not allow application
of such income by way of payment or credit made for the purposes
referred to in clause (d) of Explanation 4:";
(iii) for the tenth proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted with
effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
"Provided also that where the total income of the fund or institution
or trust or any university or other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (
v)
or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via), without giving effect to the provisions
of the said sub-clauses, exceeds the maximum amount which is not
chargeable to tax in any previous year, such fund or institution or trust or
any university or other educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution shall,—

18
(a) keep and maintain books of account and other documents
in such form and manner and at such place, as may be prescribed; and
(b) get its accounts audited in respect of that year by an
accountant as defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of
section 288 before the specified date referred to in section 44AB and
furnish by that date, the report of such audit in the prescribed form
duly signed and verified by such accountant and setting forth such
particulars as may be prescribed:";
(iv) for the fifteenth proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
'Provided also that where the fund or institution referred to in
sub-clause (iv) or trust or institution referred to in sub-clause ( v) or any
university or other educational institution referred to in sub-clause (vi) or
any hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (via) is
approved or provisionally approved under the said clause and
subsequently,—
(a) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has noticed
occurrence of one or more specified violations during any previous
year; or
(b) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has received
a reference from the Assessing Officer under the second proviso to
sub-section (3) of section 143 for any previous year; or
(c) such case has been selected in accordance with the risk
management strategy, formulated by the Board from time to time, for
any previous year,
the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, shall,—
(i) call for such documents or information from the fund or institution
or trust or any university or other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution, or make such inquiry as he thinks necessary
in order to satisfy himself about the occurrence of any specified violation;
(ii) pass an order in writing cancelling the approval of such fund or
institution or trust or any university or other educational institution or
any hospital or other medical institution, on or before the specified date,
after affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard, for such previous
year and all subsequent previous years, if he is satisfied that one or more
specified violation has taken place;
(iii) pass an order in writing refusing to cancel the approval of such
fund or institution or trust or any university or other educational institution
or any hospital or other medical institution, on or before the specified
date, if he is not satisfied about the occurrence of one or more specified
violations;
(iv) forward a copy of the order under clause (ii) or clause (iii), as
the case may be, to the Assessing Officer and such fund or institution or
trust or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or
other medical institution.

19
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this proviso, "specified date"
shall mean the day on which the period of six months, calculated from the
end of the quarter in which the first notice is issued by the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner, on or after the 1st day of April, 2022,
calling for any document or information, or for making any inquiry, under
clause (i) expires.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this proviso, the following
shall mean "specified violation",—
(a) where any income of the fund or institution or trust or any
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution has been applied other than for the objects for
which it is established; or
(b) the fund or institution or trust or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution
has income from profits and gains of business, which is not incidental
to the attainment of its objectives or separate books of account are
not maintained by it in respect of the business which is incidental to
the attainment of its objectives; or
(c) any activity of the fund or institution or trust or any
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution,—
(A) is not genuine; or
(B) is not being carried out in accordance with all or any
of the conditions subject to which it was notified or approved; or
(d) the fund or institution or trust or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution
has not complied with the requirement of any other law for the time
being in force, and the order, direction or decree, by whatever name
called, holding that such non-compliance has occurred, has either
not been disputed or has attained finality.
Explanation 3.—For the purposes of clause (b) of this proviso, where the
Assessing Officer has intimated the Central Government or the prescribed
authority under the first proviso of sub-section ( 3) of section 143 about the
contravention of the provisions of sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or
sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause ( via) of this clause by any fund or institution or
trust or university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical
institution in respect of an assessment year, and the approval granted to such
fund or institution or trust or university or other educational institution or any
hospital or other medical institution has not been withdrawn, or the notification
issued in its case has not been rescinded, on or before the 31st day of March,
2022, such intimation shall be deemed to be a reference received by the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner as on the 1st day of April, 2022, and the provisions
of clause (b) of the second proviso to sub-section (3) of section 143 shall apply
accordingly for such assessment year:';
(v) for the nineteenth proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided also that where the fund or institution referred to in
sub-clause (iv) or the trust or institution referred to in sub-clause (v)
or any university or other educational institution referred to in
sub-clause (vi) or any hospital or other medical institution referred
to in sub-clause ( via ) has been approved by the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner, and the approval is in force for any

20
previous year, then, nothing contained in any other provision of
this section, other than clause (1) thereof, shall operate to exclude
any income received on behalf of such fund or institution or trust or
university or other educational institution or hospital or other medical
institution, as the case may be, from the total income of the person
in receipt thereof for that previous year.
Explanation.—Where, on or after the 1st day of April, 2022
any fund or institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or any trust or
institution referred to in sub-clause ( v) or any university or other
educational institution referred to in sub-clause (vi) or any hospital
or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (via) is notified
under clause (46) of section 10, the approval or provisional approval
granted to such fund or institution or trust or university or other
educational institution or hospital or other medical institution shall
become inoperative from the date of notification of such fund or
institution or trust or university or other educational institution or
hospital or other medical institution, as the case may be, under
clause (46) of the said section:”;
(vi) after the nineteenth proviso and before Explanation 1, the
following provisos shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2023, namely:—
'Provided also that the fund or institution or trust or any
university or other educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or
sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) shall furnish the return of income
for the previous year in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (4C) of section 139, within the time allowed under that
section:
Provided also that where the income or part of income or
property of any fund or institution or trust or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution
referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or
sub-clause (via), has been applied directly or indirectly for the benefit
of any person referred to in sub-section ( 3) of section 13, such
income or part of income or property shall, after taking into account
the provisions of sub-sections (2), (4) and (6) of the said section, be
deemed to be the income of such fund or institution or trust or
university or other educational institution or hospital or other medical
institution of the previous year in which it is so applied:
Provided also that where any fund or institution or trust or
any university or other educational institution or any hospital or
other medical institution referred to in sub-clause ( iv) or
sub-clause (v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) violates the
conditions of the tenth proviso or twentieth proviso, or where the
provisions of the eighteenth proviso are applicable, its income
chargeable to tax shall be computed after allowing deduction for the
expenditure (other than capital expenditure) incurred in India, for
the objects of the  fund or institution or trust or university or other
educational institution or hospital or other medical institution, subject
to fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(a) such expenditure is not from the corpus standing to
the credit of the fund or institution or trust or university or
other educational institution or hospital or other medical
institution as on the end of the financial year immediately
preceding the previous year relevant to the assessment year
for which the income is being computed;

21
(b) such expenditure is not from any loan or borrowing;
(c) claim of depreciation is not in respect of an asset,
acquisition of which has been claimed as application of income
in the same or any other previous year; and
(d) such expenditure is not in the form of any contribution
or donation to any person.
Explanation.—For the purposes of determining the amount
of expenditure under this proviso, the provisions of sub-clause (ia)
of clause (a) of section 40 and sub-sections (3) and (3A) of section
40A shall, mutatis mutandis, apply as they apply in computing the
income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”:
Provided also that for the purposes of computing income
chargeable to tax under the twenty-second proviso, no deduction in
respect of any expenditure or allowance or set off of any loss shall
be allowed to the assessee under any other provision of this Act:’.
(vii) after Explanation 2, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this clause, any sum
payable by any fund or institution or trust or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution
referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or
sub-clause (via) shall be considered as application of income during
the previous year in which such sum is actually paid by it (irrespective
of the previous year in which the liability to pay such sum was
incurred by the fund or institution or trust or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution
according to the method of accounting regularly employed by it):
Provided that where during any previous year any sum has
been claimed to have been applied by the fund or institution or trust
or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or
other medical institution, such sum shall not be allowed as application
in any subsequent previous year;”.
5. In section 11 of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after Explanation 3, the following Explanations shall be
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2021, namely:—
“Explanation 3A.—For the purposes of this sub-section, where the
property held under a trust or institution includes any temple, mosque, gurdwara,
church or other place notified under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 80G ,
any sum received by such trust or institution as voluntary contribution for the
purpose of renovation or repair of such temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or
other place, may, at its option, be treated by such trust or institution as forming
part of the corpus of the trust or the institution, subject to the condition that the
trust or the institution,—
(a) applies such corpus only for the purpose for which the voluntary
contribution was made;
(b) does not apply such corpus for making contribution or donation
to any person;
(c) maintains such corpus as separately identifiable; and
Amendment
of section 11.

22
(d) invests or deposits such corpus in the forms and modes specified
under sub-section (5) of section 11.
Explanation 3B.—For the purposes of Explanation 3A, where any trust
or institution has treated any sum received by it as forming part of the corpus,
and subsequently any of the conditions specified in clause ( a) or clause (b) or
clause (c) or clause (d) of the said Explanation is violated, such sum shall be
deemed to be the income of such trust or institution of the previous year during
which the violation takes place.”;
(b) in sub-section (3), with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023,—
(a) in clause (c), the words “or in the year immediately following the expiry
thereof” shall be omitted;
(b) for the long line, the following long line shall be substituted, namely:—
“shall be deemed to be the income of such person of the previous
year,—
(i) in which it is so applied or ceases to be so accumulated or
set apart under clause (a); or
(ii) in which it ceases to remain so invested or deposited
under clause (b); or
(iii) being the last previous year of the period, for which the
income is accumulated or set apart but not utilised for the purpose
for which it is so accumulated or set apart under clause (c); or
(iv) in which it is credited or paid to any fund or institution or
trust or any university or other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution under clause (d).”;
(c) after sub-section (7), the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.—For  the purposes of this section, any sum payable
by any trust or institution shall be considered as application of income in
the previous year in which such sum is actually paid by it (irrespective of
the previous year in which the liability to pay such sum was incurred by
the trust or institution according to the method of accounting regularly
employed by it):
Provided that where during any previous year, any sum has been
claimed to have been applied by the trust or institution, such sum shall not
be allowed as application in any subsequent previous year.”.
6. In section 12A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (b), the following
clause shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
“(b) where the total income of the trust or institution as computed under this Act
without giving effect to the provisions of sections 11 and 12 exceeds the maximum
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax in any previous year,—
(i) the books of account and other documents have been kept and
maintained in such form and manner and at such place, as may be prescribed;
and
(ii) the accounts of the trust or institution for that year have been audited
by an accountant defined in the Explanation below sub-section ( 2) of
section 288 before the specified date referred to in section 44AB and the person
in receipt of the income furnishes by that date the report of such audit in the
prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant and setting forth
such particulars, as may be prescribed; ”.
Amendment
of section
12A.

23
7. In section 12AB of the Income-tax Act, for sub-sections (4) and (5), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(4) Where registration or provisional registration of a trust or an institution has
been granted under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) or clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of section 12AA, as the case may be, and subsequently,—
(a) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has noticed occurrence
of one or more specified violations during any previous year; or
(b) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has received a reference
from the Assessing Officer under the second proviso to sub-section ( 3) of
section 143 for any previous year; or
(c) such case has been selected in accordance with the risk management
strategy, formulated by the Board from time to time, for any previous year,
the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall,—
(i) call for such documents or information from the trust or institution, or
make such inquiry as he thinks necessary in order to satisfy himself about the
occurrence or otherwise of any specified violation;
(ii)  pass an order in writing, cancelling the registration of such trust or
institution, after affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard, for such
previous year and all subsequent previous years, if he is satisfied that one or
more specified violations have taken place;
(iii) pass an order in writing, refusing to cancel the registration of such
trust or institution, if he is not satisfied about the occurrence of one or more
specified violations;
(iv) forward a copy of the order under clause (ii) or clause (iii), as the case
may be, to the Assessing Officer and such trust or institution.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the following shall mean “specified
violation”,—
(a) where any income derived from property held under trust, wholly or in part
for charitable or religious purposes, has been applied, other than for the objects of the
trust or institution; or
(b) the trust or institution has income from profits and gains of business which
is not incidental to the attainment of its objectives or separate books of account are
not maintained by such trust or institution in respect of the business which is incidental
to the attainment of its objectives; or
(c) the trust or institution has applied any part of its income from the property
held under a trust for private religious purposes, which does not enure for the benefit
of the public; or
(d) the trust or institution established for charitable purpose created or established
after the commencement of this Act, has applied any part of its income for the benefit
of any particular religious community or caste; or
(e) any activity being carried out by the trust or institution,—
(i) is not genuine; or
(ii) is not being carried out in accordance with all or any of the conditions
subject to which it was registered; or
(f) the trust or institution has not complied with the requirement of any other law,
as referred to in item (B) of sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (1
), and the order,
Amendment
of section
12AB.

24
direction or decree, by whatever name called, holding that such non-compliance has
occurred, has either not been disputed or has attained finality.
 (5) The order under clause (ii) or clause (iii) of sub-section (4), as the case may be,
shall be passed before the expiry of a period of six months, calculated from the end of the
quarter in which the first notice is issued by the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, on
or after the 1st day of April, 2022, calling for any document or information, or for making any
inquiry, under clause (i) of sub-section (4).’.
8. In section 13 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause ( c), in the long line, for the word, brackets and figure
“sub-section (3)”, the words, brackets and figures “sub-section (3), such part of
income as referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii)” shall be substituted;
(ii ) in clause ( d), in the long line, for the word and figures
“November, 1983”, the words, figures and brackets “November, 1983, to the
extent of such deposits or investments referred to in sub-clauses ( i), (ii) and
(iii)” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (9) and before Explanation 1, the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(10) Where the provisions of sub-section (8) are applicable to any trust
or institution or it violates the conditions specified under clause ( b) or
clause (ba) of sub-section (1) of section 12A, its income chargeable to tax shall
be computed after allowing deduction for the expenditure (other than capital
expenditure) incurred in India, for the objects of the trust or institution, subject
to fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(a) such expenditure is not from the corpus standing to the credit of
the trust or institution as on the end of the financial year immediately
preceding the previous year relevant to the assessment year for which
income is being computed;
(b) such expenditure is not from any loan or borrowing;
(c) claim of depreciation is not in respect of an asset, acquisition of
which has been claimed as application of income, in the same or any other
previous year; and
(d) such expenditure is not in the form of any contribution or donation
to any person.
Explanation.— For the purposes of determining the amount of
expenditure under this sub-section, the provisions of sub-clause ( ia) of
clause (a) of section 40 and sub-sections ( 3) and ( 3A) of section 40A,
shall, mutatis mutandis, apply as they apply in computing the income
chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
(11) For the purposes of computing income chargeable to tax under
sub-section (10), no deduction in respect of any expenditure or allowance or set
off of any loss shall be allowed to the assessee under any other provision of this
Act.’.
9. In section 14A of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “For the purposes of”, the words
“Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, for the purposes of”
shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section
14A.

25
(b) after the proviso, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the provisions
of this section shall apply and shall be deemed to have always applied in a case
where the income, not forming part of the total income under this Act, has not
accrued or arisen or has not been received during the previous year relevant to
an assessment year and the expenditure has been incurred during the said
previous year in relation to such income not forming part of the total income.”.
10. In section 17 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (2), in the first proviso, in clause (ii),
after sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have
been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2020, namely:—
“(c) in respect of any illness relating to COVID-19 subject to such conditions as
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf:”.
11. In section 35 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1A), for the words, brackets,
figures and letter “the research association, university, college or other  institution referred
to in clause (ii) or clause (iii) or the company referred to in clause ( iia) of sub-section (1)
shall not be entitled to deduction under the respective clauses of the said sub-section”, the
words, brackets, figures and letter “the  deduction in respect of any sum paid to the research
association, university, college or other institution referred to in clause (ii) or clause (iii), or
the company referred to in clause ( iia) of sub-section ( 1), shall not be allowed” shall be
substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2021.
12. In section 37 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 1), after Explanation 2, the
following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
expression “expenditure incurred by an assessee for any purpose which is an offence
or which is prohibited by law” under Explanation 1, shall include and shall be deemed
to have always included the expenditure incurred by an assessee,—
(i) for any purpose which is an offence under, or which is prohibited by,
any law for the time being in force, in India or outside India; or
(ii) to provide any benefit or perquisite, in whatever form, to a person,
whether or not carrying on a business or exercising a profession, and acceptance
of such benefit or perquisite by such person is in violation of any law or rule or
regulation or guideline, as the case may be, for the time being in force, governing
the conduct of such person; or
(iii) to compound an offence under any law for the time being in force, in
India or outside India.’.
13. In section 40 of the Income-tax Act, in clause ( a), in sub-clause ( ii), after
Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have
been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2005, namely:—
‘Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that for the
purposes of this sub-clause, the term “tax” shall include and shall be deemed to have
always included any surcharge or cess, by whatever name called, on such tax.’.
14. In section 43B of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023,—
(i) in Explanation 3C, after the words “loan or borrowing”, the words “or
debenture or any other instrument by which the liability to pay is deferred to a future
date” shall be inserted;
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment
of section 37.
Amendment
of section 40.
Amendment
of section
43B.

26
(ii) in Explanation 3CA, after the words “loan or borrowing”, the words “or
debenture or any other instrument by which the liability to pay is deferred to a future
date” shall be inserted;
(iii) in Explanation 3D, after the words “loan or advance”, the words “or
debenture or any other instrument by which the liability to pay is deferred to a future
date” shall be inserted.
15. In section 50 of the Income-tax Act, after the proviso, the following Explanation
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2021, namely:—
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, reduction of the amount of
goodwill of a business or profession, from the block of asset in accordance with
sub-item (B) of item (ii) of sub-clause (c) of clause (6) of section 43 shall be deemed to
be transfer.”.
16. In section 56 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) in clause ( viib), in the Explanation, in clause ( aa), after the words and
figures “Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992”, the words and figures “or
regulated under the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019”
shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023;
(b) in clause (x),—
(i) in the proviso occurring after item (B) in sub-clause (c), after clause (XI)
and before the Explanation, the following clauses shall be inserted and shall be
deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2020, namely:—
‘(XII) by an individual, from any person, in respect of any expenditure
actually incurred by him on his medical treatment or treatment of any
member of his family, for any illness related to COVID-19 subject to such
conditions, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(XIII) by a member of the family of a deceased person,—
(A) from the employer of the deceased person; or
(B) from any other person or persons to the extent that such
sum or aggregate of such sums does not exceed ten lakh rupees,
where the cause of death of such person is illness related to COVID-19
and the payment is—
(i) received within twelve months from the date of death of
such person; and
(ii) subject to such other conditions, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in
this behalf.
Explanation.—For the purposes of clauses ( XII) and (XIII) of this
proviso, “family”, in relation to an individual, shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in Explanation
 1 to clause (5) of section 10.’;
(ii) in sub-clause (c), after the proviso occurring after item (B) and before
the Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted with effect from the
1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
"Provided further that clauses (VI) and (VII) of the first proviso shall not
apply where any sum of money or any property has been received by any
person referred to in sub-section (3) of section 13.”;
(iii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted
with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) the expressions “assessable”, “fair market value”,
“jewellery”, “relative” and “stamp duty value” shall have the same
meanings as respectively assigned to them in the Explanation to
clause (vii); and
Amendment
of section 50.
Amendment
of section 56.
15 of 1992.
50 of 2019.

27
(b) the expression “property” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause ( d) of the Explanation to clause ( vii) and
shall include virtual digital asset.’.
17. In section 68 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023,—
(i) in the first proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“Provided that where the sum so credited consists of loan or borrowing or
any such amount, by whatever name called, any explanation offered by such
assessee shall be deemed to be not satisfactory, unless,—
(a) the person in whose name such credit is recorded in the books of
such assessee also offers an explanation about the nature and source of
such sum so credited; and
(b) such explanation in the opinion of the Assessing Officer aforesaid
has been found to be satisfactory:
Provided further that”;
(ii)  in the second proviso,—
(a) for the words “Provided further”, the words “Provided also” shall be
substituted;
(b) for the words “first proviso”, the words “first proviso or second
proviso” shall be substituted.
18. In section 79 of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 2), after clause ( e), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(f) to an erstwhile public sector company subject to the condition that the
ultimate holding company of such company, immediately after the completion of
strategic disinvestment, continues to hold, directly or through its subsidiary or
subsidiaries, at least fifty-one per cent. of the voting power of such company in
aggregate.”;
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), if the
condition specified in clause (f) of the said sub-section is not complied with in
any previous year after the completion of strategic disinvestment, the provisions
of sub-section (1) shall apply for such previous year and subsequent previous
years.”;
(iii) in the Explanation, after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(ia)“erstwhile public sector company” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause (ii) of the Explanation to clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 72A;
(ib) “strategic disinvestment” shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in clause ( iii) of the Explanation to clause ( d
) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 72A;’.
Amendment
of section 68.
Amendment
of section 79.

28
19. After section 79 of the Income tax Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘79A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where consequent to  a
search  under section 132 or a requisition  under section 132A or a survey under
section 133A other than under sub-section (2A) of that section, the total income of any
previous year of an assessee includes any undisclosed income, no set off, against
such undisclosed income, of any loss, whether brought forward or otherwise, or
unabsorbed depreciation under sub-section (2) of section 32, shall be allowed to the
assessee  under any provision of this  Act in computing his total income for such
previous year.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “undisclosed
income” means,—
(i) any income of the previous year represented, either wholly or partly, by
any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing or any entry in the
books of account or other documents or transactions found in the course of a
search under section 132 or a requisition under section 132A or a survey under
section 133A other than  under sub-section (2A) of that section, which has,—
(A) not been recorded on or before the date of search or requisition
or survey, as the case may be, in the books of account or other documents
maintained in the normal course relating to such previous year; or
(B) not been disclosed to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner before the date
of search or requisition or survey, as the case may be; or
(ii) any income of the previous year represented, either wholly or partly,
by any entry in respect of an expense recorded in the books of account or other
documents maintained in the normal course relating to the previous year which
is found to be false and which would not have been found to be so, had the
search not been initiated or the survey not been conducted or the requisition
not been made.’.
20. In section 80CCD of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “Central
Government” wherever they occur, the words “Central Government or the State Government”
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the
1st day of April, 2020.
21. In section 80DD of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023,—
(I) in sub-section (2), for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(a) the scheme referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) provides for
payment of annuity or lump sum amount for the benefit of a dependant, being a
person with disability,—
(i) in the event of the death of the individual or the member of the
Hindu undivided family in whose name subscription to the scheme has
been made; or
(ii) on attaining the age of sixty years or more by such individual or
the member of the Hindu undivided family, and the payment or deposit to
such scheme has been discontinued;”;
(II) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3A) The provisions of sub-section ( 3) shall not apply to the amount
received by the dependant, being a person with disability, before his death, by
way of annuity or lump sum by application of the condition referred to in
sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (2).”.
No set off of
losses
consequent to
search,
requisition
and survey.
Amendment
of section
80CCD.
Amendment
of section
80DD.
Insertion of
new section
79A.

29
22. In section 80-IAC of the Income-tax Act, in the Explanation below sub-section (4),
in clause (ii), in sub-clause (a), for the figures “2022”, the figures “2023” shall be substituted.
23. In section 80LA of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (d), with effect
from the1st day of April, 2023,—
(i) after the words “being an aircraft”, the words “or a ship” shall be inserted;
(ii) in the Explanation, for the words ‘this clause, “aircraft” shall’, the words
‘this clause, “aircraft” and “ship” shall’ shall be substituted.
24. In section 92CA of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (9), in the proviso, for the
figures “2022”, the figures “2024” shall be substituted.
25. In section 94 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023,—
(i) in sub-section ( 8), for the word “units” wherever it occurs, the words
“securities or units” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the Explanation,—
(a) for clause (aa), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(aa) “record date” means such date as may be fixed by—
(i) a company;
(ii) a Mutual Fund or the Administrator of the specified
undertaking or the specified company referred to in the Explanation
to clause (35) of section 10; or
(iii)  a business trust defined in clause (13A) of section 2; or
(iv) an Alternative Investment Fund defined in clause (b) of
sub-regulation (1) of regulation 2 of the Securities and Exchange
Board of India (Alternative Investment Funds) Regulations, 2012,
made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992,
for the purposes of entitlement of the holder of the securities or units, as
the case may be, to receive dividend, income, or additional securities or
units without any consideration, as the case may be,’;
(b) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(d) “unit” shall mean,—
 ( i) a unit of a business trust defined in clause ( 13A) of
section 2;
(ii) a unit defined in clause ( b) of the Explanation  to
section 115AB; or
(iii) beneficial interest of an investor in an Alternative
Investment Fund, defined in clause ( b) of sub-regulation ( 1) of
regulation 2 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Alternative Investment Funds) Regulations, 2012, made under the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, and shall include
shares or partnership interests.’.
26. In section 115BAB of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the
figures “2023”, the figures “2024” shall be substituted.
27. In section 115BBD of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section ( 3), the following
sub-section shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
Amendment
of section
80-IAC.
Amendment
of section
80LA.
Amendment
of section
92CA.
Amendment
of section 94.
15 of 1992.
Amendment
of section
115BAB.
Amendment
of section
115BBD.
15 of 1992.

30
“(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any assessment year
beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 2023.”.
28. After section 115BBG of the Income-tax Act, the following sections shall be inserted
with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
‘115BBH. (1) Where the total income of an assessee includes any income from
the transfer of any virtual digital asset, notwithstanding anything contained in any
other provision of this Act, the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of,—
(a) the amount of income-tax calculated on the income from transfer of
such virtual digital asset at the rate of thirty per cent.; and
(b) the amount of income-tax with which the assessee would have been
chargeable, had the total income of the assessee been reduced by the income
referred to in clause (a).
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act,—
(a) no deduction in respect of any expenditure (other than cost of
acquisition, if any) or allowance or set off of any loss shall be allowed to the
assessee under any provision of this Act in computing the income referred to in
clause (a) of sub-section (1); and
(b) no set off of loss from transfer of the virtual digital asset computed
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be allowed against income computed
under any provision of this Act to the assessee and such loss shall not be
allowed to be carried forward to succeeding assessment years.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the word “transfer” as defined in clause (47)
of section 2, shall apply to any virtual digital asset, whether capital asset or not.
115BBI. (1) Where the total income of an assessee, being a person in receipt of
income on behalf of any fund or institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or any trust or
institution referred to in sub-clause (v) or any university or other educational institution
referred to in sub-clause (vi) or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in
sub-clause (via), of clause (23C) of section 10 or any trust or institution referred to in
section 11, includes any income by way of any specified income, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other provision of this Act, the income-tax payable shall be
the aggregate of,—
(i) the amount of income-tax calculated at the rate of thirty per cent. on the
aggregate of such specified income; and
(ii) the amount of income-tax with which the assessee would have been
chargeable had the total income of the assessee been reduced by the aggregate
of specified income referred to in clause (i).
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no deduction in respect of
any expenditure or allowance or set off of any loss shall be allowed to the assessee
under any provision of this Act in computing the specified income referred to in
clause (i) of sub-section (1).
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “specified income” means,—
(a) income accumulated or set apart in excess of fifteen per cent. of the
income where such accumulation is not allowed under any specific provision of
this Act; or
(b) deemed income referred to in Explanation 4 to the third proviso to
clause (23C) of section 10, or sub-section (
1B) or sub-section (3) of section 11; or
(c) any income, which is not exempt under clause (23C) of section 10 on
account of violation of the provisions of clause ( b) of the third proviso of
Insertion of
new sections
115BBH and
115BBI.
Tax on
income from
virtual digital
asset.
Specified
income of
certain
institutions.

31
clause (23C) of section 10, or not to be excluded from the total income under the
provisions of clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 13; or
(d) any income which is deemed to be income under the twenty-first proviso
to clause (23C) of section 10 or which is not excluded from the total income
under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 13; or
(e) any income which is not excluded from the total income under
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 11.’.
29. In section 115JC of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section ( 4), the following
sub-section shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
‘(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where the person
referred to therein, is a—
(i) unit located in an International Financial Services Centre and derives
its income solely in convertible foreign exchange, the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall have effect as if for the words “eighteen and one-half per
cent.”, the words “nine per cent.” had been substituted;
(ii) co-operative society, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall have effect
as if for the words “eighteen and one-half per cent.”, the words “fifteen per
cent.” had been substituted.’.
30. In section 115JF of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b), for sub-clause (i), the following
sub-clauses shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
‘(i) in case of an assessee being a unit referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (4)
of section 115JC, at the rate of nine per cent.;
(ia) in case of an assessee, being a co-operative society referred to in clause (ii)
of sub-section (4) of section 115JC, at the rate of fifteen per cent.;’.
31. In section 115TD of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2023,—
(a) for sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where in any previous
year, a specified person has—
(a) converted into any form which is not eligible for grant of
registration under section 12AA or section 12AB, or approval under
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (
via) of
clause (23C) of section 10;
(b) merged with any entity other than an entity which is a trust or
institution having objects similar to it and registered under section 12AA
or section 12AB or approved under sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or
sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section 10; or
(c) failed to transfer upon dissolution all its assets to any other
specified person within a period of twelve months from the end of the
month in which the dissolution takes place,
then, in addition to the income-tax chargeable in respect of the total income of
such specified person, the accreted income of the specified person as on the
specified date shall be charged to tax and such specified person shall be liable to
pay additional income-tax (herein referred to as tax on accreted income) at the
maximum marginal rate on the accreted income.
(2) The accreted income for the purposes of sub-section ( 1) means the
amount by which the aggregate fair market value of the total assets of the
Amendment
of section
115JC.
Amendment
of section
115JF.
Amendment
of section
115TD.

32
specified person, as on the specified date, exceeds the total liability of such
specified person, computed in accordance with the method of valuation, as may
be prescribed:
Provided that so much of the accreted income as is attributable to the
following asset and liability, if any, related to such asset, shall be ignored for the
purposes of sub-section (1), namely:—
(i) any asset which is established to have been directly acquired by
the specified person out of its income of the nature referred to in clause (1)
of section 10;
(ii) any asset acquired by the specified person during the period
beginning from the date of its creation or establishment and ending on the
date from which the registration under section 12AA or section 12AB or
approval under clause (23C) of section 10 became effective, if the specified
person has not been allowed any benefit of sections 11 and 12 or
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) of
clause (23C) of section 10 during the said period:
Provided further that where due to the provisions of the first proviso or
the second proviso to sub-section ( 2) of section 12A or the eighth proviso to
clause (23C) of section 10, the benefit of sections 11 and 12, or sub-clause (iv) or
sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section 10
have been allowed to the specified person in respect of any previous year or
years beginning prior to the date from which the registration under
section 12AA or section 12AB or approval under clause (23C) of section 10 is
effective, then, for the purposes of clause (ii) of the first proviso, the registration
or approval shall be deemed to have become effective from the first day of the
earliest previous year:
Provided also that while computing the accreted income in respect of a
case referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1), assets and liabilities, if any,
related to such asset, which have been transferred to any other specified person
within the period specified in the said clause, shall be ignored.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a specified person shall be deemed
to have been converted into any form not eligible for registration under
section 12AA or section 12AB or approval under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)
or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section 10 in a previous
year, if,—
(i) the registration or approval granted to it under section 12AA, or
section 12AB, or sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or
sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section 10, has been cancelled; or
(ii) it has adopted or undertaken modification of its objects which
do not conform to the conditions of registration and it—
(a) has not applied for fresh registration under section 12AA,
or section 12AB, or approval under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)
or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section 10
in the said previous year; or
(b) has filed application for fresh registration under
section 12AA, or section 12AB, or approval under  sub-clause (iv)
or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) of clause
(23C) of section 10 but the said application has been rejected.”;
(b)  in sub-sections (4), (5), (6) and (7), for the words “trust or the institution”
and the words “trust or institution” wherever they occur, the words “specified person”
shall be substituted;

33
(c)  in the Explanation,—
(I) in clause (i), in sub-clause (a), for the word, figures and letters “section
12AB”,  the words, figures, letters and brackets “section 12AB, or approval
under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) of
clause (23C) of section 10” shall be substituted;
(II) after clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(iia) “specified person” means—
(a) any fund or institution or trust or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution
referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or
sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section 10; or
(b) a trust or institution registered under section 12AA or
section 12AB;’.
32. In section 115TE of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2023,—
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “trust or institution”, the words “specified
person” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “trust or the institution” at both the places where they occur,
the words “specified person” shall be substituted;
(c) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “specified person” shall
have the same meaning as assigned to in clause ( iia) of the Explanation to
section 115TD.’.
33. In section 115TF of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2023,—
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “trust or institution”, the words “specified
person” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (1), for the words “trust or the institution” at both the places
where they occur, the words “specified person” shall be substituted;
(c) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “specified person” shall
have the same meaning as assigned to in clause ( iia) of the Explanation to
section 115TD.’.
34. In section 119 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( a), after the
figures and letter “234E,”, the figures and letter “234F,” shall be inserted.
35. In section 132 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (8), for the words “order of
assessment under”, the words, brackets and figures “order of assessment or reassessment
or recomputation under sub-section (3) of section 143 or section 144 or section 147 or” shall
be substituted.
36. In section 132B of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause (i), for the words, figures and letter “completion
of the assessment under section 153A”, the words “completion of the assessment or
reassessment or recomputation” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 4), in clause ( b), for the words, figures and letters “under
section 153A or under Chapter XIV-B”, the words “or reassessment or recomputation”
shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
115TE.
Amendment
of section
115TF.
Amendment
of section
119.
Amendment
of section
132.
Amendment
of section
132B.

34
37. In section 133A of the Income-tax Act, in the Explanation occurring after
sub-section (6), in clause (a), for the long line, the following long line shall be substituted,
namely:—
“who is subordinate to the Principal Director General or the Director General or the
Principal Chief Commissioner or the Chief Commissioner, as may be specified by the
Board;”.
38. In section 139 of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) after sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(8A) Any person, whether or not he has  furnished a return under
sub-section (1) or sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 5), for an assessment year
(herein referred to as the relevant assessment year), may furnish an updated
return of his income or the income of any other person in respect of which he is
assessable under this Act, for the previous year relevant to such assessment
year, in the prescribed form, verified in such manner  and setting forth such
particulars as may be prescribed, at any time within twenty-four months from the
end of the relevant assessment year:
Provided that the provision of this sub-section shall not apply, if the
updated return,—
(a) is a return of a loss; or
(b) has the effect of decreasing the total tax liability determined on
the basis of return furnished under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section (4) or
sub-section (5); or
(c) results in refund or increases the refund due on the basis of
return furnished under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 4) or
sub-section (5),
of such person under this Act for the relevant assessment year:
Provided further that a person shall not be eligible to furnish an updated
return under this sub-section, where—
(a) a search has been initiated under section 132 or books of account or
other documents or any assets are requisitioned under section 132A in the case
of such person; or
(b) a survey has been conducted under section 133A, other than
sub-section (2A) of that section, in the case such person; or
(c) a notice has been issued to the effect that any money, bullion, jewellery
or valuable article or thing, seized or requisitioned under section 132 or
section 132A in the case of any other person belongs to such person; or
(d) a notice has been issued to the effect that any books of account or
documents, seized or requisitioned under section 132 or section 132A in the case
of any other person, pertain or pertains to, or any other information contained
therein, relate to, such person,
for the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which such search is initiated
or survey is conducted or requisition is made and any assessment year preceding
such assessment year:
Provided also that no updated return shall be furnished by any person for the
relevant assessment year, where—
(a) an updated return has been furnished by him under this sub-section
for the relevant assessment year; or
Amendment
of section
133A.
Amendment
of section
139.

35
(b) any proceeding for assessment or reassessment or recomputation or
revision of income under this Act is pending or has been completed for the
relevant assessment year in his case; or
(c) the Assessing Officer has information in respect of such person for the
relevant assessment year in his possession under the Smugglers and Foreign
Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 or the Prohibition of
Benami Property Transactions Act, 1988 or the Prevention of Money-laundering
Act, 2002  or the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and
Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 and the same has been communicated to him, prior to
the date of furnishing of return under this sub-section; or
(d) information for the relevant assessment year has been received under
an agreement referred to in section 90 or section 90A in respect of such person
and the same has been communicated to him, prior to the date of furnishing of
return under this sub-section; or
(e) any prosecution proceedings under the Chapter XXII have been initiated
for the relevant assessment year in respect of such person, prior to the date of
furnishing of return under this sub-section; or
(f) he is such person or belongs to such class of persons, as may be
notified by the Board in this regard:
Provided also that if any person has sustained a loss in any previous year
and has furnished a return of loss in the prescribed from within the time allowed
under sub-section (1) and verified in the prescribed manner and containing such
other particulars as may be prescribed, he shall be allowed to furnish an updated
return where such updated return is a return of income:
Provided also that if the loss or any part thereof carried forward under
Chapter VI or unabsorbed depreciation carried forward under sub-section (2) of
section 32 or tax credit carried forward under section 115JAA or under section
115JD is to be reduced for any subsequent previous year as a result of funishing
of return of income under this sub-section for a previous year, an updated return
shall be furnished for each such subsequent previous year.”;
(ii) in sub-section (9), in the Explanation, after clause (c), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) the return is accompanied by the proof of payment of tax as required
under section 140B, if the return of income is a return furnished under
sub-section (8A);”.
39. After section 140A of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘140B. (1) Where no return of income under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of
section 139 has been furnished by an assessee and tax is payable, on the basis of
return to be furnished by such assessee under sub-section ( 8A) of section 139, after
taking into account,—
(i) the amount of tax, if any, already paid as advance tax;
(ii)  any tax deducted or collected at source;
(iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89;
(iv) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under section 90 or
section 91 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;
(v) any relief of tax claimed under section 90A on account of tax paid in any
specified territory outside India referred to in that section; and
(vi)  any tax credit claimed to be set off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JAA or section 115JD,
13 of 1976.
45 of 1988.
15 of 2003.
22 of 2015.
Insertion of
new section
140B.
Tax on
updated
return.

36
the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest and fee payable
under any of the provisions of this Act for any delay in furnishing the return or any
default or delay in payment of advance tax, along with the payment of additional
income-tax computed in accordance with sub-section (3), before furnishing the return
and the return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax, additional
income-tax, interest and fee.
(2) Where, return of income under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 4) or
sub-section (5) of section 139 (referred to as earlier return) has been furnished by an
assessee and tax is payable on the basis of return to be furnished by such assessee
under sub-section (8A) of section 139,—
(a) after taking into account,—
(i)  the amount of relief or tax referred to in sub-section (1) of section 140A,
the credit for which has been taken in the earlier return;
(ii)  tax deducted or collected at source, in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter XVII-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or collection
and which is taken into account in computing total income and which has not
been included in the earlier return;
(iii) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under section 90 or
section 91 on account of tax paid in a country outside India on such income
which has not been included in the earlier return;
(iv) any relief of tax claimed under section 90A on account of tax paid in
any specified territory outside India referred to in that section on such income
which has not been included in the earlier return;
(v)  any tax credit claimed, to be set off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JAA or section 115JD,which has not been claimed in the earlier
return; and
(b) as increased by the amount of refund, if any, issued in respect of such earlier
return,
the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest payable under
any provision of this Act for any default or delay in payment of advance tax
along with the payment of additional income-tax, as computed in accordance
with sub-section ( 3), as reduced by the amount of interest paid under the
provisions of this Act in the earlier return, before furnishing the return and the
return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax, additional
income-tax, interest and fee.
(3) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2), the additional income-tax payable
at the time of furnishing the return under sub-section (8A) of section 139 shall be equal
to,—
(i) twenty-five per cent. of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined
in sub-section (1) or sub-section ( 2), as the case may be, if such return is furnished
after expiry of the time available under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) of section 139
and before completion of the period of twelve months from the end of the relevant
assessment year; or
(ii) fifty per cent. of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after
the expiry of twelve months from the end of the relevant assessment year but before
completion of the period of twenty-four months from the end of the relevant assessment
year.
Explanation.—For the purposes of computation of “additional income-tax”, tax
shall include surcharge and cess, by whatever name called, on such tax.
(4
) Notwithstanding anything contained in Explanation 1 to  section 234B,  for
the purposes of sub-section (2), interest payable under section 234B shall be computed
on an amount equal to the assessed tax or, as the case may be, on the amount by which
the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax, where, “assessed tax” means the
tax on the total income as declared in the return to be furnished under sub-section (8A)
of section 139,—

37
(a) after taking into account,—
(i) the amount of relief or tax referred to in sub-section (1) of section
140A, the credit for which has been claimed in the earlier return;
(ii) tax deducted or collected at source, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter XVII-B, on any income which is subject to such
deduction or collection and which is taken into account in computing
such total income, which has not been included in the earlier return;
(iii) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under section 90 or
section 91 on account of tax paid in a country outside India on such
income which has not been included in the earlier return;
(iv) any relief of tax claimed under section 90A on account of tax
paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that section on
such income which has not been included in the earlier return;
(v) any tax credit claimed, to be set off in accordance with the
provisions of section 115JAA or section 115JD, which has not been claimed
in the earlier return; and
(b) as increased by the amount of refund, if any, issued in respect of such
earlier return.
(5) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the
Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, by notification in the Official
Gazette, issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(6) Every guideline issued under sub-section (5) shall be laid before each House
of Parliament.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) interest payable under section 234A, for the purposes of
sub-section ( 1), shall be computed on the amount of tax on the total
income as declared in the return, under sub-section (8A) of section 139, in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1A) of section 140A;
(ii) interest payable under section 234C,for the purposes of sub-section
(2), shall be computed after taking into account the total income furnished
in the return under sub-section (8A) of section 139 as the returned income;
(iii) interest payable, for the purposes of sub-section ( 3), shall be
the interest chargeable under any provision of this Act, on the income as
per return furnished under sub-section (8A) of section 139, as reduced by
interest paid, in accordance with the earlier return, if any:
Provided that for the purposes of this clause, the interest paid in the
earlier return shall be nil if such return is an updated return referred to in
sub-section (1).’.
40. In section 143 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3),—
(a) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that in the case of a—
(a)  research association referred to in clause (21) of section 10;
(b)  news agency referred to in clause (22B) of section 10;
(c)  association or institution referred to in clause ( 23A) of
section 10;
(d)  institution referred to in clause (23B) of section 10,
Amendment
of section
143.

38
which is required to furnish the return of income under sub-section (4C) of section 139,
no order making an assessment of the total income or loss of such research association,
news agency, association or institution, shall be made by the Assessing Officer, without
giving effect to the provisions of section 10, unless—
(i)  the Assessing Officer has intimated the Central Government or the
prescribed authority the contravention of the provisions of clause (21) or clause
(22B) or clause ( 23A) or clause ( 23B), as the case may be, by such research
association, news agency, association or institution, where in his view such
contravention has taken place; and
(ii)  the approval granted to such research association or other association
or institution has been withdrawn or notification issued in respect of such news
agency or association or institution has been rescinded:”;
(b) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further”, the following shall
be substituted, namely:—
“Provided further that where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that any
fund or institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or trust or institution referred to
in sub-clause (v) or any university or other educational institution referred to in
sub-clause ( vi) or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in
sub-clause (via), of clause (23C) of section 10, or any trust or institution referred
to in section 11, has committed any specified violation as defined in
Explanation 2 to the fifteenth proviso to clause ( 23C) of section 10 or the
Explanation to sub-section (4) of section 12AB, as the case may be, he shall—
(a) send a reference to the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner
to withdraw the approval or registration, as the case may be; and
(b) no order making an assessment of the total income or loss of
such fund or institution or trust or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical institution shall be made by
him without giving effect to the order passed by the Principal Commissioner
or Commissioner under clause (ii) or clause (iii) of the fifteenth proviso to
clause (23C) of section 10 or clause (ii) or clause (iii) of sub-section (4) of
section 12AB:
Provided also”;
(c)  the third proviso shall be omitted.
41. In section 144 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( a), after the
words, brackets and figure “or sub-section (5)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “or an
updated return under sub-section (8A)” shall be inserted.
42. In section 144B of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) for sub-sections (1) to (8), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other
provision of this Act, the assessment, reassessment or recomputation under
sub-section (3) of section 143 or under section 144 or under section 147, as the
case may be, with respect to the cases referred to in sub-section ( 2), shall be
made in a faceless manner as per the following procedure, namely:—
(i) the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall assign the case
selected for the purposes of faceless assessment under this section to a
specific assessment unit through an automated allocation system;
Amendment
of section
144.
Amendment
of section
144B.

(ii) the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall intimate the
assessee that assessment in his case shall be completed in accordance
with the procedure laid down under this section;
(iii) a notice shall be served on the assessee, through the National
Faceless Assessment Centre, under sub-section (2) of section 143 or under
sub-section (1) of section 142 and the assessee may file his response to
such notice within the date specified therein, to the National Faceless
Assessment Centre which shall forward the same to the assessment unit;
 ( iv) where a case is assigned to the assessment unit, under
clause (i), it may make a request through the National Faceless Assessment
Centre for—
(a)  obtaining such further information, documents or evidence
from the assessee or any other person, as it may specify;
(b)  conducting of enquiry or verification by verification unit;
(c) seeking technical assistance in respect of determination of
arm’s length price, valuation of property, withdrawal of registration,
approval, exemption or any other technical matter by referring to the
technical unit;
(v) where a request under sub-clause ( a) of clause ( iv) has been
initiated by the assessment unit, the National Faceless Assessment Centre
shall serve appropriate notice or requisition on the assessee or any other
person for obtaining the information, documents or evidence requisitioned
by the assessment unit and the assessee or any other person, as the case
may be, shall file his response to such notice within the time specified
therein or such time as may be extended on the basis of an application in
this regard, to the National Faceless Assessment Centre which shall forward
the reply to the assessment unit;
(vi) where a request,—
(a) for conducting of enquiry or verification by the verification
unit has been made by the assessment unit under sub-clause (b) of
clause (iv), the request shall be assigned by the National Faceless
Assessment Centre to a verification unit through an automated
allocation system; or
(b) for reference to the technical unit has been made by the
assessment unit under sub-clause ( c) of clause ( iv), the request
shall be assigned by the National Faceless Assessment Centre to a
technical unit through an automated allocation system;
(vii) the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall send the report
received from the verification unit or the technical unit, as the case may be,
based on the request referred to in clause (vi) to the concerned assessment
unit;
(viii) where the assessee fails to comply with the notice served
under clause (v) or notice issued under sub-section (1) of section 142 or
the terms of notice issued under sub-section (2) of section 143, the National
Faceless Assessment Centre shall intimate such failure to the assessment
unit;
(ix) the assessment unit shall serve upon such assessee, as referred
to in clause ( viii), a notice, through the National Faceless Assessment
Centre, under section 144, giving him an opportunity to show-cause on a
39

40
date and time as specified in such notice as to why the assessment in his
case should not be completed to the best of its judgment;
(x) the assessee shall, within the time specified in the notice referred
to in clause ( ix) or such time as may be extended on the basis of an
application in this regard, file his response to the National Faceless
Assessment Centre which shall forward the same to the assessment unit;
(xi) where the assessee fails to file response to the notice served
under clause (ix) within the time specified therein or within the extended
time, if any, the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall intimate such
failure to the assessment unit;
(xii) the assessment unit shall, after taking into account all the
relevant material available on the record, prepare, in writing,—
(a) an income or loss determination proposal, where no
variation prejudicial to assessee is proposed and send a copy of
such income or loss determination proposal to the National Faceless
Assessment Centre; or
(b) in any other case, a show-cause notice stating the variations
prejudicial to the interest of assessee proposed to be made to the
income of the assessee and calling upon him to submit as to why the
proposed variation should not be made and serve such show-cause
notice, on the assessee, through the National Faceless Assessment
Centre;
(xiii) the assessee shall file his reply to the show cause notice served
under sub-clause (b) of clause (xii) on a date and time as specified therein
or such time as may be extended on the basis of an application made in this
regard, to the National Faceless Assessment Centre, which shall forward
the reply to the assessment unit;
(xiv) where the assessee fails to file response to the notice served
under sub-clause (b) of clause ( xii) within the time specified therein or
within the extended time, if any, the National Faceless Assessment Centre
shall intimate such failure to the assessment unit;
(xv) the assessment unit shall, after considering the response
received under clause (xiii) or after receipt of intimation under clause (xiv),
as the case may be, and taking into account all relevant material available
on record, prepare an income or loss determination proposal and send the
same to the National Faceless Assessment Centre;
(xvi) upon receipt of the income or loss determination proposal, as
referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (xii) or clause (xv), as the case may
be, the National Faceless Assessment Centre may, on the basis of
guidelines issued by the Board,—
(a) convey to the assessment unit to prepare draft order in
accordance with the income or loss determination proposal, which
shall thereafter prepare a draft order; or
(b) assign the income or loss determination proposal to a
review unit through an automated allocation system, for conducting
review of such proposal;
(xvii) the review unit shall conduct review of the income or loss
determination proposal assigned to it by the National Faceless Assessment
Centre, under sub-clause (b) of clause (xvi), whereupon it shall prepare a

41
review report and send the same to the National Faceless Assessment
Centre;
(xviii) the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall, upon receiving
the review report under clause (xvii), forward the same to the assessment
unit which had proposed the income or loss determination proposal;
(xix) the assessment unit shall, after considering such review report,
accept or reject some or all of the modifications proposed therein and after
recording reasons in case of rejection of such modifications, prepare a
draft order;
(xx) the assessment unit shall send such draft order prepared under
sub-clause (a) of clause (xvi) or under clause (xix) to the National Faceless
Assessment Centre;
(xxi) in case of an eligible assessee, where there is a proposal to
make any variation which is prejudicial to the interest of such assessee, as
mentioned in sub-section (1) under section 144C, the National Faceless
Assessment Centre shall serve the draft order referred to in clause (xx) on
the assessee;
(xxii)  in any case other than that referred to in clause ( xxi), the
National Faceless Assessment Centre shall convey to the assessment
unit to pass the final assessment order in accordance with such draft
order, which shall thereafter pass the final assessment order and initiate
penalty proceedings, if any, and send it to the National Faceless
Assessment Centre;
(xxiii) upon receiving the final assessment order as per clause (xxii),
the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall serve a copy of such order
and notice for initiating penalty proceedings, if any, on the assessee,
along with the demand notice, specifying the sum payable by, or refund of
any amount due to, the assessee on the basis of such assessment;
(xxiv) where a draft order is served on the assessee as referred to in
clause (xxi), such assessee shall,—
(a) file his acceptance of the variations proposed in such draft
order to the National Faceless Assessment Centre; or
(b) file his objections, if any, to such variations, with—
(I) the Dispute Resolution Panel, and
(II) the National Faceless Assessment Centre,
within the period specified in  sub-section (2) of section 144C;
(xxv) the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall,—
(a) upon receipt of acceptance from the eligible assessee; or
(b) if no objections are received from the eligible assessee,
within the period specified in sub-section (2) of section 144C,
intimate the assessment unit to complete the assessment on the basis of
the draft order;
(xxvi) the assessment unit shall, upon receipt of intimation under
clause (xxv), pass the assessment order, in accordance with the relevant
draft order, within the time allowed under sub-section (4) of section 144C
and initiate penalty proceedings, if any, and send the order to the National
Faceless Assessment Centre;

42
(xxvii) where the eligible assessee files objections with the Dispute
Resolution Panel, under sub-clause ( b) of clause ( xxiv), the National
Faceless Assessment Centre shall send such intimation along with a copy
of objections filed to the assessment unit;
(xxviii) the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall, in a case
referred to in clause (xxvii), upon receipt of the directions issued by the
Dispute Resolution Panel under sub-section (5) of section 144C, forward
such directions to the assessment unit;
(xxix) the assessment unit shall, in conformity with the directions issued
by the Dispute Resolution Panel under sub-section ( 5) of section 144C,
complete the assessment within the time allowed in sub-section ( 13)
of section 144C and initiate penalty proceedings, if any, and send a copy
of the assessment order to the National Faceless Assessment Centre;
(xxx) the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall, upon receipt
of the assessment order referred to in clause (xxvi) or clause (xxix), as the
case may be, serve a copy of such order and notice for initiating penalty
proceedings, if any, on the assessee, along with the demand notice,
specifying the sum payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the assessee
on the basis of such assessment;
(xxxi ) the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall, after
completion of assessment, transfer all the electronic records of the case to
the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over the said case for such
action as may be required under the provisions of this Act;
(xxxii) if at any stage of the proceedings before it, the assessment
unit having regard to the nature and complexity of the accounts, volume
of the accounts, doubts about the correctness of accounts, multiplicity of
transactions in the accounts or specialised nature of business activity of
the assessee, and the interests of the revenue, is of the opinion that it is
necessary to do so, it may, upon recording its reasons in writing, refer the
case to the National Faceless Assessment Centre stating that the provisions
of sub-section (2A) of section 142 may be invoked and such case shall be
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (7).
(2) The faceless assessment under sub-section (1) shall be made in respect
of such territorial area, or persons or class of persons, or incomes or class of
incomes, or cases or class of cases, as may be specified by the Board.
(3) The Board may, for the purposes of faceless assessment, set up the
following Centre and units and specify their functions and jurisdiction, namely:—
(i) a National Faceless Assessment Centre to facilitate the conduct
of faceless assessment proceedings in a centralised manner;
(ii) such assessment units, as it may deem necessary to conduct the
faceless assessment, to perform the function of making assessment, which
includes identification of points or issues material for the determination of
any liability (including refund) under this Act, seeking information or
clarification on points or issues so identified, analysis of the material
furnished by the assessee or any other person, and such other functions
as may be required for the purposes of making faceless assessment, and
the term “assessment unit”, wherever used in this section, shall refer to  an
Assessing Officer having powers so assigned by the Board;
(iii) such verification units, as it may deem necessary to facilitate
the conduct of faceless assessment, to perform the function of verification,

43
which includes enquiry, cross verification, examination of books of
account, examination of witnesses and recording of statements, and such
other functions as may be required for the purposes of verification and the
term “verification unit”, wherever used in this section, shall refer to  an
Assessing Officer having powers so assigned by the Board:
Provided that the function of verification unit under this section
may also be performed by a verification unit located in any other faceless
centre set up under the provisions of this Act or under any scheme notified
under the provisions of this Act; and the request for verification may also
be assigned through the National Faceless Assessment Centre to such
verification unit;
(iv) such technical units, as it may deem necessary to facilitate the
conduct of faceless assessment, to perform the function of providing
technical assistance which includes any assistance or advice on legal,
accounting, forensic, information technology, valuation, transfer pricing,
data analytics, management or any other technical matter under this Act or
an agreement entered into under section 90 or 90A, which may be required
in a particular case or a class of cases, under this section and the term
“technical unit”, wherever used in this section, shall refer to  an Assessing
Officer having powers so assigned by the Board;
(v) such review units, as it may deem necessary to facilitate the
conduct of faceless assessment, to perform the function of review of the
income determination proposal assigned under sub-clause ( b) of
clause ( xvi) of sub-section ( 1), which includes checking whether the
relevant and material evidence has been brought on record, relevant points
of fact and law have been duly incorporated, the issues requiring addition
or disallowance have been incorporated and such other functions as may
be required for the purposes of review and the term “review unit”, wherever
used in this section, shall refer to  an Assessing Officer having powers so
assigned by the Board;
(4) The assessment unit, verification unit, technical unit and the review
unit shall have the following authorities, namely:—
(i) Additional Commissioner or Additional Director or Joint
Commissioner or Joint Director, as the case may be;
(ii) Deputy Commissioner or Deputy Director or Assistant
Commissioner or Assistant Director, or Income-tax Officer, as the case may
be;
(iii) such other income-tax authority, ministerial staff, executive or
consultant, as may be considered necessary by the Board.
(5) All communications,—
(i) among the assessment unit, review unit, verification unit or
technical unit or with the assessee or any other person with respect to the
information or documents or evidence or any other details, as may be
necessary for the purposes of making a faceless assessment shall be
through the National Faceless Assessment Centre;
(ii) between the National Faceless Assessment Centre and the
assessee, or his authorised representative, or any other person shall be
exchanged exclusively by electronic mode; and
(iii) between the National Faceless Assessment Centre and various
units shall be exchanged exclusively by electronic mode:

44
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to the
enquiry or verification conducted by the verification unit in the circumstances
as may be specified by the Board in this behalf.
(6) For the purposes of faceless assessment—
(i)  an electronic record shall be authenticated by—
(a)  the National Faceless Assessment Centre by way of an
electronic communication;
(b) the assessment unit or verification unit or technical unit or
review unit, as the case may be, by affixing digital signature;
(c)  assessee or any other person, by affixing his digital
signature or under electronic verification code, or by logging into
his registered account in the designated portal;
(ii) every notice or order or any other electronic communication
shall be delivered to the addressee, being the assessee, by way of—
(a)  placing an authenticated copy thereof in the registered
account of the assessee; or
(b)  sending an authenticated copy thereof to the registered
email address of the assessee or his authorised representative; or
(c)  uploading an authenticated copy on the Mobile App of
the assessee,
and followed by a real time alert;
(iii) every notice or order or any other electronic communication
shall be delivered to the addressee, being any other person, by sending an
authenticated copy thereof to the registered email address of such person,
followed by a real time alert;
(iv) the assessee shall file his response to any notice or order or any
other electronic communication, through his registered account, and once
an acknowledgement is sent by the National Faceless Assessment Centre
containing the hash result generated upon successful submission of
response, the response shall be deemed to be authenticated;
(v)  the time and place of dispatch and receipt of electronic record
shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of section 13 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000;
(vi) a person shall not be required to appear either personally or
through authorised representative in connection with any proceedings
before any unit set up under this section;
(vii) in a case where a variation is proposed in the income or loss
determination proposal or the draft order, and an opportunity is provided
to the assessee by serving a notice calling upon him to show cause as to
why the assessment should not be completed as per such income or loss
determination proposal, the assessee or his authorised representative, as
the case may be, may request for personal hearing so as to make his oral
submissions or present his case before the income-tax authority of the
relevant unit;
(viii) where the request for personal hearing has been received, the
income-tax authority of relevant unit shall allow such hearing, through
National Faceless Assessment Centre, which shall be conducted
21 of 2000.

45
exclusively through video conferencing or video telephony, including use
of any telecommunication application software which supports video
conferencing or video telephony, to the extent technologically feasible, in
accordance with the procedure laid down by the Board;
(ix)  subject to the proviso to sub-section ( 5), any examination or
recording of the statement of the assessee or any other person (other than
the statement recorded in the course of survey under section 133A) shall
be conducted by an income-tax authority in the relevant unit, exclusively
through video conferencing or video telephony, including use of any
telecommunication application software which supports video
conferencing or video telephony, to the extent technologically feasible, in
accordance with the procedure laid down by the Board;
(x) the Board shall establish suitable facilities for video conferencing
or video telephony including telecommunication application software
which supports video conferencing or video telephony at such locations
as may be necessary, so as to ensure that the assessee, or his authorised
representative, or any other person is not denied the benefit of faceless
assessment merely on the consideration that such assessee or his
authorised representative, or any other person does not have access to
video conferencing or video telephony at his end;
(xi) the Principal Chief Commissioner or the Principal Director General,
as the case may be, in charge of the National Faceless Assessment Centre
shall, with the prior approval of the Board, lay down the standards,
procedures and processes for effective functioning of the National Faceless
Assessment Centre and the units set up, in an automated and mechanised
environment.
(7) (a) The Principal Chief Commissioner or the Principal Director General,
as the case may be, in charge of the National Faceless Assessment Centre shall,
in accordance with the procedure laid down by the Board in this regard, if he
considers appropriate that the provisions of sub-section ( 2A) of section 142
may be invoked in the case,—
(i) forward the reference received from an assessment unit under
clause (xxxii) of sub-section (1) to the Principal Chief Commissioner or
Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner having
jurisdiction over such case, and inform the assessment unit accordingly;
(ii) transfer the case to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction
over such case in accordance sub-section ( 8);
(b) where a reference has been received by the Principal Chief Commissioner
or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner under
sub-clause (i) of clause (a), he shall direct the Assessing Officer, having jurisdiction
over the case, to invoke the provisions of sub-section (2A) of section 142;
(c) where a reference has not been forwarded to the Principal Chief
Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner,
having jurisdiction over the case, in a case referred to in sub-clause ( i) of
clause ( a), the assessment unit shall proceed to complete the assessment in
accordance with the procedure laid down in this section.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section (2), the Principal Chief Commissioner or the Principal Director General,
as the case may be, in charge of National Faceless Assessment Centre may, at
any stage of the assessment, if considered necessary, transfer the case to the

46
Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such case, with the prior approval of
the Board.”;
(b) sub-section (9) shall be omitted and shall be deemed to have been omitted
with effect from the 1st day of April, 2021;
(c) sub-section (10) shall be omitted;
(d) in the Explanation,—
(i) after clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(la) “electronic verification code” means a code generated for the
purpose of electronic verification as per the data structure and standards
specified by the Principal Director General or Director General, as the case
may be, in charge of information technology;’;
(ii) clause (q) shall be omitted.
43. In section 144C of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (14C), in the proviso, for the
figures “2022”, the figures “2024” shall be substituted.
44. In section 148 of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that no such approval shall be required where the
Assessing Officer, with the prior approval of the specified authority, has passed
an order under clause (d) of section 148A to the effect that it is a fit case to issue
a notice under this section.”;
(ii) in Explanation 1,—
(a) in clause (i), the word “flagged” shall be omitted;
(b) for clause (ii), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(ii) any audit objection to the effect that the assessment in the case
of the assessee for the relevant assessment year has not been made in
accordance with the provisions of this Act; or
(iii) any information received under an agreement referred to in
section 90 or section 90A of the Act; or
(iv) any information made available to the Assessing Officer under
the scheme notified under section 135A; or
(v) any information which requires action in consequence of the
order of a Tribunal or a Court.”;
(iii) in Explanation 2,—
(a) in clause (ii), the words, brackets and figure “or sub-section (5)” shall
be omitted;
(b) in the long line, for the words “for the three assessment years
immediately preceding the assessment year relevant to the previous year in
which”, the word “where” shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been
substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2021.
45. In section 148A of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) in clause (b), the words “with the prior approval of specified authority,” shall
be omitted;
Amendment
of section
148A.
Amendment
of section
144C.
Amendment
of section
148.

47
(ii) in the proviso, in clause ( c), for the words “relate to, the assessee.” the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“relate to, the assessee; or
(d) the Assessing Officer has received any information under the scheme
notified under section 135A pertaining to income chargeable to tax escaping
assessment for any assessment year in the case of the assessee.”.
46. After section 148A of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“148B. No order of assessment or reassessment or recomputation under this Act
shall be passed by an Assessing Officer below the rank of Joint Commissioner, in
respect of an assessment year to which clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii) or clause (iv)
of Explanation  2 to section 148 apply except with the prior approval of the Additional
Commissioner or Additional Director or Joint Commissioner or Joint Director.”.
47. In section 149 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) if three years, but not more than ten years, have elapsed from the end
of the relevant assessment year unless the Assessing Officer has in his
possession books of account or other documents or evidence which reveal that
the income chargeable to tax, represented in the form of—
(i) an asset;
(ii) expenditure in respect of a transaction or in relation to an event
or occasion; or
(iii) an entry or entries in the books of account,
which has escaped assessment amounts to or is likely to amount to fifty lakh rupees or
more:”;
(ii) in the first proviso, for the words, brackets, letter and figure “such notice
could not have been issued at that time on account of being beyond the time limit
specified under the provisions of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of this section”, the
words, figures, letters and brackets “a notice under section 148 or section 153A or
section 153C could not have been issued at that time on account of being beyond the
time limit specified under the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of this section
or section 153A or section 153C, as the case may be” shall be substituted and shall be
deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2021;
(iii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where the
income chargeable to tax represented in the form of an asset or expenditure in
relation to an event or occasion of the value referred to in clause ( b) of
sub-section (1), has escaped the assessment and the investment in such asset
or expenditure in relation to such event or occasion has been made or incurred,
in more than one previous years relevant to the assessment years within the
period referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1), a notice under section 148
shall be issued for every such assessment year for assessment, reassessment or
recomputation, as the case may be.”.
48. In section 153 of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the second proviso, the following proviso
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the
1st day of April, 2021, namely:—
"Provided further that in respect of an order of assessment relating to the
assessment year commencing on—
(
i) the 1st day of April, 2019, the provisions of this sub-section shall
have effect, as if for the words "twenty-one months", the words "twelve
months" had been substituted;
Amendment
of section
153.
Insertion of
new section
148B.
Prior approval
for assessment,
reassessment or
recomputation
in certain cases.
Amendment
of section
149.

48
(ii) the 1st day of April, 2020, the provisions of this sub-section shall have
effect, as if for the words "twenty-one months", the words "eighteen months"
had been substituted:";
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where a
return under sub-section (8A) of section 139 is furnished, an order of assessment
under section 143 or section 144 may be made at any time before the expiry of
nine months from the end of the financial year in which such return was
furnished.”;
(c) in sub-section (3),—
(i) after the words “fresh assessment”, the words, figures and letters
“or fresh order under section 92CA, as the case may be,” shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words “cancelling an assessment,”, the words, figures and
letters “or an order under section 92CA, as the case may be” shall be inserted;
(d) in sub-section (5),—
(i) after the words “Assessing Officer” wherever they occur, the words
“or the Transfer Pricing Officer, as the case may be,” shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words “fresh assessment or reassessment”, the words, figures
and letters “or fresh order under section 92CA, as the case may be,” shall be
inserted;
(e) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5A) Where the Transfer Pricing Officer gives effect to an order or direction
under section 263 by an order under section 92CA and forwards such order to
the Assessing Officer, the Assessing Officer shall proceed to modify the order of
assessment or reassessment or recomputation, in conformity with such order of
the Transfer Pricing Officer, within two months from the end of the month in
which such order of the Transfer Pricing Officer is received by him.”;
(f) in sub-section ( 6), for the words, brackets and figures “sub-sections ( 3)
and (5)”, the words, brackets, figures and letter “sub-sections (3), (5) and (5A)” shall
be substituted;
(g) in Explanation 1,—
(I) in clause ( iii), for the words, brackets, figures and letters "or
sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) of
clause (23C) of section 10, under clause (i) of the proviso", the words, brackets
and figure ",under clause (i) of the first proviso" shall be substituted;
(II
) in clause (xi), for the words "Assessing Officer,", the following shall
be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from
the 1st day of April, 2021, namely:—
"Assessing Officer; or
(xii) the period (not exceeding one hundred and eighty days)
commencing from the date on which a search is initiated under section 132
or a requisition is made under section 132A and ending on the date on
which the books of account or other documents, or any money, bullion,
jewellery or other valuable article or thing seized under section 132 or
requisitioned under section 132A, as the case may be, are handed over to
the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over the assessee,—
(a) in whose case such search is initiated under section 132 or
such requisition is made under section 132A; or
(b) to whom any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable
article or thing seized or requisitioned belongs to; or
(c) to whom any books of account or documents seized or
requisitioned pertains or pertains to, or any information contained
therein, relates to; or";

49
(III) after clause (xii), before the long line, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
 "(xiii) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing
Officer makes a reference to the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner
under the second proviso to sub-section ( 3) of section 143 and ending
with the date on which the copy of the order under clause ( ii) or
clause ( iii) of the fifteenth proviso to clause ( 23C) of section 10 or
clause (ii) or clause (iii) of sub-section (4) of section 12AB, as the case
may be, is received by the Assessing Officer,".
49. In section 153B of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the fifth proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2021, namely:—
"Provided also that in a case where the last of the authorisations for
search under section 132 or requisition under section 132A was executed during
the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2020 or in case of other
person referred to in section 153C, the books of account or document or assets
seized or requisitioned were handed over under section 153C to the Assessing
Officer having jurisdiction over such other person during the financial year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2020, the assessment in such cases for the
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2021 shall be made on or
before the 30th day of September, 2022.";
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any search initiated
under section 132 or requisition made under section 132A on or after the 1st day
of April, 2021.";
(c) in the Explanation,—
(i) in clause (x), for the words "Assessing Officer,", the words "Assessing
Officer; or" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted
with effect from the 1st day of April, 2021;
(ii) after clause ( x), the following clause shall be inserted and shall be
deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 2021, namely:—
"(xi) the period (not exceeding one hundred and eighty days)
commencing from the date on which a search is initiated under section 132
or a requisition is made under section 132A and ending on the date on
which  the books of account, or other documents or money or bullion or
jewellery or other valuable article or thing seized under section 132 or
requisitioned under section 132A, as the case may be, are handed over to
the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over  the assessee, in whose
case such search is initiated under section 132 or such requisition is made
under section 132A, as the case may be,".
50. In section 155 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section ( 17) and before the
Explanation, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(18) Where any deduction in respect of any surcharge or cess, which is not
allowable as deduction under section 40, has been claimed and allowed in the case of
an assessee in any previous year, such claim shall be deemed to be under-reported
income of the assessee for such previous year for the purposes of sub-section ( 3) of
section 270A, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6) of section 270A,
and the Assessing Officer shall recompute the total income of the assessee for such
previous year and make necessary amendment; and the provisions of section 154
shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, the period of four years specified in sub-section (7)
of section 154 being reckoned from the end of the previous year commencing on the
1st day of April, 2021:
Provided that in a case where the assessee makes an application to the Assessing
Officer in the prescribed form and within the prescribed time, requesting for
Amendment
of section
153B.
Amendment
of section
155.

50
recomputation of the total income of the previous year without allowing the claim for
deduction of surcharge or cess and pays the amount due thereon within the specified
time, such claim shall not be deemed to be under-reported income for the purposes of
sub-section (3) of section 270A.".
51. After section 156 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"156A. (1) Where any tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum in respect of
which a notice  of demand has been issued under section 156, is reduced as a result of
an order of the Adjudicating Authority as defined in clause ( 1) of section 5 of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, the Assessing Officer shall modify the demand
payable in conformity with such order and shall thereafter serve on the assessee a
notice of demand specifying the sum payable, if any, and such notice of demand shall
be deemed to be a notice under section 156 and the provisions of this Act shall
accordingly, apply in relation to such notice.
(2) Where the order referred to in sub-section ( 1) is modified by the National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal or the Supreme Court, as the case may be, the
modified notice of demand as referred to in sub-section (1), issued by the Assessing
Officer shall be revised accordingly.".
52. In section 158AA of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that no such direction shall be given on or after the 1st day of
April, 2022.".
53.  After section 158AA of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
'158AB. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the collegium
is of the opinion that—
(a) any question of law arising in the case of an assessee for any assessment
year (such case being herein referred to as the relevant case) is identical with a
question of law arising,—
(i) in his case for any other assessment year; or
(ii) in the case of any other assessee for any assessment year; and
(b) such question is pending before the jurisdictional High Court under
section 260A or the Supreme Court in an appeal under section 261 or in a special
leave petition under article 136 of the Constitution, against the order of the
Appellate Tribunal or the jurisdictional High Court, as the case may be, which is
in favour of such assessee (such case being herein referred to as the other case),
the collegium may, decide and inform the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner not
to file any appeal, at this stage, to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 2) of
section 253 or to the jurisdictional High Court under sub-section (2) of section 260A in
the relevant case against the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate
Tribunal, as the case may be.
(2) The Principal Commissioner or the Commissioner shall, on receipt of a
communication from the collegium under sub-section (1), notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section ( 3) of section 253 or clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 260A, direct the Assessing Officer to make an application to the Appellate
Tribunal or the jurisdictional High Court, as the case may be, in such form as may be
prescribed within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date of receipt of
the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or of the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may
be, stating that an appeal on the question of law arising in the relevant case may be filed
when the decision on such question of law becomes final in the other case.
(3) The Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall direct the Assessing
Officer to make an application under sub-section (2) only if an acceptance is received
from the assessee to the effect that the question of law in the other case is identical to
Amendment
of section
158AA.
Procedure
where an
identical
question of
law is pending
before High
Courts or
Supreme
Court.
Insertion of
new section
156A.
Modification
and revision
of notice in
certain cases.
Insertion of
new section
158AB.
31 of 2016.

51
that arising in the relevant case; and in case no such acceptance is received, the
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall, notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (3) of section 253 or clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 260A, proceed
in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-section ( 2) of section 253 or in
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 260A.
(4) Where the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the order of the Appellate
Tribunal, as the case may be, referred to in sub-section (1) is not in conformity with the
final decision on the question of law in the other case, as and when such order is
received, the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner may direct the Assessing Officer
to appeal to the Appellate Tribunal or the jurisdictional High Court, as the case may be,
against such order and save as otherwise provided in this section all other provisions
of Part B and Part CC of Chapter XX shall apply accordingly.
(5) Every appeal under sub-section (4) shall be filed within a period of sixty days
to the Appellate Tribunal or one hundred and twenty days to the High Court, as the
case may be, from the date on which the order of the jurisdictional High Court or the
Supreme Court in the other case is communicated to the Principal Commissioner or the
Commissioner (having jurisdiction over the relevant case), in accordance with the
procedure specified by the Board in this behalf.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "collegium" means a collegium
comprising of two or more Chief Commissioners or Principal Commissioners or
Commissioners, as may be specified by the Board in this behalf.'.
54. In section 170 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
'(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), where
there is succession, the assessment or reassessment or any other proceedings, made or
initiated on the predecessor during the course of  pendency of such succession, shall be
deemed to have been made or initiated on the successor and all the provisions of this Act
shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the term "pendency" means
the period commencing from the date of filing of application for such succession of
business before the High Court or tribunal or the date of admission of an application
for corporate insolvency resolution by the Adjudicating Authority as defined in
clause (1) of section 5 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 and ending with
the date on which the order of such High Court or tribunal or such Adjudicating
Authority, as the case may be, is received by the Principal Commissioner or the
Commissioner.'.
55.  After section 170 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
'170A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 139, in a
case of business reorganisation, where prior to the date of  order of a High Court or
tribunal or an Adjudicating Authority as defined in clause ( 1) of section 5 of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be, any return of income has
been furnished by the successor under the provisions of section 139 for any assessment
year relevant to the previous year to which such order  applies, such successor  shall
furnish, within a period of six  months from the end of the month in which the said order
was issued, a modified return in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, in
accordance with  and limited to the  said order.
Explanation.—In this section, the expressions—
(i) "business reorganisation" means the reorganisation of business involving
the amalgamation or de-merger or merger of business of one or more persons;
(ii) "successor" means all resulting companies in a business reorganisation,
whether or not the company was in existence prior to such business reorganisation.'.
56. In section 179 of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in the marginal heading, the words "in liquidation" shall be omitted;
Insertion of
new section
170A.
Amendment
of section
170.
Effect of
order of
tribunal of
court in
respect of
business
reorganisation.
31 of 2016.
Amendment of
section 179.
31 of 2016.

52
(b) in the Explanation, after the word "interest", the word ", fees" shall be inserted.
57. In section 194-IA of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words "one per cent. of such sum", the words "or
the stamp duty value of such property, whichever is higher," shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "immovable property is", the words
"immovable property and the stamp duty value of such property, are both," shall be
substituted;
(iii) in the Explanation, after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
'(c) "stamp duty value" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (f) of the Explanation to clause (vii) of sub-section (2) of section 56.'.
58. In section 194-IB of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (4), the words, figures and
letters "or section 206AB" shall be omitted.
59. After section 194Q of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted
with effect from the 1st day of July, 2022, namely:—
'194R. (1) Any person responsible for providing to a resident, any benefit or
perquisite, whether convertible into money or not, arising from business or the exercise
of a profession, by such resident, shall, before providing such benefit or perquisite, as
the case may be, to such resident, ensure that tax has been deducted in respect of such
benefit or perquisite at the rate of ten per cent. of the value or aggregate of value of
such benefit or perquisite:
Provided that in a case where the benefit or perquisite, as the case may be, is
wholly in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind but such part in cash is not sufficient
to meet the liability of deduction of tax in respect of whole of such benefit or perquisite,
the person responsible for providing such benefit or perquisite shall, before releasing
the benefit or perquisite, ensure that tax required to be deducted has been paid in
respect of the benefit or perquisite:
Provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply in case of a
resident where the value or aggregate of value of the benefit or perquisite provided or
likely to be provided to such resident during the financial year does not exceed twenty
thousand rupees:
Provided also that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a person
being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, whose total sales, gross receipts or
turnover does not exceed one crore rupees in case of business or fifty lakh rupees in
case of profession, during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year
in which such benefit or perquisite, as the case may be, is provided by such person.
(2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the
Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, issue guidelines for
the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(3) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (2) shall, as soon as
may be after it is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament, and shall be binding
on the income-tax authorities and on the person providing any such benefit or perquisite.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression "person
responsible for providing" means the person providing such benefit or perquisite, or
in case of a company, the company itself including the principal officer thereof.'.
60. After section 194R of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted
with effect from the 1st day of July, 2022, namely:—
'194S. (1) Any person responsible for paying to any resident any sum by way of
consideration for transfer of a virtual digital asset, shall, at the time of credit of such sum to
the account of the resident or at the time of payment of such sum by any mode, whichever
is earlier, deduct an amount equal to one per cent. of such sum as income-tax t
hereon:
Amendment
of section
194-IB.
Insertion of
new section
194R.
Deduction of
tax on benefit
or perquisite
in respect of
business or
profession.
Insertion of
new section
194S.
Payment on
transfer of
virtual digital
asset.
Amendment
of section
194-IA.

53
Provided that in a case where the consideration for transfer of virtual digital
asset is—
(a) wholly in kind or in exchange of another virtual digital asset, where
there is no part in cash; or
(b) partly in cash and partly in kind but the part in cash is not sufficient to
meet the liability of deduction of tax in respect of whole of such transfer,
the person responsible for paying such consideration shall, before releasing the
consideration, ensure that tax required to be deducted has been paid in respect of such
consideration for the transfer of virtual digital asset.
(2) The provisions of sections 203A and 206AB shall not apply to a specified
person.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), no tax shall be
deducted in a case, where—
(a) the consideration is payable by a specified person and the value or
aggregate value of such consideration does not exceed fifty thousand rupees
during the financial year; or
(b) the consideration is payable by any person other than a specified
person and the value or aggregate value of such consideration does not exceed
ten thousand rupees during the financial year.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 194-O, in case of a transaction
to which the provisions of the said section are also applicable along with the provisions
of this section, then, tax shall be deducted under sub-section ( 1).
(5) Where any sum referred to in sub-section ( 1) is credited to any account,
whether called "Suspense Account" or by any other name, in the books of account of
the person liable to pay such sum, such credit of the sum shall be deemed to be the
credit of such sum to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall
apply accordingly.
(6) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the
Board may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, issue guidelines for the
purposes of removing the difficulty.
(7) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section ( 6) shall be laid
before each House of Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities
and on the person responsible for paying the consideration on transfer of such virtual
digital asset.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "specified person" means a person,—
 (a) being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business carried on by him or profession
exercised by him does not exceed one crore rupees in case of business or fifty
lakh rupees in case of profession, during the financial year immediately preceding
the financial year in which such virtual digital asset is transferred;
(b) being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, not having any income
under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession".'.
61. In section 201 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 1A), after the proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that where an order is made by the Assessing Officer for the
default under sub-section (1), the interest shall be paid by the person in accordance
with such order.".
Amendment
of section
201.

54
62. In section 206AB of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the figures, letters and word "194LBC or 194N", the figures, letters
and word "194-IA, 194-IB, 194LBC, 194M or 194N" shall be substituted;
(ii) the brackets and words "(hereafter referred to as deductee)" shall be
omitted;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the portion beginning with the words "filed the returns
of income" and ending with the words "each of these two previous years:", the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
"furnished the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the
previous year immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to
be deducted, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under
sub-section (1) of section 139 has expired and the aggregate of tax deducted at
source and tax collected at source in his case is rupees fifty thousand or more in
the said previous year:".
63. In section 206C of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 7), after the proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that where an order is made by the Assessing Officer for the
default under sub-section (6A), the interest shall be paid by the person in accordance
with such order.".
64. In section 206CCA of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the brackets and words "(hereafter referred to as collectee)"
shall be omitted;
 (b) in sub-section (3), for the portion beginning with the words "filed the returns
of income" and ending with the words "each of these two previous years:", the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
"furnished the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the
previous year immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to
be collected, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under
sub-section (1) of section 139 has expired and the aggregate of tax deducted at
source and tax collected at source in his case is rupees fifty thousand or more in
the said previous year:".
65. In section 234A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) after the words, brackets and figure "or sub-section (4)", the words, brackets,
figure and letter "or sub-section (8A)" shall be inserted;
(ii) for Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:—
'Explanation 2.—In this sub-section,—
(i) "tax on total income as determined under sub-section ( 1) of
section 143" shall not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable
under section 140B or section 143; and
(ii) tax on the total income determined under regular assessment
shall not include the additional income-tax payable under section 140B.'.
66. In section 234B of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), for Explanation 3, the
following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:—
Amendment
of section
206AB.
Amendment
of section
206C.
Amendment
of section
206CCA.
Amendment
of section
234A.
Amendment
of section
234B.

55
Amendment
of section
246A.
'Explanation 3.—In Explanation 1 and in sub-section (3),—
(i) "tax on total income as determined under sub-section ( 1) of
section 143" shall not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable under
section 140B or section 143; and
(ii) tax on the total income determined under such regular assessment
shall not include the additional income-tax payable under section 140B.'.
67. After section 239 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
 "239A. (1) Where under an agreement or other arrangement, in writing, the tax
deductible on any income, other than interest, under section 195 is to be borne by the
person by whom the income is payable, and such person having paid such tax to the
credit of the Central Government claims that no tax was required to be deducted on
such income, may, within a period of thirty days from the date of payment of such tax,
file an application before the Assessing Officer for refund of such tax in such form and
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, allow or reject the
application:
Provided that no application under sub-section ( 1) shall be rejected unless an
opportunity of being heard has been given to the applicant.
(3) The Assessing Officer may, before passing an order under sub-section (2),
make such inquiry as he considers necessary.
(4) The order under sub-section (2) shall be passed within six months from the
end of the month in which application under sub-section (1) is received.".
68. In section 245MA of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 144C, upon receipt of the
order of the Dispute Resolution Committee under this section, the Assessing Officer
shall,—
(a) in a case where the specified order is a draft of the proposed order of
assessment under sub-section (1) of section 144C, pass an order of assessment,
reassessment or recomputation; or
(b) in any other case, modify the order of assessment, reassessment or
recomputation,
in conformity with the directions contained in the order of the Dispute Resolution
Committee within a period of one month from the end of the month in which such order
is received.".
69. In section 246A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 1), after clause ( i), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ia) an order made under section 239A;".
70. In section 248 of the Income-tax Act, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that no appeal shall be filed where tax is paid to the credit of the
Central Government on or after the 1st day of April, 2022.".
Insertion of
new section
239A.
Refund for
denying
liability to
deduct tax in
certain cases.
Amendment
of section
245MA.
Amendment
of section
248.

56
71.  In section 253 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 9), in the proviso, for the
figures "2022", the figures "2024" shall be substituted.
72. In section 255 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 8), in the proviso, for the
figures "2023", the figures "2024" shall be substituted.
73. In section 263 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) after the words "Assessing Officer" wherever they occur, the words "or the
Transfer Pricing Officer, as the case may be," shall be inserted;
(b)  for the words "including an order enhancing or modifying the assessment,
or cancelling the assessment and directing a fresh assessment", the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
"including,—
(i) an order enhancing or modifying the assessment or cancelling
the assessment and directing a fresh assessment; or
(ii) an order modifying the order under section 92CA; or
(iii) an order cancelling the order under section 92CA and directing
a fresh order under the said section.";
(c) in Explanation 1, in clause (a), after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(iii) an order under section 92CA by the Transfer Pricing Officer;";
(d) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
'Explanation  3.—For the purposes of this section, "Transfer Pricing
Officer" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Explanation to
section 92CA.'.
74. In section 271AAB of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), in the opening portion, after the words "The Assessing
Officer", the words and brackets "or the Commissioner (Appeals)" shall be inserted;
(b) in sub-section (1A), in the opening portion, after the words "The Assessing
Officer", the words and brackets "or the Commissioner (Appeals)" shall be inserted;
(c) in the Explanation, in clause ( a), for the words, figures and letter "under
section 153A", the words, figures and letter "under section 148 or under section 153A,
as the case may be," shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted
with effect from 1st April, 2021.
75. In section 271AAC of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after the words "The
Assessing Officer", the words and brackets "or the Commissioner (Appeals)" shall be
inserted.
76. In section 271AAD of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in the long line, after the words "the Assessing Officer",
the words and brackets "or the Commissioner (Appeals)," shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), after the words "the Assessing Officer", the words and
brackets "or the Commissioner (Appeals)" shall be inserted.
77. After section 271AAD of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted
with effect from the 1st day of April, 2023, namely:—
Amendment
of section
253.
Amendment
of section
255.
Amendment
of section
263.
Amendment
of section
271AAB.
Amendment
of section
271AAC.
Amendment
of section
271AAD.
Insertion of
new section
271AAE.

57
"271AAE.  Without prejudice to any other provision of this Chapter, if during
any proceedings under this Act, it is found that a person, being any fund or institution
referred to in sub-clause (iv) or any trust or institution referred to in sub-clause (v) or
any university or other educational institution referred to in sub-clause ( vi) or any
hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of
section 10, or any trust or institution referred to in section 11 has violated the provisions
of the twenty-first proviso to clause ( 23C) of section 10, or clause ( c) of
sub-section (1) of section 13, as the case may be, the Assessing Officer may direct that
such person shall pay by way of penalty—
(a) a sum equal to the aggregate amount of income applied, directly or
indirectly, by such person, for the benefit of any person referred to in
sub-section (3) of section 13, where the violation is noticed for the first time
during any previous year; and
(b) a sum equal to two hundred per cent. of the aggregate amount of
income of such person applied, directly or indirectly, by that person, for the
benefit of any person referred to in sub-section (3) of section 13, where violation
is noticed again in any subsequent previous year.".
78. In section 271C of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( b), in
sub-clause (ii), the word "second" shall be omitted.
79. In section 272A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), in the long line, for the
words "one hundred rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
80. In section 276AB of the Income-tax Act, after the proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that no proceeding under this section shall be initiated on or
after the 1st day of April, 2022.".
81. In section 276B of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), the word
"second" shall be omitted.
82. In section 276CC of the Income-tax Act, in the proviso, in clause ( ii), in
sub-clause (a), after the words "expiry of the assessment year", the words, brackets, figures
and letter "or a return is furnished by him under sub-section (8A) of section 139 within the
time provided in that sub-section" shall be inserted.
83. In section 278A of the Income-tax Act, after the word, figures and letter
"section 276B", the words, figures and letters "or section 276BB" shall be inserted.
84. In section 278AA of the Income-tax Act, after the words, figures and letter "or
section 276B", the words, figures and letters "or section 276BB" shall be inserted.
85. For section 285B of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
'285B.  Any person carrying on the production of a cinematograph film or engaged
in any specified activity, or both, during the whole or any part of any financial year
shall, in respect of the period during which such production or specified activity is
carried on by him in such financial year, furnish within the prescribed period, a statement
in the prescribed form to the prescribed income-tax authority in the prescribed manner,
containing particulars of all payments of over fifty thousand rupees in the aggregate
made by him or due from him to each such person as is engaged by him in such
production or specified activity.
Benefits to
related
persons.
Amendment
of section
271C.
Amendment
of section
272A.
Amendment
of section
276AB.
Amendment
of section
276B.
Amendment
of section
276CC.
Amendment
of section
278A.
Amendment
of section
278AA.
Substitution
of new section
for section
285B.
Submission of
statements by
producers of
cinematograph
films or
persons
engaged in
specified
activitiy.

58
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "specified activity" means any
event management, documentary production, production of programmes for telecasting
on television or over the top platforms or any other similar platform, sports event
management, other performing arts or any other activity as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.'.
CHAPTER IV
I
NDIRECT TAXES
Customs
86. In the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Act), in section 2,
in clause (34), after the words "Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of
Customs", the words and figure "under section 5" shall be inserted.
87. For section 3 of the Customs Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"3. There shall be the following classes of officers of customs, namely:—
(a) Principal Chief Commissioner of Customs or Principal Chief
Commissioner of Customs (Preventive) or Principal Director General of Revenue
Intelligence;
(b) Chief Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner of Customs
(Preventive) or Director General of Revenue Intelligence;
(c) Principal Commissioner of Customs or Principal Commissioner of
Customs (Preventive) or Principal Additional Director General of Revenue
Intelligence or Principal Commissioner of Customs (Audit);
(d) Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs (Preventive)
or Additional Director General of Revenue Intelligence or Commissioner of
Customs (Audit);
(e) Principal Commissioner of Customs (Appeals);
(f) Commissioner of Customs (Appeals);
(g) Additional Commissioner of Customs or Additional Commissioner of
Customs (Preventive) or Additional Director of Revenue Intelligence or Additional
Commissioner of Customs (Audit);
(h) Joint Commissioner of Customs or Joint Commissioner of Customs
(Preventive) or Joint Director of Revenue Intelligence or Joint Commissioner of
Customs (Audit);
(i) Deputy Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs
(Preventive) or Deputy Director of Revenue Intelligence or Deputy Commissioner
of Customs (Audit);
(j) Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Assistant Commissioner of
Customs (Preventive) or Assistant Director of Revenue Intelligence or Assistant
Commissioner of Customs (Audit);
(k) such other class of officers of customs as may be appointed for the
purposes of this Act.".
88. In section 5 of the Customs Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1),
the Board may, by notification, assign such functions as it may deem fit, to an
officer of customs, who shall be the proper officer in relation to such functions.
Amendment
of section 2.
Substitution of
new section
for 
section 3.
Classes of
officers of
customs.
52 of 1962.
Amendment
of section 5.

59
Amendment
of section 14.
(1B) Within their jurisdiction assigned by the Board, the Principal
Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs, as the case may be,
may, by order, assign such functions, as he may deem fit, to an officer of customs,
who shall be the proper officer in relation to such functions.”;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) In specifying the conditions and limitations referred to in sub-section (1),
and in assigning functions under sub-section (1A), the Board may consider any
one or more of the following criteria, including, but not limited to––
(a) territorial jurisdiction;
(b) persons or class of persons;
(c) goods or class of goods;
(d) cases or class of cases;
(e) computer assigned random assignment;
(f) any other criterion as the Board may, by notification, specify.
(5) The Board may, by notification, wherever necessary or appropriate,
require two or more officers of customs (whether or not of the same class) to
have concurrent powers and functions to be performed under this Act.”.
89. In section 14 of the Customs Act, in sub-section (1), in the second proviso, after
clause (iii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(iv) the additional obligations of the importer in respect of any class of imported
goods and the checks to be exercised, including the circumstances and manner of
exercising thereof, as the Board may specify, where, the Board has reason to believe
that the value of such goods may not be declared truthfully or accurately, having
regard to the trend of declared value of such goods or any other relevant criteria:”.
90. In section 28E of the Customs Act,––
(a) in clause (c), the Explanation shall be omitted;
(b) clause (h) shall be omitted.
91. In section 28H of the Customs Act,––
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words “an application in such form and in such
manner”, the words “and accompanied by such fee” shall be inserted;
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section ( 4), for the words “within thirty days from the date of the
application”, the words “at any time before an advance ruling is pronounced” shall be
substituted.
92. In section 28-I of the Customs Act, in sub-section (7), the words “by the Members”
shall be omitted.
93. In section 28J of the Customs Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:––
“(2) The advance ruling referred to in sub-section (1) shall remain valid for three
years or till there is a change in law or facts on the basis of which the advance ruling
has been pronounced, whichever is earlier:
Provided that in respect of any advance ruling in force on the date on which the
Finance Bill, 2022 receives the assent of the President, the said period of three years
shall be reckoned from the date on which the said Finance Bill receives the assent of
the President.”.
Amendment of
section 28E.
Amendment of
section 28H.
Amendment of
section 28-I.
Amendment
of section 28J.

60
94. After section 110A of the Customs Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:––
“110AA. Where in pursuance of any proceeding, in accordance with Chapter XIIA
or this Chapter, if an officer of customs has reasons to believe that––
(a) any duty has been short-levied, not levied, short-paid or not paid in a
case where assessment has already been made;
(b) any duty has been erroneously refunded;
(c) any drawback has been erroneously allowed; or
(d) any interest has been short-levied, not levied, short-paid or not paid,
or erroneously refunded,
then such officer of customs shall, after causing inquiry, investigation, or as the case
may be, audit, transfer the relevant documents, along with a report in writing—
(i) to the proper officer having jurisdiction, as assigned under section 5 in
respect of assessment of such duty, or to the officer who allowed such refund or
drawback; or
(ii) in case of multiple jurisdictions, to an officer of customs to whom such
matter is assigned by the Board, in exercise of the powers conferred under
section 5,
and thereupon, power exercisable under sections 28, 28AAA or Chapter X, shall be
exercised by such proper officer or by an officer to whom the proper officer is subordinate
in accordance with sub-section (2) of section 5.”.
95. After section 135A of the Customs Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:––
‘135AA. (1) If a person publishes any information, that is furnished to customs
by an exporter or importer under this Act, relating to the value or classification or
quantity of goods entered for export from India, or import into India, along with the
identity of the persons involved or in a manner that leads to disclosure of such identity,
unless required so to do under any law for the time being in force or by specific
authorisation of such exporter or importer, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to—
(a) any publication made by or on behalf of the Central Government;
(b) data sourced from any publication made by or on behalf of the Central
Government for analysis of trends in India's international trade and dissemination
thereof.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the expression “publishes”
includes reproducing the information in printed or electronic form and making it available
for the public. ’.
96. In section 137 of the Customs Act, in sub-section (1), after the words, figures and
letter “or section 135A”, the words, figures and letters “or section 135AA” shall be inserted.
97. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any
court, tribunal, or other authority, or in the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter
referred to as the Customs Act),––
(i) anything done or any duty performed or any action taken or purported to
have been taken or done under Chapters V , V AA, VI, IX, X, XI, XII, XIIA, XIII, XIV , XVI
and XVII of the Customs Act, as it stood prior to its amendment by this Act, shall be
deemed to have been validly done or performed or taken;
Insertion of
new section
110AA.
Insertion of
new section
135AA.
Amendment of
section 137.
Validation of
certain actions
taken under
Customs Act.
Action
subsequent to
inquiry,
investigation
or audit or any
other specified
purpose.
Protection of
data.
52 of 1962.

61
(ii) any notification issued under the Customs Act for appointing or assigning
functions to any officer shall be deemed to have been validly issued for all purposes,
including for the purposes of section 6;
(iii) for the purposes of this section, sections 2, 3 and 5 of the Customs Act, as
amended by this Act, shall have and shall always be deemed to have effect for all
purposes as if the provisions of the Customs Act, as amended by this Act, had been in
force at all material times.
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that any
proceeding arising out of any action taken under this section and pending on the date
of commencement of this Act shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
the Customs Act, as amended by this Act.
Customs Tariff
98. In the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Tariff Act),
the First Schedule shall,––
(a) be amended in the manner specified in the Second Schedule;
(b) with effect from the 1st May, 2022, be also amended in the manner specified
in the Third Schedule.
Excise
99. In the Central Excise Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Excise Act), the
Fourth Schedule shall, with effect from the 1st May, 2022,  be amended in the manner specified
in the Fourth Schedule.
Central Goods and Services T ax
100. In the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act), in section 16, ––
(a) in sub-section (2),––
(i) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ba) the details of input tax credit in respect of the said supply
communicated to such registered person under section 38 has not been
restricted;”;
(ii) in clause (c), the words, figures and letter “or section 43A” shall be
omitted;
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words and figures “due date of furnishing of the
return under section 39 for the month of September”, the words “thirtieth day of
November” shall be substituted.
101. In section 29 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, in sub-section (2),––
(a) in clause (b), for the words “returns for three consecutive tax periods”, the
words “the return for a financial year beyond three months from the due date of
furnishing the said return” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (c), for the words “a continuous period of six months”, the words
“such continuous tax period as may be prescribed” shall be substituted.
102. In section 34 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, in sub-section (2), for the
word “September”, the words “the thirtieth day of November” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of First
Schedule.
Amendment
of Fourth
Schedule.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 29.
51 of 1975.
1 of 1944.
12 of 2017.
Amendment
of section 34.

62
103. In section 37 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,––
(a) in sub-section (1), ––
(i) after the words “shall furnish, electronically,”, the words “subject to
such conditions and restrictions and” shall be inserted;
(ii) for the words “shall be communicated to the recipient of the said
supplies within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed”, the words
“shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions, within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed, be communicated to the recipient of the said
supplies” shall be substituted;
(iii) the first proviso shall be omitted;
(iv) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further that”, the
words “Provided that” shall be substituted;
(v) in the third proviso, for the words “Provided also that”, the words
“Provided further that” shall be substituted;
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section (3),––
(i) the words and figures “and which have remained unmatched under
section 42 or section 43” shall be omitted;
(ii) in the first proviso, for the words and figures “furnishing of the return
under section 39 for the month of September”, the words “the thirtieth day of
November” shall be substituted;
(d) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(4) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish the details of
outward supplies under sub-section (1) for a tax period, if the details of outward
supplies for any of the previous tax periods has not been furnished by him:
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
by notification, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified
therein, allow a registered person or a class of registered persons to furnish the
details of outward supplies under sub-section (1), even if he has not furnished
the details of outward supplies for one or more previous tax periods. ”.
104. For section 38 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:––
“38. (1) The details of outward supplies furnished by the registered persons
under sub-section (1) of section 37 and of such other supplies as may be prescribed,
and an auto-generated statement containing the details of input tax credit shall be
made available electronically to the recipients of such supplies in such form and
manner, within such time, and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be
prescribed.
(2) The auto-generated statement under sub-section ( 1) shall consist of––
(a) details of inward supplies in respect of which credit of input tax may be
available to the recipient; and
(b) details of supplies in respect of which such credit cannot be availed,
whether wholly or partly, by the recipient, on account of the details of the said
supplies being furnished under sub-section (1) of section 37,––
(i) by any registered person within such period of taking registration
as may be prescribed; or
Substitution of
new section
for section 38.
Communication
of details of
inward supplies
and input tax
credit.
Amendment
of section 37.

63
(ii) by any registered person, who has defaulted in payment of tax
and where such default has continued for such period as may be
prescribed; or
(iii) by any registered person, the output tax payable by whom in
accordance with the statement of outward supplies furnished by him under
the said sub-section during such period, as may be prescribed, exceeds
the output tax paid by him during the said period by such limit as may be
prescribed; or
(iv) by any registered person who, during such period as may be
prescribed, has availed credit of input tax of an amount that exceeds the
credit that can be availed by him in accordance with clause ( a), by such
limit as may be prescribed; or
(v) by any registered person, who has defaulted in discharging his
tax liability in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 12) of
section 49 subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed; or
(vi) by such other class of persons as may be prescribed.”.
105. In section 39 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,––
(a) in sub-section ( 5), for the word “twenty”, the word “thirteen” shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 7), for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:––
“Provided that every registered person furnishing return under the proviso
to sub-section (1) shall pay to the Government, in such form and manner, and
within such time, as may be prescribed,––
(a) an amount equal to the tax due taking into account inward and
outward supplies of goods or services or both, input tax credit availed, tax
payable and such other particulars during a month; or
(b) in lieu of the amount referred to in clause ( a), an amount
determined in such manner and subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed. ”;
(c) in sub-section (9), ––
(i) for the words and figures “Subject to the provisions of sections 37 and
38, if”, the word “Where” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the proviso, for the words “the due date for furnishing of return for
the month of September or second quarter”, the words “the thirtieth day of
November” shall be substituted;
(d) in sub-section ( 10), for the words “has not been furnished by him”, the
following shall be substituted, namely:––
“or the details of outward supplies under sub-section (1) of section 37 for
the said tax period has not been furnished by him:
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
by notification, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified
therein, allow a registered person or a class of registered persons to furnish the
return, even if he has not furnished the returns for one or more previous tax
periods or has not furnished the details of outward supplies under sub-section (1)
of section 37 for the said tax period.”.
Amendment
of section 39.

64
106. For section 41 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:––
“41. (1) Every registered person shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed, be entitled to avail the credit of eligible input tax, as self-assessed,
in his return and such amount shall be credited to his electronic credit ledger.
(2) The credit of input tax availed by a registered person under sub-section (1) in
respect of such supplies of goods or services or both, the tax payable whereon has not
been paid by the supplier, shall be reversed along with applicable interest, by the said
person in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that where the said supplier makes payment of the tax payable in
respect of the aforesaid supplies, the said registered person may re-avail the amount of
credit reversed by him in such manner as may be prescribed. ”.
107. Sections 42, 43 and 43A of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act shall be
omitted.
108. In section 47 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, in sub-section (1),––
(a) the words “or inward” shall be omitted;
(b) the words and figures “or section 38” shall be omitted;
(c) after the words and figures “section 39 or section 45”, the words and figures
“or section 52” shall be inserted.
109. In section 48 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, in sub-section (2), the
words and figures “, the details of inward supplies under section 38” shall be omitted.
110. In section 49 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,––
(a) in sub-section ( 2), the words, figures and letter “or section 43A” shall be
omitted;
(b) in sub-section (4), after the words “subject to such conditions”, the words
“and restrictions” shall be inserted;
(c) for sub-section (10), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(10) A registered person may, on the common portal, transfer any amount
of tax, interest, penalty, fee or any other amount available in the electronic cash
ledger under this Act, to the electronic cash ledger for,––
(a) integrated tax, central tax, State tax, Union territory tax or cess; or
(b) integrated tax or central tax of a distinct person as specified in
sub-section (4) or, as the case may be, sub-section (5) of section 25,
in such form and manner and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may
be prescribed and such transfer shall be deemed to be a refund from the electronic
cash ledger under this Act:
Provided that no such transfer under clause (b) shall be allowed if the said
registered person has any unpaid liability in his electronic liability register. ”;
(d) after sub-section (11), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government
may, on the recommendations of the Council, subject to such conditions and
restrictions, specify such maximum proportion of output tax liability under this
Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 which may be
discharged through the electronic credit ledger by a registered person or a class
of registered persons, as may be prescribed.”.
Substitution of
new section
for section 41.
Omission of
sections 42,
43 and 43A.
Amendment
of section 47.
Availment of
input tax
credit.
Amendment
of section 48.
Amendment
of section 49.
13 of 2017.

65
111. In section 50 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, for sub-section (3), the
following sub-section shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted
with effect from the 1st day of July, 2017, namely:––
“(3) Where the input tax credit has been wrongly availed and utilised, the
registered person shall pay interest on such input tax credit wrongly availed and
utilised, at such rate not exceeding twenty-four per cent. as may be notified by the
Government, on the recommendations of the Council, and the interest shall be calculated,
in such manner as may be prescribed.”.
112. In section 52 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, in sub-section (6), in the
proviso, for the words “due date for furnishing of statement for the month of September”, the
words “thirtieth day of November” shall be substituted.
113. In section 54 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, ––
(a) in sub-section ( 1), in the proviso, for the words and figures “the return
furnished under section 39 in such”, the words “such form and” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “six months”, the words “two years” shall
be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (10), the words, brackets and figure “under sub-section (3) ”
shall be omitted;
(d) in the Explanation, in clause (2), after sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause
shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ba) in case of zero-rated supply of goods or services or both to a Special
Economic Zone developer or a Special Economic Zone unit where a refund of tax
paid is available in respect of such supplies themselves, or as the case may be,
the inputs or input services used in such supplies, the due date for furnishing of
return under section 39 in respect of such supplies;”.
114. In section 168 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, in sub-section (2), the
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (2) of section 38,” shall be omitted.
115. (1) The notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) number G. S. R. 58(E), dated the 23rd January, 2018, issued by the
Central Government on the recommendations of the Council, under section 146 of the Central
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 read with section 20 of the Integrated Goods and Services
Tax Act, 2017, shall stand amended and shall be deemed to have been amended retrospectively,
in the manner specified in column (2) of the Fifth Schedule, on and from the date specified in
column (3) of that Schedule.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall have and shall
be deemed to have the power to amend the notification referred to in the said sub-section
with retrospective effect as if the Central Government had the power to amend the said
notification under section 146 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 read with
section 20 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, retrospectively, at all material
times.
116. (1) The notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) number G . S. R. 661(E), dated the 28th June, 2017, issued by the
Central Government on the recommendations of the Council, under sub-sections (1) and (3)
of section 50, sub-section (12) of section 54 and section 56 of the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act, 2017, shall stand amended and shall be deemed to have been amended retrospectively,
in the manner specified in column (2) of the Sixth Schedule, on and from the date specified in
column (3) of that Schedule.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall have and shall
be deemed to have the power to amend the notification referred to in the said sub-section
with retrospective effect as if the Central Government had the power to amend the said
Amendment
of section 50.
Amendment
of section 52.
Amendment
of section 54.
Amendment of
section 168.
Amendment
of notification
issued under
section 146 of
Central Goods
and Services
Tax Act read
with section
20 of
Integrated
Goods and
Services Tax
Act,
retrospectively.
Amendment
of notification
issued under
sub-sections
(1) and ( 3) of
section 50,
sub-section
(12) of section
54 and section
56 of Central
Goods and
Services Tax
Act,
retrospectively.
12 of 2017.
13 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
13 of 2017.

66
notification under sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 50, sub-section (12) of section 54 and
section 56 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, retrospectively, at all material
times.
117. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the notification of the Government of
India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) number G . S. R. 673(E), dated the
28th June, 2017 issued by the Central Government, on the recommendations of the Council,
in exercise of the powers under sub-section ( 1) of section 9 of the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, no central tax shall be levied or collected in respect of supply of
unintended waste generated during the production of fish meal (falling under heading 2301),
except for fish oil, during the period commencing from the 1st day of July, 2017 and ending
with the 30th day of September, 2019 (both days inclusive) .
(2) No refund shall be made of all such tax which has been collected, but which would
not have been so collected, had sub-section (1) been in force at all material times.
118. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the notification of the Government
of India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) number G . S. R. 746(E), dated the
30th September, 2019 issued by the Central Government, on the recommendations of the
Council, in exercise of the powers under sub- section (2) of section 7 of the Central Goods
and Services Tax Act, 2017, shall be deemed to have, and always to have, for all purposes,
come into force on and from the 1st day of July, 2017.
(2) No refund shall be made of all such central tax which has been collected, but which
would not have been so collected, had the notification referred to in sub-section (1) been in
force at all material times.
Integrated Goods and Services Tax
119. (1) The notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) number G . S. R. 698(E), dated the 28th June, 2017, issued by the
Central Government on the recommendations of the Council, under section 20 of the Integrated
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 read with sub-sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 50,
sub-section (12) of section 54 and section 56 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,
2017, shall stand amended and shall be deemed to have been amended retrospectively, in the
manner specified in column (2) of the Seventh Schedule, on and from the date specified in
column (3) of that Schedule.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall have and shall
be deemed to have the power to amend the notification referred to in the said sub-section
with retrospective effect as if the Central Government had the power to amend the said
notification under section 20 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 read with
sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 50, sub-section (12) of section 54 and section 56 of the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, retrospectively, at all material times.
120. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the notification of the Government of
India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) number G . S. R. 666(E), dated the
28th June, 2017 issued by the Central Government, on the recommendations of the Council,
in exercise of the powers under sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, no integrated tax shall be levied or collected in respect of supply of
unintended waste generated during the production of fish meal (falling under heading 2301),
except for fish oil, during the period commencing from the 1st day of July, 2017 and ending
with the 30th day of September, 2019 (both days inclusive) .
(2) No refund shall be made of all such tax which has been collected, but which would
not have been so collected, had sub-section (1) been in force at all material times.
Retrospective
exemption
from, or levy
or collection
of central tax
in certain
cases.
Retrospective
effect to
notification
issued under
sub-section (2)
of section 7 of
Central Goods
and Services
Tax Act.
Amendment
of notification
issued under
section 20 of
Integrated
Goods and
Services Tax
Act, read with
sub-sections
(1) and ( 3) of
section 50,
sub-section
(12) of section
54 and section
56 of Central
Goods and
Services Tax
Act,
retrospectively.
Retrospective
exemption
from, or levy
or collection
of integrated
tax in certain
cases.
12 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
13 of 2017.
13 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
13 of 2017.

67
121. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the notification of the Government
of India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) number G. S. R. 745(E),dated the
30th September, 2019 issued by the Central Government on the recommendations of the
Council, in exercise of the powers under clause (i) of section 20 of the Integrated Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, read with sub-section ( 2) of section 7 of the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, shall be deemed to have, and always to have, for all purposes, come
into force on and from the 1st day of July, 2017.
(2) No refund shall be made of all such integrated tax which has been collected, but
which would not have been so collected, had the notification referred to in sub-section (1)
been in force at all material times.
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax
122. (1) The notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) number G . S. R. 747(E), dated the 30th June, 2017, issued by the
Central Government on the recommendations of the Council, under section 21 of the Union
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 read with sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 50,
sub-section (12) of section 54 and section 56 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,
2017, shall stand amended and shall be deemed to have been amended retrospectively, in the
manner specified in column (2) of the Eighth Schedule, on and from the date specified in
column (3) of that Schedule.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall have and shall
be deemed to have the power to amend the notification referred to in the said sub-section
with retrospective effect as if the Central Government had the power to amend the said
notification under section 21 of the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 read
with sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 50, sub-section (12) of section 54 and section 56 of
the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, retrospectively, at all material times.
123. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the notification of the Government of
India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) number G . S. R. 710(E), dated the
28th June, 2017 issued by the Central Government, on the recommendations of the Council,
in exercise of the powers under sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Union Territory Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, no Union territory tax shall be levied or collected in respect of supply
of unintended waste generated during the production of fish meal (falling under heading
2301), except for fish oil, during the period commencing from the 1st day of July, 2017 and
ending with the 30th day of September, 2019 (both days inclusive) .
(2) No refund shall be made of all such tax which has been collected, but which would
not have been so collected, had sub-section (1) been in force at all material times.
124. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the notification of the Government
of India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) number G. S. R. 747(E),dated the
30th September, 2019 issued by the Central Government, on the recommendations of the
Council, in exercise of the powers under clause (i) of section 21 of the Union Territory Goods
and Services Tax Act, 2017, read with sub-section (2) of section 7 of the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, shall be deemed to have, and always to have, for all purposes, come
into force on and from the 1st day of July, 2017.
(2) No refund shall be made of all such Union territory tax which has been collected,
but which would not have been so collected, had the notification referred to in sub-section (1)
been in force at all material times.
Retrospective
effect to
notification
issued under
clause ( i) of
section 20 of
Integrated
Goods and
Services Tax
read with sub-
section ( 2) of
section 7 of
Central Goods
and Services
Tax Act.
Amendment
of notification
issued under
section 21 of
Union
Territory
Goods and
Services Tax
Act read with
sub-sections
(1) and ( 3) of
section 50,
sub-section
(12) of section
54 and section
56 of Central
Goods and
Services Tax
Act,
retrospectively.
Retrospective
exemption
from, or levy
or collection
of Union
territory tax
in certain
cases.
Retrospective
effect to
notification
issued under
clause ( i) of
section 21 of
Union
Territory
Goods and
Services Tax
Act read with
sub-section ( 2)
of section 7 of
Central Goods
and Services
Tax Act.
13 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
14 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
14 of 2017.
12 of 2017.
14 of 2017.
14 of 2017.
12 of 2017.

68
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
PART I
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE  BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934
125. In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934,––
(a) in section 2, after clause (aiii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aiv) “bank note” means a bank note issued by the Bank, whether in
physical or digital form, under section 22;’;
(b) after section 22, the following section shall be inserted, namely:––
“22A. Nothing contained in sections 24, 25, 27, 28 and 39 shall apply to the
bank notes issued in digital form by the Bank. ”.
PART II
AMENDMENT TO THE  FINANCE ACT, 2001
126. In the Finance Act, 2001, the Seventh Schedule shall be amended in the manner
specified in the Ninth Schedule.
Amendment
of Act 2 of
1934.
Amendment
of Seventh
Schedule.
Non-
applicability
of certain
provisions to
digital form of
bank notes.
14 of 2001.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
PART I
INCOME-TAX
Paragraph A
(I) In the case of every individual other than the individual referred to in items (II) and
(III) of this Paragraph or Hindu undivided family or association of persons or body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to in
sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which
any other Paragraph of this Part applies,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not Nil;
exceed Rs. 2,50,000
(2) where the total income exceeds 5 per cent. of the amount by which
Rs. 2,50,000 but does the total income exceeds Rs. 2,50,000;
not exceed Rs. 5,00,000
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,500 plus 20 per cent. of the amount
Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed by which the total income exceeds
Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 5,00,000;
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,12,500 plus 30 per cent. of the
Rs. 10,00,000 amount by which the total income
exceeds Rs. 10,00,000.
(II) In the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is of the age of sixty
years or more but less than eighty years at any time during the previous year,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not exceed Nil;
Rs. 3,00,000
(2) where the total income exceeds 5 per cent. of the amount by which the
Rs. 3,00,000 but does not exceed total income exceeds Rs. 3,00,000;
Rs. 5,00,000
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 plus 20 per cent. of the amount
Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed by which the total income exceeds
Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 5,00,000;
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,10,000 plus 30 per cent. of the
Rs. 10,00,000 amount by which the total income
exceeds Rs. 10,00,000.
(III) In the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is of the age of eighty
years or more at any time during the previous year,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not exceed Nil;
Rs. 5,00,000
(2) where the total income exceeds 20 per cent. of the amount by which the
Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed total income exceeds Rs. 5,00,000;
Rs. 10,00,000
69

70
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 plus 30 per cent. of the
Rs. 10,00,000 amount by which the total income
exceeds Rs. 10,00,000.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A or the
provision of section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, shall be increased by a surcharge for the
purposes of the Union, calculated, in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family
or association of persons or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every
artificial juridical person referred to in sub-clause ( vii) of clause ( 31) of section 2 of the
Income-tax Act,—
(a) having a total income (including the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A and section 112A of the Income-tax Act) exceeding
fifty lakh rupees but not exceeding one crore rupees, at the rate of ten per cent. of such
income-tax;
(b) having a total income (including the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A and section 112A of the Income-tax Act) exceeding
one crore rupees, but not exceeding two crore rupees, at the rate of fifteen per cent. of
such income-tax;
(c) having a total income (excluding the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A and section 112A of the Income-tax Act) exceeding
two crore rupees but not exceeding five crore rupees, at the rate of twenty-five
per cent. of such income-tax;
(d) having a total income (excluding the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A and section 112A of the Income-tax Act) exceeding
five crore rupees, at the rate of thirty-five per cent. of such income-tax; and
(e) having a total income (including the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A and section 112A) exceeding two crore rupees
but is not covered under clauses (c) and (d), shall be applicable at the rate of fifteen
per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in case where the total income includes any income by way of dividend
or income chargeable under section 111A and section 112A of the Income-tax Act, the rate of
surcharge on the amount of income-tax computed in respect of that part of income shall not
exceed fifteen per cent.:
Provided further that in the case of persons mentioned above having total income
exceeding,—
(a) fifty lakh rupees but not exceeding one crore rupees, the total amount payable
as income-tax and surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount payable
as income-tax on a total income of fifty lakh rupees by more than the amount of income
that exceeds fifty lakh rupees;
(b) one crore rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees, the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of one crore rupees by more
than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees;
(c) two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees, the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of two crore rupees by more
than the amount of income that exceeds two crore rupees;

71
(d) five crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on
such income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on
a total income of five crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds
five crore rupees.
Paragraph B
In the case of every co-operative society,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not exceed 10 per cent. of the total income;
Rs. 10,000
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,000 plus 20 per cent. of the amount
Rs. 10,000 but does not exceed Rs. 20,000 by which the total income exceeds
Rs. 10,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 3,000 plus 30 per cent. of the amount
Rs. 20,000 by  which the total income exceeds
Rs. 20,000.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the
Income-tax Act, shall, in the case of every co-operative society, having a total income exceeding
one crore rupees, be increased by a surcharge for the purposes of the Union calculated at the
rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in the case of every co-operative society mentioned above having total
income exceeding one crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge
on such income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total income of
one crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees.
Paragraph C
In the case of every firm,—
Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 30 per cent.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the
Income-tax Act, shall, in the case of every firm, having a total income exceeding one crore
rupees, be increased by a surcharge for the purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of
twelve per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in the case of every firm mentioned above having total income exceeding
one crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on such income
shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total income of one crore rupees
by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees.
Paragraph D
In the case of every local authority,—
Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 30 per cent.

72
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the
Income-tax Act, shall, in the case of every local authority, having a total income exceeding
one crore rupees, be increased by a surcharge for the purposes of the Union calculated at the
rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in the case of every local authority mentioned above having total income
exceeding one crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on such
income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total income of one
crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees.
Paragraph E
In the case of a company,—
Rates of income-tax
I. In the case of a domestic company,—
(i) where its total turnover or the 25 per cent. of the total income;
gross receiptin  the previous  year 2019-
20 does not exceed four hundred crore
rupees
(ii) other than that referred to in 30 per cent. of the total income.
item (i)
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic company,—
(i) on so much of the total 50 per cent.;
income as consists of,—
(a) royalties received from
Government or an Indian concern in
pursuance of an agreement made by it
with the Government or the Indian
concern after the 31st day of March,
1961, but before the 1st day of April,
1976; or
(b) fees for rendering technical
services received from Government or
an Indian concern in pursuance of an
agreement made by it with the
Government or the Indian concern after
the 29th day of February, 1964 but before
the 1st day of April, 1976, and where such
agreement has, in either case, been
approved by the Central Government.
(ii) on the balance, if any, of the 40 per cent.
total income
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or 112A of the Income-tax
Act, shall, be increased by a surcharge for the purposes of the Union calculated,—
(i) in the case of every domestic company,––
(a) having a total income exceeding one crore rupees but not exceeding
ten crore rupees, at the rate of seven per cent. of such income-tax; and
(b) having a total income exceeding ten crore rupees, at the rate of twelve
per cent. of such income-tax;

73
(ii) in the case of every company other than a domestic company,––
(a) having a total income exceeding one crore rupees but not exceeding
ten crore rupees, at the rate of two per cent. of such income-tax; and
(b) having a total income exceeding ten crore rupees, at the rate of
five per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in the case of every company having a total income exceeding one crore
rupees but not exceeding ten crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and
surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total
income of one crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore
rupees:
Provided further that in the case of every company having a total income exceeding
ten crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on such income shall
not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of ten
crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds ten crore rupees.
P
ART II
RA TES FOR DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE IN CERTAIN CASES
In every case in which under the provisions of sections 193, 194A, 194B, 194BB, 194D,
194LBA, 194LBB, 194LBC and 195 of the Income-tax Act, tax is to be deducted at the rates in
force, deduction shall be made from the income subject to the deduction at the following
rates:—
Rate of
income-tax
1. In the case of a person other than a company—
(a) where the person is resident in India—
(i) on income by way of interest other than 10 per cent.;
“Interest on securities”
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries, 30 per cent.;
puzzles, card games and other games of any sort
(iii) on income by way of winnings from horse races 30 per cent.;
(iv) on income by way of insurance commission 5 per cent.;
(v) on income by way of interest payable on— 10 per cent.;
(A) any debentures or securities for money issued
by or on behalf of any local authority or a corporation
established by a Central, State or Provincial Act;
(B) any debentures issued by a company where
such debentures are listed on a recognised stock
exchange in India in accordance with the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and any
rules made thereunder;
(C) any security of the Central or State Government;
(vi) on any other income 10 per cent.;
(b) where the person is not resident in India—
(i) in the case of a non-resident Indian—
(A) on any investment income 20 per cent.;

74
(B) on income by way of long-term capital gains 10 per cent.;
referred to in section 115E or sub-clause (iii) of clause (c)
of sub-section (1) of section 112
(C) on income by way of long-term capital gains 10 per cent.;
referred to in section 112A exceeding one lakh rupees
(D) on other income by way of long-term capital 20 per cent.;
gains [not being long-term capital gains referred
to in clauses (33) and (36) of section 10]
(E) on income by way of short-term capital gains 15 per cent.;
referred to in section 111A
(F) on  income  by  way  of  interest  payable  by 20 per cent.;
Government or an Indian concern on moneys borrowed
or debt incurred by Government or the Indian concern
in foreign currency (not being income by way of interest
referred to in section 194LB or section 194LC)
(G) on  income  by  way  of  royalty  payable  by 10 per cent.;
Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an
agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian
concern where such royalty is in consideration for the
transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a
licence) in respect of copyright in any book on a subject
referred to in the first proviso to sub-section ( 1A) of
section 115A of the Income-tax Act, to the Indian
concern, or in respect of any computer software referred
to in the second proviso to sub-section (1A) of section
115A of the Income-tax Act, to a person resident in India
(H) on income by way of royalty [not being royalty 10 per cent.;
of the nature referred to in sub-item (b) (i) (G) ] payable
by Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an
agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian
concern and where such agreement is with an Indian
concern, the agreement is approved by the Central
Government or where it relates to a matter included in
the industrial policy, for the time being in force, of the
Government of India, the agreement is in accordance
with that policy
(I) on income by way of fees for technical services 10 per cent.;
payable by Government or an Indian concern in
pursuance of an agreement made by it with the
Government or the Indian concern and where such
agreement is with an Indian concern, the agreement is
approved by the Central Government or where it relates
to a matter included in the industrial policy, for the time
being in force, of the Government of India, the agreement
is in accordance with that policy
(J) on income by way of winnings from lotteries, 30 per cent.;
crossword puzzles, card games and other games of any
sort
(K) on income by way of winnings from horse races 30 per cent.;

75
(L) on the income by way of dividend 20 per cent.;
(M) on the whole of the other income 30 per cent.;
(ii) in the case of any other person—
(A) on  income  by  way  of  interest  payable  by 20 per cent.;
Government or an Indian concern on moneys borrowed
or debt incurred by Government or the Indian concern
in foreign currency (not being income by way of interest
referred to in section 194LB or section 194LC)
(B)  on  income  by  way  of  royalty  payable  by 10 per cent.;
Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an
agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian
concern where such royalty is in consideration for the
transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a
licence) in respect of copyright in any book on a subject
referred to in the first proviso to sub-section ( 1A) of
section 115A of the Income-tax Act, to the Indian
concern, in respect of any computer software referred
to in the second proviso to sub-section (1A) of section
115A of the Income-tax Act, to a person resident in India
(C) on income by way of royalty [not being royalty 10 per cent.;
of  the nature referred to in sub-item (b) (ii) (B) ] payable
by Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an
agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian
concern and where such agreement is with an Indian
concern, the agreement is approved by the Central
Government or where it relates to a matter included in
the industrial policy, for the time being in force, of the
Government of India,the agreement is in accordance
with that policy
(D) on income by way of fees for technical services 10 per cent.;
payable by Government or an Indian concern in
pursuance of an agreement made by it with the
Government or the Indian concern and where such
agreement is with an Indian concern, the agreement is
approved by the Central Government or  where  it  relates
to a matter included in the industrial policy, for the time
being in force, of the Government of India, the agreement
is in accordance with that policy
(E) on income by way of winnings from lotteries, 30 per cent.;
crossword puzzles, card games and other games of any
sort
(F) on income by way of winnings from horse races 30 per cent.;
(G) on income by way of short-term capital gains 15 per cent.;
referred to in section 111A
(H) on income by way of long-term capital gains 10 per cent.;
referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of section 112
(I) on income by way of long-term capital gains 10 per cent.;
referred to in section 112A exceeding one lakh rupees

76
(J) on income by way of other long-term capital 20 per cent.;
gains [not being long-term capital gains referred to in
clauses (33) and (36) of section 10]
(K) on income by way of dividend 20 per cent.;
(L) on the whole of the other income 30 per cent.;
2. In the case of a company—
(a) where the company is a domestic company—
(i) on income by way of interest other than 10 per cent. ;
“Interest on securities”
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries, puzzles, 30 per cent. ;
card games and other games of any sort
(iii) on income by way of winnings from horse races 30 per cent. ;
(iv) on any other income 10 per cent. ;
(b) where the company is not a domestic company—
(i) on income by way of winnings from lotteries, 30 per cent. ;
crossword puzzles, card games and other games of any sort
(ii) on income by way of winnings from horse races 30 per cent. ;
(iii) on income by way of interest payable by 20 per cent. ;
Government or an Indian concern on moneys borrowed or
debt incurred by Government or the Indian concern in foreign
currency (not being income by way of interest referred to in
section 194LB or section 194LC)
(iv) on income by way of royalty payable by Government 10 per cent. ;
or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by it
with the Government or the Indian concern after the 31st day
of March, 1976 where such royalty is in consideration for the
transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence)
in respect of copyright in any book on a subject referred to in
the first proviso to sub-section ( 1A) of section 115A of the
Income-tax Act, to the Indian concern, or in respect of any
computer software referred to in the second proviso to
sub-section (1A) of section 115A of the Income-tax Act, to a
person resident in India
(v) on income by way of royalty [not being royalty of
the nature referred to in sub-item ( b)(iv)] payable by
Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement
made by it with the Government or the Indian concern and
where such agreement is with an Indian concern, the agreement
is approved by the Central Government or where it relates to a
matter included in the industrial policy, for the time being in
force, of the Government of India, the agreement is in
accordance with that policy—
(A) where the agreement is made after the 50 per cent.;
31st day of March, 1961 but before the 1st day of
April, 1976
(B) where the agreement is made after the 10 per cent.;
31st day of March, 1976

77
(vi) on income by way of fees for technical services
payable by Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of
an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian
concern and where such agreement is with an Indian concern,
the agreement is approved by the Central Government or where
it relates to a matter included in the industrial policy, for the
time being in force, of the Government of India, the agreement
is in accordance with that policy—
(A) where the agreement is made after the 29th day 50 per cent.;
of February, 1964 but before the 1st day of April, 1976
(B) where the agreement is made after the 31st day 10 per cent.;
of March, 1976
(vii) on income by way of short-term capital gains 15 per cent.;
referred to in section 111A
(viii) on income by way of long-term capital gains 10 per cent.;
referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (c) of sub-section (1)
of section 112
(ix) on income by way of long-term 10 per cent.;
capital gains referred to in section 112A
exceeding one lakh rupees
(x) on income by way of other long- 20 per cent.;
term capital gains [not being long-term
capital gains referred to in clauses (33)
and (36) of section 10]
(xi) on income by way of dividend 20 per cent.;
(xii) on any other income 40 per cent.
Explanation.— For the purposes of item 1(b)(i) of this Part, "investment income" and
"non-resident Indian" shall have the meanings assigned to them in Chapter XII-A of the
Income-tax Act.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax deducted in accordance with the provisions of––
(i) item 1 of this Part, shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the
Union,—
(a) in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or association
of persons or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial
juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the
Income-tax Act, being a non-resident, calculated,––
I. at the rate of ten per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes (including the income by way of dividend or
income under the provisions of sections 111A, 112 and 112A of the
Income-tax Act) paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed one crore rupees;
II. at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes (including the income by way of dividend or
income under the provisions of sections 111A, 112 and 112A of the
Income-tax Act) paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees;

78
III. at the rate of twenty-five per cent. of such tax, where the income
or the aggregate of such incomes (excluding the income by way of dividend
or income under the provisions of sections 111A, 112 and 112A of the
Income-tax Act) paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees;
IV . at the rate of thirty-seven per cent. of such tax, where the income
or the aggregate of such incomes (excluding the income by way of dividend
or income under the provisions of sections 111A, 112 and 112A of the
Income-tax Act) paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds five crore rupees; and
V . at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes (including the income by way of dividend or
income under the provisions of sections 111A, 112 and 112A of the
Income-tax Act) paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds two crore rupees, but is not covered under sub-clauses III and IV:
Provided that in case where the total income includes any income
chargeable under sections 111A, 112 and 112A of the Income-tax Act, the
rate of surcharge on the amount of Income-tax deducted in respect of that
part of income shall not exceed fifteen per cent.;
(b) in the case of every co-operative society, being a non-resident,
calculated,—
I. at the rate of seven per cent. of such tax, where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the
deduction exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
II. at the rate of twelve per cent., where the income or the aggregate
of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds ten crore rupees;
(c) in the case of every firm, being a non-resident, calculated at the rate of
twelve per cent., where the income or the aggregate of such incomes paid or
likely to be paid and subject to the deduction exceeds one crore rupees;
(ii) Item 2 of this Part shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the
Union, in the case of every company other than a domestic company, calculated,––
(a) at the rate of two per cent. of such income-tax where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds one crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees; and
(b) at the rate of five per cent. of such income-tax where the income or the
aggregate of such incomes paid or likely to be paid and subject to the deduction
exceeds ten crore rupees.
P
ART III
RATES FOR CHARGING INCOME-TAX IN CERTAIN CASES, DEDUCTING INCOME-TAX FROM INCOME
CHARGEABLE UNDER THE HEAD “SALARIES” AND COMPUTING “ADV ANCE TAX”
In cases in which income-tax has to be charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 of
the Income-tax Act or sub-section ( 2) of section 174 or section 174A or section 175 or
sub-section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or deducted from, or paid on, from income
chargeable under the head “Salaries” under section 192 of the said Act or deducted under
section 194P of the said Act or in which the “advance tax” payable under Chapter XVII-C of
the said Act has to be computed at the rate or rates in force, such income-tax or, as the case

79
may be, “advance tax” [not being “advance tax” in respect of any income chargeable to tax
under Chapter XII or Chapter XII-A or income chargeable to tax under section 115JB or
section 115JC or Chapter XII-FA or Chapter XII-FB or sub-section (1A) of section 161 or
section 164 or section 164A or section 167B of the said Act at the rates as specified in that
Chapter or section or surcharge, wherever applicable, on such “advance tax” in respect of
any income chargeable to tax under section 115A or section 115AB or section 115AC or
section 115ACA or section 115AD or section 115B or section 115BA or section 115BAA or
section 115BAB or section 115BAD or section 115BB or section 115BBA or section 115BBC
or section 115BBE or section 115BBF or section 115BBG or section 115BBH or section
115BBI or section 115E or section 115JB or section 115JC] shall be charged, deducted or
computed at the following rate or rates:—
Paragraph A
(I) In the case of every individual other than the individual referred to in items (II) and
(III) of this Paragraph or Hindu undivided family or association of persons or body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to in
sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which
any other Paragraph of this Part applies,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not Nil;
exceed Rs. 2,50,000
(2) where the total income exceeds 5 per cent. of the amount
Rs. 2,50,000 but does not exceed by which the total income
Rs. 5,00,000 exceeds Rs. 2,50,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,500 plus 20 percent. of the
Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed amount by which the
Rs. 10,00,000 total income exceeds Rs. 5,00,000;
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,12,500 plus 30 percent. of the
Rs. 10,00,000 amount by which the total income
exceeds Rs. 10,00,000.
(II) In the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is of the age of sixty
years or more but less than eighty years at any time during the previous year,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not Nil;
exceed Rs. 3,00,000
(2) where the total income exceeds 5 per cent. of the amount by
Rs. 3,00,000 but does not which the total income exceeds
exceed Rs. 5,00,000 Rs. 3,00,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 plus 20 per cent.
Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed of the amount by which the total
Rs. 10,00,000 income exceeds Rs. 5,00,000;
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,10,000 plus 30 per cent.
Rs. 10,00,000 of the amount by which the
total income exceeds Rs. 10,00,000.
(III) In the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is of the age of eighty
years or more at any time during the previous year,—

80
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not Nil;
exceed Rs. 5,00,000
(2) where the total income exceeds 20 per cent. of the amount
Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed by which the total income exceeds
Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 5,00,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 plus 30 per cent.
Rs. 10,00,000 of the amount by which the
total income exceeds
Rs. 10,00,000.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A or the
provisions of section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, shall be increased by a surcharge for
the purposes of the Union, calculated, in the case of every individual or Hindu undivided
family or association of persons or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or
every artificial juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of  the
Income-tax Act,—
(a) having a total income (including the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A, section 112 and section 112A of the Income-tax
Act) exceeding fifty lakh rupees but not exceeding one crore rupees, at the rate of ten
per cent. of such income-tax;
(b) having a total income (including the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A, section 112 and section 112A of the Income-tax
Act) exceeding one crore rupees but not exceeding two crore rupees, at the rate of
fifteen per cent. of such income-tax;
(c) having a total income (excluding the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A, section 112 and section 112A of the Income-tax
Act) exceeding two crore rupees but not exceeding five crore rupees, at the rate of
twenty-five per cent. of such income-tax;
(d) having a total income (excluding the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A, section 112 and section 112A of the Income-tax
Act) exceeding five crore rupees, at the rate of thirty-seven per cent. of such income-tax;
and
(e) having a total income (including the income by way of dividend or income
under the provisions of section 111A, section 112 and section 112A of the Income-tax
Act) exceeding two crore rupees, but is not covered under clauses (c) and (d), shall be
applicable at the rate of fifteen per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in case where the total income includes any income by way of
dividend or income chargeable under section 111A, section 112 and section 112A of
the Income-tax Act, the rate of surcharge on the amount of Income-tax computed in
respect of that part of income shall not exceed fifteen per cent.:
Provided further that in case of an association of persons consisting of only
companies as its members, the rate of surcharge on the amount of Income-tax shall not
exceed fifteen per cent.:
Provided also that in the case of persons mentioned above having total income
exceeding,—

81
(a) fifty lakh rupees but not exceeding one crore rupees, the total amount payable
as income-tax and surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount payable
as income-tax on a total income of fifty lakh rupees by more than the amount of income
that exceeds fifty lakh rupees;
(b) one crore rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees, the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of one crore rupees by more
than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees;
(c) two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees, the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount
payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of two crore rupees by more
than the amount of income that exceeds two crore rupees;
(d) five crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on
such income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on
a total income of five crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds
five crore rupees.
Paragraph B
In the case of every co-operative society,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not 10 per cent. of the total income;
exceed Rs. 10,000
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,000 plus 20 per cent. of the
Rs. 10,000 but does not exceed amount by which the total income
Rs. 20,000 exceeds Rs. 10,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 3,000 plus 30 per cent. of the
Rs. 20,000 amount by which the total income
exceeds Rs. 20,000.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the
Income-tax Act, shall, be increased by a surcharge for the purpose of the Union, calculated
in the case of every co-operative society,––
(a) having a total income exceeding one crore rupees but not exceeding ten crore
rupees, at the rate of seven per cent., of such income-tax;
(b) having a total income exceeding ten crore rupees, at the rate of twelve per cent.:
Provided that in the case of every co-operative society having total income exceeding
one crore rupees but not exceeding ten crore rupees the total amount payable as income-tax
and surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a
total income of one crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore
rupees:
Provided further that in the case of every co-operative society having total income
exceeding ten crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on such
income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total
income of ten crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds ten crore
rupees.

82
Paragraph C
In the case of every firm,—
Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 30 per cent.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the
Income-tax Act, shall, in the case of every firm, having a total income exceeding one crore
rupees, be increased by a surcharge for the purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of
twelve per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in the case of every firm mentioned above having total income exceeding
one crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on such income
shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total income of one crore rupees
by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees.
Paragraph D
In the case of every local authority,—
Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 30 per cent. ;
 Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the
Income-tax Act, shall, in the case of every local authority, having a total income exceeding
one crore rupees, be increased by a surcharge for the purposes of the Union calculated at the
rate of twelve per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in the case of every local authority mentioned above having total income
exceeding one crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on such
income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total income of one
crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore rupees.
Paragraph E
In the case of a company,—
Rates of income-tax
I. In the case of a domestic company,—
(i) where its total turnover or the 25 per cent. of the total income;
gross receipt in the previous year
2020-2021 does not exceed
four hundred crore rupees
(ii) other than that referred 30 per cent. of the total income.
to in item (i)
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic company,—
(i) on so much of the total income                         50 per cent.;
as consists of,—

83
(a) royalties received from Government or an Indian concern in pursuance
of an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern after the
31st day of March, 1961 but before the 1st day of April, 1976; or
(b) fees for rendering technical services received from Government or an
Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or
the Indian concern after the 29th day of February, 1964 but before the 1st day of
April, 1976,
and where such agreement has, in either case, been approved by the Central Government;
(ii) on the balance, if any, of the total income               40 per cent.
Surcharge on income-tax
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of
this Paragraph, or the provisions of section 111A or section 112 or section 112A of the
Income-tax Act, shall, be increased by a surcharge for the purposes of the Union, calculated,—
(i) in the case of every domestic company,––
(a) having a total income exceeding one crore rupees but not exceeding
ten crore rupees, at the rate of seven per cent. of such income-tax; and
(b) having a total income exceeding ten crore rupees, at the rate of twelve
per cent. of such income-tax;
(ii) in the case of every company other than a domestic company,––
(a) having a total income exceeding one crore rupees but not exceeding
ten crore rupees, at the rate of two per cent. of such income-tax; and
(b) having a total income exceeding ten crore rupees, at the rate of five
per cent. of such income-tax:
Provided that in the case of every company having a total income exceeding one crore
rupees but not exceeding ten crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and
surcharge on such income shall not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax on a total
income of one crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds one crore
rupees:
Provided further that in the case of every company having a total income exceeding
ten crore rupees, the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on such income shall
not exceed the total amount payable as income-tax and surcharge on a total income of ten
crore rupees by more than the amount of income that exceeds ten crore rupees.
PART IV
[See section 2(13) (c)]
R
ULES FOR COMPUTA TION OF NET AGRICULTURAL INCOME
Rule 1. —Agricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (1A)
of section 2 of the Income-tax Act shall be computed as if it were income chargeable to
income-tax under that Act under the head “Income from other sources” and the provisions of
sections 57 to 59 of that Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly:
Provided that sub-section (2) of section 58 shall apply subject to the modification that
the reference to section 40A therein shall be construed as not including a reference to
sub-sections (3), (3A) and (4) of section 40A.
Rule 2. —Agricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b) or  sub-clause (c)
of clause ( 1A) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act [other than income derived from any
building required as a dwelling-house by the receiver of the rent or revenue of the cultivator

84
or the receiver of rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause (c)] shall be computed as if it
were income chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” and the provisions of sections 30, 31, 32, 36, 37, 38, 40, 40A [other
than sub-sections (3), (3A) and (4) thereof], 41, 43, 43A, 43B and 43C of the Income-tax Act
shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
Rule 3. —Agricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (c) of clause (1A)
of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, being income derived from any building required as a
dwelling-house by the receiver of the rent or revenue or the cultivator or the receiver of
rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause ( c) shall be computed as if it were income
chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head “Income from house property” and
the provisions of sections 23 to 27 of that Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
Rule 4. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of these rules,
in a case—
(a) where the assessee derives income from sale of tea grown and manufactured
by him in India, such income shall be computed in accordance with rule 8 of the
Income-tax Rules, 1962, and sixty per cent. of such income shall be regarded as the
agricultural income of the assessee;
(b) where the assessee derives income from sale of centrifuged latex or cenex or
latex based crepes (such as pale latex crepe) or brown crepes (such as estate brown
crepe, re-milled crepe, smoked blanket crepe or flat bark crepe) or technically specified
block rubbers manufactured or processed by him from rubber plants grown by him in
India, such income shall be computed in accordance with rule 7A of the Income-tax
Rules, 1962, and sixty-five per cent. of such income shall be regarded as the agricultural
income of the assessee;
(c) where the assessee derives income from sale of coffee grown and manufactured
by him in India, such income shall be computed in accordance with rule 7B of the
Income-tax Rules, 1962, and sixty per cent. or seventy-five per cent., as the case may
be, of such income shall be regarded as the agricultural income of the assessee.
Rule 5. —Where the assessee is a member of an association of persons or a body of
individuals (other than a Hindu undivided family, a company or a firm) which in the previous
year has either no income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act or has total income not
exceeding the maximum amount not chargeable to tax in the case of an association of persons
or a body of individuals (other than a Hindu undivided family, a company or a firm) but has
any agricultural income then, the agricultural income or loss of the association or body shall
be computed in accordance with these rules and the share of the assessee in the agricultural
income or loss so computed shall be regarded as the agricultural income or loss of the
assessee.
Rule 6. —Where the result of the computation for the previous year in respect of any
source of agricultural income is a loss, such loss shall be set off against the income of the
assessee, if any, for that previous year from any other source of agricultural income:
Provided that where the assessee is a member of an association of persons or a body
of individuals and the share of the assessee in the agricultural income of the association or
body, as the case may be, is a loss, such loss shall not be set off against any income of the
assessee from any other source of agricultural income.
Rule 7. —Any sum payable by the assessee on account of any tax levied by the State
Government on the agricultural income shall be deducted in computing the agricultural
income.
Rule 8. —(1) Where the assessee has, in the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2022, any agricultural income and the net result of
the computation of the agricultural income of the assessee for any one or more of the

85
previous years relevant to the assessment years commencing on the 1st day of April, 2014 or
the 1st day of April, 2015 or the 1st day of April, 2016 or the 1st day of April, 2017 or the
1st day of April, 2018 or the 1st day of April, 2019 or the 1st day of April, 2020, or the 1st day
of April, 2021, is a loss, then, for the purposes of sub-section (2) of section 2 of this Act,––
(i) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2014, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2015 or the 1st day of April, 2016 or the
1st day of April, 2017 or the 1st day of April, 2018 or the 1st day of April, 2019 or the
1st day of April, 2020 or the 1st day of April, 2021,
(ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2015, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2016 or the 1st day of April, 2017 or the
1st day of April, 2018 or the 1st day of April, 2019 or the 1st day of April, 2020 or the
1st day of April, 2021,
(iii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2016, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2017 or the 1st day of April, 2018 or the
1st day of April, 2019 or the 1st day of April, 2020 or the 1st day of April, 2021,
(iv) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2017, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2018 or the 1st day of April, 2019 or the
1st day of April, 2020 or the 1st day of April, 2021,
(v) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2018, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2019 or the 1st day of April, 2020 or the
1st day of April, 2021,
(vi) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2019, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2020 or the 1st day of April, 2021,
(vii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2020, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2021,
(viii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2021,
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee for the previous year relevant
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2022.
(2) Where the assessee has, in the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2023, or, if by virtue of any provision of the Income-tax
Act, income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a period other than the previous
year, in such other period, any agricultural income and the net result of the computation of
the agricultural income of the assessee for any one or more of the previous years relevant to
the assessment years commencing on the 1st day of April, 2015 or the 1st day of April, 2016
or the 1st day of April, 2017 or the 1st day of April, 2018 or the 1st day of April, 2019 or the

86
1st day of April, 2020 or the 1st day of April, 2021 or the 1st day of April, 2022, is a loss, then,
for the purposes of sub-section (10) of section 2 of this Act,––
(i) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2015, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2016 or the 1st day of April, 2017 or the
1st day of April, 2018 or the 1st day of April, 2019 or the 1st day of April, 2020 or the
1st day of April, 2021 or the 1st day of April, 2022,
(ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2016, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2017 or the 1st day of April, 2018 or the
1st day of April, 2019 or the 1st day of April, 2020 or the 1st day of April, 2021 or the
1st day of April, 2022,
(iii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2017, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2018 or the 1st day of April, 2019 or the
1st day of April, 2020 or the 1st day of April, 2021 or the 1st day of April, 2022,
(iv) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2018, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2019 or the 1st day of April, 2020 or the
1st day of April, 2021 or the 1st day of April, 2022,
(v) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2019, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2020 or the 1st day of April, 2021 or the
1st day of April, 2022,
(vi) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2020, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the or the 1st day of April, 2021 or the 1st day of April, 2022,
(vii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2021, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been
set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2022,
(viii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2022,
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee for the previous year relevant
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2023.
(3) Where any person deriving any agricultural income from any source has been
succeeded in such capacity by another person, otherwise than by inheritance, nothing in
sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle any person, other than the person incurring the loss,
to have it set off under sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2) .
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, no loss which has not been
determined by the Assessing Officer under the provisions of these rules or the rules contained
in the First Schedule to the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2014 (25 of 2014) or the First Schedule to the
Finance Act, 2015 (20 of 2015) or the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 2016 (28 of 2016) or
the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017) or the First Schedule to the Finance

87
Act, 2018 ( 13 of 2018) or the First Schedule of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019 (23 of 2019) or the
First Schedule of the Finance Act, 2020 (12 of 2020) or the First Schedule of the Finance Act,
2021 (13 of 2021) shall be set off under sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2) .
Rule 9. —Where the net result of the computation made in accordance with these rules
is a loss, the loss so computed shall be ignored and the net agricultural income shall be
deemed to be nil.
Rule 10. —The provisions of the Income-tax Act relating to procedure for assessment
(including the provisions of section 288A relating to rounding off of income) shall, with the
necessary modifications, apply in relation to the computation of the net agricultural income
of the assessee as they apply in relation to the assessment of the total income.
Rule 11. —For the purposes of computing the net agricultural income of the assessee,
the Assessing Officer shall have the same powers as he has under the Income-tax Act for the
purposes of assessment of the total income.

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 98(a)]
In the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act,––
Tariff Item Description of goods Unit Rate of duty
Standard    Preferential
(1) (2) (3) (4)               (5)
(1) in Chapter 15, for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1516 30 00, the
entry “100%” shall be substituted;
(2) in Chapter 66, for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 6601, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(3) in Chapter 71, for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 7117, the entry “20% or Rs. 400 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(4) in Chapter 85,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 8518 21 00, 8518 22 00,
8518 29 00 and 8518 30 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for tariff item 8524 11 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely:––
“8524 11 00 - - Of liquid crystals 15% - ”;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8541 42 00, the entry
“25%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8541 43 00, the entry
“40%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8541 49 00, the entry
“40%” shall be substituted;
(5) in Chapter 90,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9028 30 10, the entry
“25%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9028 90 10, the entry
“20%” shall be substituted.
88

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 98(b)]
In the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act,––
Tariff Item Description of goods Unit Rate of duty
Standard    Preferential
(1) (2) (3) (4)  (5)
(1) in Chapter 1, for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item
0101 21 00, the entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(2) in Chapter 3,––
(i) in heading 0306, for tariff item 0306 36 00 and the entries relating thereto,
the following shall be substituted, namely:—
(1) (2) (3) (4)  (5)
“0306 36 - - Other shrimps and prawns:
0306 36 10 - - - Scampi (Macrobachium spp. ) kg. 30% -
0306 36 20 - - - V annamei shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) kg. 10% -
0306 36 30 - - - Indian white shrimp (Fenneropenaeus kg. 30% -
indicus)
0306 36 40 - - - Black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) kg. 10% -
0306 36 50 - - - Flower shrimp (Penaeus semisulcatus) kg. 30% -
0306 36 60 - - - Artemia kg. 5% -
0306 36 90 - - - Other kg. 30% -”;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0307 32 00, the
entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0307 43 20, the
entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(3) in Chapter 5,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0508 00 10, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0511 10 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) in heading 0511, for tariff items 0511 91 10 to 0511 91 90, sub-heading
0511 99, tariff items 0511 99 11 and 0511 99 19, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“0511 91 10 - - - Fish nails kg. 30% -
0511 91 20 - - - Fish tails kg. 30% -
0511 91 30 - - - Other fish waste kg. 30% -
0511 91 40 - - - Artemia cysts kg. 5% -
0511 91 90 - - - Other kg. 30% -
89

90
0511 99 - - Other:
0511 99 10 - - - Silkworm pupae kg. 30% -”;
(4) in Chapter 7,––
(i) after Note 5, the following Supplementary Note shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Supplementary Note:
(1) (a) For the purposes of this Chapter, “Rose Onion” refers to a variety
of onion defined and recognised by the Geographical Indication (GI) Registry
against the GI no. 212 under the Geographical Indication of Goods (Registration
and Protection) Act, 1999 (48 of 1999) .
(b) Produced/cultivated by a person certified/recognised and mentioned
as a user in the Geographical Indication Registry against the said GI no. 212”;
(ii) in heading 0703, for tariff item 0703 10 10 and the entries relating
thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“ - - - Onions:
0703 10 11 - - - - Rose onion kg. 30% 20%
0703 10 19 - - - - Other kg. 30% 20%” ;
(5) in Chapter 8,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0801 31 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 0802 51 00 and
0802 52 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 0804 10 20 and
0804 10 30, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0805 10 00, the
entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0805 50 00, the
entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0806 10 00, the
entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 0808 30 00 and
0808 40 00, the entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(6) in Chapter 9,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 0904 11 10, the
entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 0907, the entry “35%” shall be substituted;
(7) in Chapter 10,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1001 19 00, the
entry “40%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1001 99 10, the
entry “40%” shall be substituted;

91
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 1005, the entry “50%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 1007, the entry “50%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 1008 21 and 1008 29, the entry “50%” shall be substituted;
(8) in Chapter 11,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1104 22 00, the
entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1107 10 00, the
entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1108 12 00, the
entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(9) in Chapter 12,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1207 91 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 1209 91, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 1209 99, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(10) in Chapter 13, for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1301 90 13,
the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(11) in Chapter 14, for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1401 10 00,
the entry “25%” shall be substituted;
(12) in Chapter 16, in the Chapter heading, for the word “crustaceans”, the
words “of crustaceans” shall be substituted;
(13) in Chapter 17, for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items
of sub-headings 1702 11 and 1702 19, the entry “25%” shall be substituted;
(14) in Chapter 18, for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1801 00 00,
the entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(15) in Chapter 19,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 1905 31 00, the
entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 1905 32, the entry “30%” shall be substituted;
(16) in Chapter 21, in clause (e) of Note 1, for the words “blood, fish”, the words
“blood, insects, fish” shall be substituted;
(17) in Chapter 22, for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2207 20 00,
the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(18) in Chapter 23,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2301, 2302, 2303, 2304, 2305 and 2306, the entry “15%” shall be
substituted;

92
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2307 00 00, the
entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2308 00 00, the
entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2309 10 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2309 90 10,
2309 90 20 and 2309 90 31, the entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (2) occurring against tariff item 2309 90 32, the
following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“Fish feed in powdered form”;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2309 90 32,
2309 90 39 and 2309 90 90, the entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(19) in Chapter 25,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
2501, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2502 00 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2503 00 10, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2503 00 90, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2504, 2505, 2506, 2507 and 2508, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2509 00 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2510, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2511, 2512 and 2513, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2514 00 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2517 and 2519, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2520 10 10,
2520 10 20 and 2520 10 90, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2520 20, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2521 and 2522, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;

93
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2523 29, the entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2525 and 2526, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2528, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2529 and 2530, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(20) in Chapter 26,––
(i) in clause ( f) of Note 1, for the brackets, word and figures “(heading
7112)”, the brackets, words and figures “(heading 7112 or 8549)” shall be
substituted;
(ii) after sub-heading Notes, the following Supplementary Note shall be
inserted, namely:––
“Supplementary Note:
1. For the products of heading 2601, the percentage of Fe content,
wherever specified, shall be calculated on the Dry Weight or Dry Metric
Tonne (DMT) basis.”;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2601 and 2602, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2603 00 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2604 00 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2605 00 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2606, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2607 00 00,
2608 00 00 and 2609 00 00, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2610, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2611 00 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2612 10 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2612 20 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2613, 2614, 2615, 2616 and 2617, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2620, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;

94
(21) in Chapter 27,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2701, 2702 and 2703, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2704, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2705 00 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2706, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2707, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2708, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2709 00 90, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2710 12 21,
2710 12 22 and 2710 12 29, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2710 12 31 and
2710 12 32, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(x) in heading 2710, for tariff items 2710 12 39 to 2710 12 49 and the entries
relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“2710 12 39 - - - - Solvent 145/205 kg. 5% -
- - - Motor Gasoline conforming to standard
IS 2796, IS 17021, IS 17586 or IS 17076:
2710 12 41 - - - - Motor Gasoline conforming to standard kg. 2.5% -
IS 2796
2710 12 42 - - - - E 20 Fuel conforming to standard kg. 2.5% -
IS 17021
2710 12 43 - - - - E 12 Fuel conforming to standard kg. 2.5% -
IS 17586
2710 12 44 - - - - E 15 Fuel conforming to standard kg. 2.5% -
IS 17586
2710 12 49 - - - - M 15 Fuel conforming to standard kg. 2.5% -”;
IS 17076
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2710 12 50, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2710 12 90,
2710 19 20, 2710 19 31, 2710 19 32, 2710 19 39, 2710 19 41, 2710 19 42 and
2710 19 43, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2710 19 44
and 2710 19 49, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;

95
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2710 19 51,
2710 19 52, 2710 19 53, 2710 19 59, 2710 19 61, 2710 19 69, 2710 19 71, 2710 19 72,
2710 19 73, 2710 19 74, 2710 19 75, 2710 19 76, 2710 19 77, 2710 19 78, 2710 19 79,
2710 19 81, 2710 19 82, 2710 19 83, 2710 19 84, 2710 19 85, 2710 19 86, 2710 19 87,
2710 19 88, 2710 19 89 and 2710 19 90, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2710 20 10 and
2710 20 20, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2710 20 90,
2710 91 00 and 2710 99 00, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2711 11 00,
2711 12 00 and 2711 13 00, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2711 14 00,
2711 19 10, 2711 19 20, 2711 19 90, 2711 21 00 and 2711 29 00, the entry “5%” shall
be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2712, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2713 12 10 and
2713 12 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2713 20 00
and 2713 90 00, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2714 and 2715, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(22) in Chapter 28,––
(i) after Supplementary Note 1, the following Supplementary Note shall be
inserted, namely:—
“2. In this Chapter, reference to any standard of the Bureau of Indian
Standards refers to the last published version of that standard.”;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2801 20 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2806, 2807 and 2808, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2809 10 00,
2809 20 20 and 2810 00 10, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2811, 2812, 2813, 2815, 2816 and 2817, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2818 10 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) in heading 2818, for tariff item 2818 20 10 and the entries relating
thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“- - - Alumina, calcined:

96
2818 20 11 - - -  - Metallurgical grade, conforming to
IS 17441 kg. 5% -
2818 20 19 - - - - Non-metallurgical grade, conforming kg. 5% -”;
to IS 17441
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2818 20 90
and 2818 30 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2819, 2820, 2821 and 2822, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2823 00 90, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2824, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2825 10 10,
2825 10 20, 2825 10 30, 2825 10 40, 2825 10 90, 2825 20 00, 2825 30 10 and
2825 30 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2825 40 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2825 50 00,
2825 60 10, 2825 60 20, 2825 70 10, 2825 70 20, 2825 70 90, 2825 80 00, 2825 90 10,
2825 90 20, 2825 90 40, 2825 90 50 and 2825 90 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2826, 2827, 2828, 2829, 2830, 2831, 2832, 2833, 2834, 2835 and 2836, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 2837 19 and 2837 20, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2839, 2840, 2841 and 2842, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2844 10 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2844 20 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2844 30 10,
2844 30 21, 2844 30 22, 2844 30 23, 2844 30 29, 2844 30 30, 2844 30 90, 2844 41 00,
2844 42 00, 2844 43 00, 2844 44 00 and 2844 50 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2845 and 2846, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2847 00 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2849, 2850, 2852 and 2853, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;

97
(23) in Chapter 29,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
2901, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2902 11 00,
2902 19 10, 2902 19 90, 2902 20 00 and 2902 30 00, the entry “2.5%” shall be
substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2902 41 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2902 42 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2902 43 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2902 44 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2902 50 00, the
entry “2%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2902 60 00,
2902 70 00, 2902 90 10, 2902 90 20, 2902 90 30, 2902 90 40, 2902 90 50, 2902 90 60 and
2902 90 90, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2903 11 10, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2903 11 20, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2903 12 00 and
2903 13 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2903 14 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2903 15 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2903 19, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2903 21 00, the
entry “2%” shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2903 22 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2903 23 00
and 2903 29 00, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2903 41 00,
2903 42 00, 2903 43 00, 2903 44 00, 2903 45 00,  2903 46 00, 2903 47 00, 2903 48 00,
2903 49 00, 2903 51 00, 2903 59 10, 2903 59 90, 2903 61 00, 2903 62 00, 2903 69 00,
2903 71 00, 2903 72 00, 2903 73 00, 2903 74 00 and 2903 75 00, the entry “7.5%”
shall be substituted;

98
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 2903 76 and 2903 77, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2903 78 00,
2903 79 00, 2903 81 00, 2903 82 00, 2903 83 00 and 2903 89 00, the entry “7.5%”
shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 2903 91 and 2903 92, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2903 93 00
and 2903 94 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2903 99, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2904, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2905 11 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2905 12, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2905 13 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 2905 14 and 2905 16, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2905 17 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 2905 19 and 2905 22, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2905 29 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2905 31 00,
the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2905 32 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2905 39, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted
(xxxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2905 41 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2905 42, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2905 43 00
and 2905 44 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2905 45 00,
2905 49 00, 2905 51 00 and 2905 59 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;

99
(xxxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2906, 2907 and 2908, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xl) in the heading of sub-chapter IV , for the words “ETHER PEROXIDES”,
the words “ETHER PEROXIDES, ACETAL AND HEMIACETAL PEROXIDES”
shall be substituted;
(xli) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2909, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xlii) in the entry in column (2) occurring against tariff item 2909 60 00, for
the words “ether peroxides”, the words “ether peroxides, acetal and hemiacetal
peroxides” shall be substituted;
(xliii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2910 10 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xliv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2910 20 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xlv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2910 30 00,
2910 40 00, 2910 50 00 and 2910 90 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xlvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2911, 2912, 2913 and 2914, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xlvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2915 11 00,
2915 12 10, 2915 12 90 and 2915 13 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xlviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2915 21 00,
the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xlix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2915 24 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(l) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items
of sub-heading 2915 29, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(li) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2915 31 00,
2915 32 00, 2915 33 00 and 2915 36 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 2915 39 and 2915 40, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(liii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2915 50 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(liv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 2915 60, 2915 70 and 2915 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 2916, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2917 11, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2917 12 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2917 13, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;

100
(lix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2917 14 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2917 19, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2917 20 00,
2917 32 00, 2917 33 00, 2917 34 00 and 2917 35 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(lxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2917 36 00
and 2917 37 00, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(lxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2917 39, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2918, 2919, 2920, 2921, 2922, 2923, 2924 and 2925, the entry “7.5%” shall
be substituted;
(lxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2926 10 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2926 20 00,
2926 30 00, 2926 40 00 and 2926 90 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2927, 2928, 2929, 2930, 2931 and 2932, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(lxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2933 11 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2933 19, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2933 21 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2933 29, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2933 31 00
and 2933 32 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2933 33, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2933 34 00,
2933 35 00, 2933 36 00 and 2933 37 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2933 39, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2933 41 00,
2933 49 00, 2933 52 00, 2933 53 00, 2933 54 00 and 2933 55 00, the entry “7.5%”
shall be substituted;
(lxxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2933 61 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 2933 69, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2933 71 00,
the entry “5%” shall be substituted;

101
(lxxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 2933 72 00,
2933 79 10, 2933 79 20, 2933 79 90, 2933 91 00, 2933 92 00, 2933 99 10 and
2933 99 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2934, 2935, 2936, 2937, 2938 and 2939, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(lxxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 2940 00 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(lxxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 2941 and 2942, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(24) in Chapter 31,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
3101, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 3102 29, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3102 40 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 3102 60 00,
3102 80 00, 3102 90 10 and 3102 90 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 3103, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3104 20 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3104 90 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3105 10 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(25) in Chapter 32,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3201 10 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3201 20 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 3201 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 3202, 3203 and 3204, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3205 00 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 3206 20 00,
3206 41 00, 3206 42 00, 3206 49 10, 3206 49 20, 3206 49 30, 3206 49 40, 3206 49 90 and
3206 50 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 3207, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(26) in Chapter 33, for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items
of heading 3301, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;

102
(27) in Chapter 34,––
(i) in the entry in column (2) occurring after heading 3402 and the entries
relating thereto, for the words “surface active agents”, the words “surface-
active agents” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the entry in column (2) occurring after tariff item 3402 39 00 and the
entries relating thereto, for the words “surface active agents”, the words “surface-
active agents” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 3403, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(28) in Chapter 35, for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items
of headings 3501, 3502, 3503, 3504 and 3505, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(29) in Chapter 38,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 3801 and 3802, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3803 00 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 3804, 3805, 3806 and 3807, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3809 10 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 3809 91 10,
3809 91 20, 3809 91 30, 3809 91 40, 3809 91 50, 3809 91 60, 3809 91 70, 3809 91 80,
3809 91 90, 3809 92 00, 3809 93 10 and 3809 93 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 3810, 3812 and 3815, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3816 00 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 3817, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3821 00 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 3823, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 3824 10 00,
3824 30 00, 3824 40 10, 3824 40 90, 3824 50 10, 3824 50 90, 3824 81 00, 3824 82 00,
3824 83 00, 3824 84 00, 3824 85 00, 3824 86 00, 3824 87 00, 3824 88 00, 3824 89 00,
3824 91 00 and 3824 92 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 3827, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(30) in Chapter 39,––
(i) after Sub-heading Notes, the following Supplementary Note shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Supplementary Note:
1. In this Chapter, reference to any standard of the Bureau of Indian
Standards refers to the last published version of that standard.”;

103
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 3901, 3902 and 3903, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 3905, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 3906 10 10,
3906 10 90, 3906 90 40, 3906 90 50, 3906 90 60 and 3906 90 90, the entry “7.5%”
shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 3906 90 70, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 3907, 3909, 3910, 3911, 3912, 3913, 3914 and 3915, the entry “7.5%” shall
be substituted;
(vii) in heading 3920, after tariff item 3920 10 12 and the entries relating
thereto, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“3920 10 13 - - - -Geomembrane, conforming to IS 16352 kg. 10% -”;
(31) in Chapter 40,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 4001 21 00 and
4001 22 00, the entry “25% or Rs.30 per kg., whichever is lower” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 4001 29, the entry “25% or Rs.30 per kg., whichever is lower” shall
be substituted;
(32) in Chapter 44, in Sub-heading Note 2, for the words “by products” and “saw
dust”, the words “by-products” and “sawdust” shall respectively be substituted;
(33) in Section XI,––
(i) in clause ( b) of Note 1, for the words “straining cloth”, the words
“filtering or straining cloth” shall be substituted;
(ii) after Sub-heading Notes, the following Supplementary Note shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Supplementary Note:
1.In this Section, reference to any standard of the Bureau of
Indian Standards or ASTM International refers to the last published
version of that standard.”;
(34) in Chapter 50,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5002, 5003, 5004, 5005 and 5006, the entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5007, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(35) in Chapter 51,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
5101, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5102, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5103 10 10,
5103 20 10, 5103 20 20 and 5103 20 90, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;

104
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5103 10 90 and
5103 30 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5104, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5105 10 00 and
5105 21 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against the tariff item 5105 29 10,
the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5105 29 90,
5105 31 00, 5105 39 00 and 5105 40 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5106, 5107, 5108, 5109 and 5110, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5111 11, the entry “10% or Rs.115 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5111 19, the entry “10% or Rs.125 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5111 20 and 5111 30, the entry “10% or Rs.65 per sq.metre, whichever
is higher” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5111 90, the entry “10% or Rs.75 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5112 11, the entry “10% or Rs.105 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5112 19, the entry “10% or Rs.130 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5112 20, the entry “10% or Rs.70 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5112 30, the entry “10% or Rs.90 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5112 90, the entry “10% or Rs.115 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5113, the entry “10% or Rs.60 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;
(36) in Chapter 52,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
5201, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5202, 5204, 5205, 5206 and 5207, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;

105
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5208 11, 5208 12, 5208 13, 5208 19, 5208 21, 5208 22, 5208 23,
5208 29, 5208 31, 5208 32 and 5208 33, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5208 39, the entry “10% or Rs.150 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5208 41, the entry “10% or Rs.9 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5208 42, the entry “10% or Rs.22 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5208 43, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5208 49, the entry “10% or Rs.143 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5208 51, the entry “10% or Rs.27 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5208 52, the entry “10% or Rs.14 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5208 59, the entry “10% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5209 11, 5209 12, 5209 21, 5209 22 and 5209 29 and tariff item
5209 19 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5209 31, 5209 32 and 5209 39, the entry “10% or Rs.150 per kg.,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5209 41, the entry “10% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5209 42 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.25 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5209 43, the entry “10% or Rs.28 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5209 49, the entry “10% or Rs.150 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5209 51 and 5209 52, the entry “10% or Rs.24 per sq.metre, whichever
is higher” shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5209 59, the entry “10% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;

106
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5210 11, 5210 21, 5210 29, 5210 31 and 5210 32, the entry “10%”
shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5210 39, the entry “10% or Rs.150 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5210 41, the entry “10% or Rs.15 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5210 49, the entry “10% or Rs.132 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5210 51 and 5210 59, the entry “10% or Rs.12 per sq.metre, whichever
is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5211 11 and 5211 12, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5211 19 00,
the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5211 20, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5211 31, 5211 32 and 5211 39, the entry “10% or Rs.150 per kg.,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5211 41, the entry “10% or Rs.35 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5211 42 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.18 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5211 43, the entry “10% or Rs.32 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5211 49, the entry “10% or Rs.150 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5211 51, 5211 52 and 5211 59, the entry “10% or Rs.12 per sq.metre,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5212 11 00,
5212 12 00, 5212 13 00 and 5212 14 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5212 15 00,
the entry “10% or Rs.165 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5212 21 00,
5212 22 00 and 5212 23 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5212 24 00,
the entry “10% or Rs.20 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;

107
(xxxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5212 25 00,
the entry “10% or Rs.165 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(37) in Chapter 53,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
5301, the entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5303 10 10, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5303 10 90,
5303 90 10 and 5303 90 90, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5305, 5306, 5307, 5308 and 5309, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5310 10, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5310 90, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5311, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(38) in Chapter 54,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
5401, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5402 11 10 and
5402 19 10, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) after tariff item 5402 19 10 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“5402 19 20 - - - Nylon 66 filament yarn conforming to IS 13464 kg. 2.5% -”;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5402 19 90,
5402 20 10, 5402 20 90, 5402 31 00, 5402 32 00, 5402 33 00, 5402 34 00, 5402 39 10,
5402 39 20, 5402 39 90, 5402 44 00, 5402 45 00, 5402 46 00, 5402 47 00, 5402 48 00,
5402 49 00 and 5402 51 00, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for tariff item 5402 52 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“5402 52 - - Of polyesters:
5402 52 10 - - -Polyester yarn-Anti Static Filament kg. 2.5% -
5402 52 90 - - - Other kg. 5% -”;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5402 53 00,
5402 59 10, 5402 59 90, 5402 61 00, 5402 62 00, 5402 63 00, 5402 69 10, 5402 69 20,
5402 69 30, 5402 69 40 and 5402 69 50, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) after tariff item 5402 69 50 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“5402 69 60 - - - Ultra high molecular weight poly
ethylene filament yarn conforming to
ASTM F2848 kg. 5% -”;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5402 69 90, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;

108
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5403 and 5404, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5405 00 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5406, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 10 11,
5407 10 12, 5407 10 13, 5407 10 14, 5407 10 15, 5407 10 16 and 5407 10 19, the entry
“20% or Rs.115 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 10 21, the
entry “10% or Rs.115 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 10 22,
5407 10 23, 5407 10 24 and 5407 10 25, the entry “20% or Rs.115 per kg., whichever
is higher” shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 10 26, the
entry “10% or Rs.115 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 10 29
and 5407 10 31, the entry “20% or Rs.115 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 10 32, the
entry “10% or Rs.115 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 10 33,
5407 10 34, 5407 10 35, 5407 10 36 and 5407 10 39, the entry “20% or Rs.115 per kg.,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 10 41
and 5407 10 42, the entry “10% or Rs.115 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 10 43,
5407 10 44, 5407 10 45, 5407 10 46, 5407 10 49, 5407 10 91, 5407 10 92, 5407 10 93,
5407 10 94, 5407 10 95, 5407 10 96 and 5407 10 99, the entry “20% or Rs.115 per kg.,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5407 20 and 5407 30, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 41 11, the
entry “20% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 41 12,
the entry “10% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 41 13,
the entry “20% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 41 14, the
entry “10% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 41 19,
the entry “20% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 41 21
and 5407 41 22, the entry “10% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;

109
(xxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 41 23,
the entry “20% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 41 24,
the entry “10% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 41 29, the
entry “20% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5407 42, the entry “20% or Rs.36 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 43 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.40 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 44 10,
the entry “20% or Rs.35 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 44 20,
the entry “10% or Rs.35 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 44 30,
5407 44 40 and 5407 44 90, the entry “20% or Rs.35 per sq.metre, whichever is
higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5407 51, the entry “20% or Rs.11 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5407 52, the entry “20% or Rs.23 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 53 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5407 54, the entry “20% or Rs.20 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xl) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5407 61, the entry “20% or Rs.150 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xli) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 69 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.36 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5407 71, the entry “20% or Rs.10 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xliii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 72 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.24 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xliv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 73 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.36 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 74 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.23 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 81 11,
5407 81 12, 5407 81 13 and 5407 81 14, the entry “20% or Rs.10 per sq.metre,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;

110
(xlvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 81 15
and 5407 81 16, the entry “10% or Rs.10 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;
(xlviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 81 19,
the entry “20% or Rs.10 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 81 21, the
entry “10% or Rs.10 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(l) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 81 22 and
5407 81 23, the entry “20% or Rs.10 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(li) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 81 24,
5407 81 25 and 5407 81 26, the entry “10% or Rs.10 per sq.metre, whichever is
higher” shall be substituted;
(lii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 81 29, the
entry “20% or Rs.10 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(liii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 82 10,
5407 82 20, 5407 82 30 and 5407 82 40, the entry “20% or Rs.25 per sq.metre,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(liv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 82 50, the
entry “10% or Rs.25 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 82 60 and
5407 82 90, the entry “20% or Rs.25 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(lvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 83 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.40 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 84 10,
5407 84 20, 5407 84 30 and 5407 84 40, the entry “20% or Rs.23 per sq.metre,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 84 50,
the entry “10% or Rs.23 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5407 84 60,
5407 84 70 and 5407 84 90, the entry “20% or Rs.23 per sq.metre, whichever is
higher” shall be substituted;
(lx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5407 91, the entry “20% or Rs.15 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(lxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 92 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.40 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 93 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.27 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5407 94 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.40 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5408 10 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(lxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5408 21, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;

111
(lxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5408 22, the entry “20% or Rs.27 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(lxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5408 23 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.28 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5408 24 11,
the entry “20% or Rs.52 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5408 24 12
and 5408 24 13, the entry “10% or Rs.52 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;
(lxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5408 24 14, the
entry “20% or Rs.52 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5408 24 15, the
entry “10% or Rs.52 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5408 24 16
and 5408 24 17, the entry “20% or Rs.52 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;
(lxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5408 24 18,
the entry “10% or Rs.52 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5408 24 19
and 5408 24 90, the entry “20% or Rs.52 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;
(lxxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5408 31, the entry “20% or Rs.25 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(lxxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5408 32, the entry “20% or Rs.44 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(lxxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5408 33 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.10 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5408 34, the entry “20% or Rs.11 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(39) in Chapter 55,––
(i) after the Note, the following Supplementary Note shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Supplementary Note:
For the purposes of this Chapter, inherent Fire Retardant (FR) fibres,
as specified in IS 11871, IS 13501, IS 15742, IS 15742 A, are those in which
the FR properties are naturally part of the polymer backbone and can
never be worn away or washed out.”;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5501 and 5502, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for tariff item 5503 11 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“5503 11 - - Of aramids:
5503 11 10 - - - Aramid Flame Retardant Fibre kg. 2.5% -

112
5503 11 20 - - - Para- aramid Fibre kg. 2.5% -
5503 11 90 - - - Other kg. 5% -”;
(iv) for tariff item 5503 19 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be substituted, namely:–
“5503 19 - - Other:
5503 19 10 - - - Nylon Staple Fibre kg. 2.5% -
5503 19 20 - - - Nylon Anti Static Staple Fibre kg. 2.5% -
5503 19 30 - - - Nylon 66 fibre conforming to IS 13464 kg. 2.5% -
5503 19 90 - - - Other kg. 5% -”;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5503 20 00, the entry
“5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for tariff item 5503 30 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be substituted, namely:––
“5503 30 - Acrylic or modacrylic:
5503 30 10 - - - Pre Oxidised Fibre, conforming to IS 17308 kg. 2.5% -
5503 30 90 - - - Other kg. 5% -”;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5503 40 00, 5503 90
10 and 5503 90 20, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(viii) after tariff item 5503 90 20 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:–
“5503 90 30 - - - Ultra high molecular weight poly ethylene
staple fibre conforming to ASTM F2848 kg. 5% -”;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5503 90 90, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(x) for sub-heading 5504 10, tariff items 5504 10 10 to 5504 10 90 and the
entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“5504 10 - Of viscose rayon:
- - - Obtained from wood other than bamboo:
5504 10 11 - - - - Flame retardant Viscose Rayon fibre kg. 2.5% -
5504 10 19 - - - - Other kg. 5% -
- - - Obtained from bamboo:
5504 10 21 - - - - Flame retardant Viscose Rayon fibre kg. 2.5% -
5504 10 29 - - - - Other kg. 5% -
5504 10 90 - - - Other kg. 5% -”;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5504 90 10, 5504 90
20, 5504 90 30 and 5504 90 90, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of headings
5505, 5506, 5507 and 5508, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5509 11 00, 5509 12
00, 5509 21 00, 5509 22 00, 5509 31 00, 5509 32 00, 5509 41 10, 5509 41 20, 5509 41 30, 5509
41 90, 5509 42 10, 5509 42 20, 5509 42 30, 5509 42 90, 5509 51 00, 5509 52 00, 5509 53 00,
5509 59 00, 5509 61 00, 5509 62 00, 5509 69 00, 5509 91 00 and 5509 92 00, the entry “5%”
shall be substituted;
(xiv) for tariff item 5509 99 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be substituted, namely:—
“5509 99 - - Other:
5509 99 10 - - - Y arn made of 100% inherent FR synthetic fibre kg. 5% -
5509 99 90 - - - Other kg. 5% -”;

113
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5510 11 10,
5510 11 20, 5510 11 90, 5510 12 10, 5510 12 20, 5510 12 90, 5510 20 10, 5510 20 20,
5510 20 90, 5510 30 10, 5510 30 20, 5510 30 90, 5510 90 10 and 5510 90 20, the entry
“5%” shall be substituted;
(xvi) after tariff item 5510 90 20 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“5510 90 30 - - - Y arn made of 100% inherent FR artificial fibre kg. 5% -”;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5510 90 90, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5511, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5512 11, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5512 19, the entry “20% or Rs.25 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5512 21, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5512 29, the entry “20% or Rs.28 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5512 91, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5512 99, the entry “20% or Rs.54 per kg., whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;
(xxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5513 11, 5513 12, 5513 13 and 5513 19, the entry “20%” shall be
substituted;
(xxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5513 21 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.107 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5513 23 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.125 per kg. or Rs.25 per sq.metre, whichever is highest”
shall be substituted;
(xxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5513 29 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.185 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5513 31 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.21 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5513 39 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.125 per kg. or Rs.25 per sq.metre, whichever is highest” shall
be substituted;
(xxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5513 41 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.15 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5513 49 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.185 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5514 11, 5514 12 and 5514 19, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;

114
(xxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 21 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.100 per kg. or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is highest”
shall be substituted;
(xxxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 22 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.100 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 23 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.114 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 29 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.121 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 30 11,
the entry “20% or Rs.45 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 30 12,
the entry “20% or Rs.26 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xl) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 30 13, the
entry “20% or Rs.180 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xli) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 30 19, the
entry “20% or Rs.31 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 41 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.26 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xliii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 42 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.140 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xliv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 43 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.31 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5514 49 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.114 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5515 11, the entry “20% or Rs.40 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xlvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5515 12, the entry “20% or Rs.95 per kg., whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;
(xlviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5515 13, the entry “20% or Rs.75 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xlix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5515 19, the entry “20% or Rs.45 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(l) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5515 21, the entry “20% or Rs.55 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(li) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5515 22 10 and
5515 22 20, the entry  “10%  or  Rs.140 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5515 22 30, the
entry “20% or Rs.140 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(liii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5515 22 40, the
entry “10% or Rs.140 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(liv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5515 22 90, the
entry “20% or Rs.140 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;

115
(lv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5515 29 10 and
5515 29 20, the entry “10% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(lvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5515 29 30,
5515 29 40 and 5515 29 90, the entry “20% or Rs.30 per sq.metre, whichever is
higher” shall be substituted;
(lvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5515 91, the entry “20% or Rs.40 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(lviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5515 99 10,
5515 99 20, 5515 99 30 and 5515 99 40, the entry “20% or Rs.35 per sq.metre,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lix) after tariff item 5515 99 40 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“5515 99 50 - - - Fabrics made of 100% inherent m² 20% or
FR synthetic fibre Rs. 35
per sq.
metre,
which-
ever is
higher -”;
(lx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5515 99 90, the
entry “20% or Rs.35 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5516 11, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(lxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5516 12 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.35 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5516 13 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.40 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5516 14, the entry “20% or Rs.12 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(lxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5516 21, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(lxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5516 22 00
and 5516 23 00, the entry “20% or Rs.150 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(lxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5516 24 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.12 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5516 31 10,
the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(lxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5516 31 20, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(lxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5516 32 00,
5516 33 00, 5516 34 00, 5516 41 10, 5516 41 20 and 5516 42 00, the entry “20%” shall
be substituted;
(lxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5516 43 00
and 5516 44 00, the entry “20% or Rs.12 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall
be substituted;
(lxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5516 91 10,
5516 91 20 and 5516 92 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;

116
(lxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5516 93 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.21 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5516 94 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.40 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(40) in Chapter 56,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5601 21, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5601 22 00 and
5601 29 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5601 30 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5602, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(v) for tariff item 5603 11 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“5603 11 - - Weighing not more than 25g/m²:
5603 11 10 - - - Crop covers, conforming to IS 16718 kg. 20% -
5603 11 90 - - - Other kg. 20% -”;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5603 12 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5603 13 00, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5603 14 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5603 91 00, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5603 92 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for tariff items 5603 93 00 and 5603 94 00 and the entries relating
thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“5603 93 - - Weighing more than 70g/ m² but not
more than 150 g/m²:
5603 93 10 - - - Mulch Mats, conforming to IS 17355 kg. 10% -
5603 93 90 - - - Other kg. 10% -
5603 94 - - Weighing more than 150 g/m²:
5603 94 10 - - - Non-woven Geotextile and articles thereof,
Conforming to IS 16391, IS 16392 kg. 20% -
5603 94 20 - - - Mulch Mats, conforming to IS 17355 kg. 20% -
5603 94 90 - - - Other kg. 20% -”;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5604, 5605, 5606, 5607, 5608 and 5609, the entry “10%” shall be
substituted;
(41) in Chapter 57,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
5701, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5702 10 00,
5702 20 10, 5702 20 20 and 5702 20 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;

117
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5702 31, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5702 32, the entry “20% or Rs.105 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 5702 39 and 5702 41, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5702 42, the entry “20% or Rs.80 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5702 49, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5702 50 21,
5702 50 22 and 5702 50 29, the entry “20% or Rs.105 per sq.metre, whichever is
higher” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5702 50 31,
5702 50 32, 5702 50 33 and 5702 50 39, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5702 91 10, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5702 91 20, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5702 91 30 and
5702 91 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5702 92, the entry “20% or Rs.110 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5702 99, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5703 10, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5703 21 00,
5703 29 10, 5703 29 20 and 5703 29 90, the entry “20% or Rs.70 per sq.metre,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5703 31 00,
5703 39 10, 5703 39 20 and 5703 39 90, the entry “20% or Rs.55 per sq.metre,
whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5703 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5704 10 00
and 5704 20 10, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5704 20 20, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5704 20 90, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5704 90, the entry “20% or Rs.35 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;

118
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5705, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(42) in Chapter 58,––
(i) after the Notes, the following Supplementary Note shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Supplementary Note:
1.(a) For the purposes of this Chapter, “Lucknow Chikan craft” refers
to a type of embroidery defined and recognised by the Geographical
Indication (GI) Registry against the GI no.119 under the Geographical
Indication of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999(48 of 1999).
(b) Produced/manufactured by a person certified/recognised and
mentioned as a user in the Geographical Indication Registry against the
said GI no.119.”;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 10 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.210 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 21 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.80 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5801 22, the entry “10% or Rs.70 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 23 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.80 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 26 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.180 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 27 10, the
entry “10% or Rs.135 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 27 20, the
entry “10% or Rs.120 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 27 90, the
entry “10% or Rs.135 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 31 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.75 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 32 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.180 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 33 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.150 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5801 36, the entry “20% or Rs.130 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 37 10, the
entry “20% or Rs.140 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 37 20, the
entry “20% or Rs.68 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5801 37 90, the
entry “20% or Rs.140 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;

119
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5801 90, the entry “10% or Rs.35 per sq.metre, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5802 10 10,
the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5802 10 20,
5802 10 30, 5802 10 40, 5802 10 50, 5802 10 60 and 5802 10 90, the entry “10% or
Rs. 60 per sq.metre, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5802 20 00, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5802 30 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.150 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5803, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5804 10, the entry “10% or Rs. 200 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5804 21 00,
the entry “20% or Rs. 200 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5804 29 10,
5804 29 90 and 5804 30 00, the entry “10% or Rs. 200 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5805, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5806 10 00,
5806 20 00, 5806 31 10, 5806 31 20 and 5806 31 90, the entry “10%” shall be
substituted;
(xxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5806 32 00,
the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5806 39 10,
5806 39 20, 5806 39 30, 5806 39 90 and 5806 40 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5807, 5808 and 5809, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5810 10 00,
the entry “10% or Rs. 200 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxii) in heading 5810, for tariff item 5810 91 00, sub-heading 5810 92, tariff
items 5810 92 10 to 5810 99 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be substituted, namely:—
“ 5810 91 - - Of cotton:
5810 91 10 - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft kg. 10% -
5810 91 90 - - - Other kg. 10% -
5810 92 - - Of man made fibres:
5810 92 10 - - - Embroidered badges, motifs and the like kg. 10% -
5810 92 20 - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft kg. 10% -
5810 92 90 - - - Other kg. 10% -
5810 99 - - Of other textile materials:
5810 99 10 - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft kg. 10% -
5810 99 90 - - - Other kg. 10% -”;

120
(xxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 5811, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(43) in Chapter 59,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
5901, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 5902 and 5903, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of headings
5904, 5905, 5906, 5907, 5908 and 5909, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 5910 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 5911 10 00,
5911 20 00, 5911 31 10, 5911 31 20, 5911 31 30, 5911 31 40, 5911 31 50, 5911 31 90,
5911 32 10, 5911 32 20, 5911 32 30, 5911 32 40, 5911 32 50, 5911 32 90, 5911 40 00,
5911 90 10 and 5911 90 20, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(vi) after tariff item 5911 90 20 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“-  -  - Knitted or woven Geo-technical textile:
5911 90 31 - - - - Geogrid conforming to IS 17373 kg. 10% -
5911 90 32 - - - - Geotextile conforming to IS 16391, IS 16392 kg. 10% -
5911 90 39 - - - - Other kg. 10% -
5911 90 40 - - - Mulch mats, conforming to IS 16202 kg. 10% -”;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 5911 90 90, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(44) in Chapter 60,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6001 10 10,
6001 10 20, 6001 10 90 and 6001 21 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6001 22 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6001 29 00 and
6001 91 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6001 92 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6001 99 10, 6001 99 90,
6002 40 00, 6002 90 00, 6003 10 00 and 6003 20 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6003 30 00 and
6003 40 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6003 90 00, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6004 10 00,
6004 90 00, 6005 35 00 and 6005 36 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for tariff item 6005 37 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“ 6005 37 - - Other, dyed:
6005 37 10 - - - Shade Nets, conforming to IS 16008 kg. 20% -
6005 37 90 - - -  Other kg. 20% -”;

121
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6005 38 00, 6005 39 00,
6005 41 00, 6005 42 00, 6005 43 00 and 6005 44 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6005 90 00,
6006 10 00, 6006 21 00, 6006 22 00, 6006 23 00 and 6006 24 00, the entry “10%” shall
be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6006 31 00,
6006 32 00, 6006 33 00, 6006 34 00, 6006 41 00, 6006 42 00, 6006 43 00 and
6006 44 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6006 90 00, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(45) in Chapter 61,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 6101, 6102 and 6103, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6104 13 00,
6104 19 10, 6104 19 20, 6104 19 90, 6104 22 00, 6104 23 00, 6104 29 10, 6104 29 20,
6104 29 90, 6104 31 00, 6104 32 00, 6104 33 00, 6104 39 10, 6104 39 20 and
6104 39 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6104 41 00, the
entry “20% or Rs. 255 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6104 42 00, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6104 43 00 and
6104 44 00, the entry “20% or Rs. 255 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6104 49, the entry “20% or Rs. 220 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6104 51 00,
6104 52 00, 6104 53 00, 6104 59 10, 6104 59 20 and 6104 59 90, the entry “20% or
Rs.110 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6104 61 00,
6104 62 00, 6104 63 00, 6104 69 10, 6104 69 20 and 6104 69 90, the entry “20%” shall
be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 6105 10 and 6105 20, the entry “20% or Rs. 83 per piece, whichever
is higher” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6105 90 10,
6105 90 90 and 6106 10 00, the entry “20% or Rs. 90 per piece, whichever is
higher” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6106 20, the entry “20% or Rs.25 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6106 90, the entry “20% or Rs.135 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;

122
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6107 11 00, the
entry “20% or Rs. 24 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6107 12, the entry “20% or Rs. 30 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6107 19 10,
6107 19 90, 6107 21 00, 6107 22 10, 6107 22 20, 6107 29 10, 6107 29 20, 6107 29 90,
6107 91 10, 6107 91 90, 6107 99 10, 6107 99 20 and 6107 99 90, the entry “20%” shall
be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 6108 11 and 6108 19, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6108 21 00,
6108 22 10 and 6108 22 20, the entry “20% or Rs.25 per piece, whichever is
higher” shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6108 29 10, 6108
29 90, 6108 31 00, 6108 32 10 and 6108 32 20, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6108 39 10, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6108 39 90, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6108 91 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.65 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6108 92, the entry “20% or Rs.60 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6108 99 10,
the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6108 99 20,
the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6108 99 90, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6109 10 00,
the entry “20% or Rs. 45 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6109 90, the entry “20% or Rs.50 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6110 11 10,
6110 11 20, 6110 11 90, 6110 12 00 and 6110 19 00, the entry “20% or Rs. 275 per
piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6110 20 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.85 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6110 30, the entry “20% or Rs.110 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;

123
(xxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6110 90 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.105 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 6111, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6112 11 00
and 6112 12 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6112 19 10,
the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6112 19 20,
6112 19 30 and 6112 19 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6112 20 10,
the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6112 20 20,
6112 20 30, 6112 20 40, 6112 20 50, 6112 20 90, 6112 31 00, 6112 39 10, 6112 39 20,
6112 39 90 and 6112 41 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6112 49 10,
the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xxxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6112 49 20,
6112 49 90 and 6113 00 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xl) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 6114, 6115, 6116 and 6117, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(46) in Chapter 62,––
(i) the Supplementary Note shall be numbered as “Supplementary Note 1”
thereof, and after the Supplementary Note as so numbered, the following
Supplementary Notes shall be inserted, namely:—
“2. For the purposes of this Chapter, inherent Fire Retardant (FR)
fibres, as specified in IS 11871, IS 13501, IS 15742, IS 15742 A, are those in
which the FR properties are naturally part of the polymer backbone and
can never be worn away or washed out.
3. (a) For the purposes of this Chapter, “Lucknow Chikan craft”
refers to a type of embroidery defined and recognised by the Geographical
Indication (GI) Registry against the GI no.119 under the Geographical
Indication of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 (48 of 1999).
(b) Produced/manufactured by a person certified/recognised and
mentioned as a user in the Geographical Indication Registry against the
said GI no.119.”;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6201 20 10, the
entry “20% or Rs. 385 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6201 20 90, the
entry “20% or Rs.220 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 6201 30, 6201 40 and 6201 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;

124
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6202 20 10, the
entry “20% or Rs.385 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6202 20 90, the
entry “20% or Rs.220 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 6202 30, 6202 40 and 6202 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6203 11 00,
6203 12 00, 6203 19 10 and 6203 19 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6203 22 00,
6203 23 00, 6203 29 11, 6203 29 19 and 6203 29 90, the entry “20% or Rs.145 per
piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6203 31 10,
6203 31 90, 6203 32 00, 6203 33 00, 6203 39 11, 6203 39 19 and 6203 39 90, the
entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6203 41 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.285 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6203 42, the entry “20% or Rs.135 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6203 43 00,
6203 49 10, 6203 49 90 and 6204 11 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xiv) in heading 6204, for tariff items 6204 12 00 to 6204 13 00, sub-heading
6204 19, tariff items 6204 19 11 to 6204 21 00, sub-heading 6204 22, tariff items
6204 22 10 to 6204 23 00, sub-heading 6204 29, tariff items 6204 29 12 to 6204 29 90,
sub-heading 6204 31, tariff items 6204 31 10 to 6204 33 00, sub-heading 6204 39,
tariff items 6204 39 12 to 6204 39 90, sub-heading 6204 41, tariff items 6204 41 10
to 6204 41 90, sub-heading 6204 42, tariff items 6204 42 10 to 6204 42 90,
sub-heading 6204 43, tariff items 6204 43 10 to 6204 44 00, sub-heading 6204 49,
tariff items 6204 49 11 to 6204 53 00, sub heading 6204 59, tariff items 6204 59 10
to 6204 59 90 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
" 6204 12        - - Of cotton:
6204 12 10     - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 12 90     - - - Other u 20% -
6204 13 - - Of synthetic fibre:
6204 13 10     - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 13 90     - - - Other u 20% -
6204 19 - - Of other textile materials:
                        - - - Of silk:
6204 19 11      - - - - Sequinned or beaded with chattons or
embroidered u 20% -
6204 19 12     - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 19 19    - - - - Other u 20% -
                         - - -Of all other fibres:
6204 19 91    - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 19 99    - - - - Other u 20% -
                         - Ensembles :
6204 21 00      - - Of wool or fine animal hair u 20% -
6204 22 - - Of cotton :
6204 22 10      - - - Blouses combined with skirts, trousers or
shorts u 20% -

125
6204 22 20     - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 22 90     - - - Other u 20% -
6204 23 - - Of Synthetic fibres:
6204 23 10    - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 23 90    - - - Other u 20% -
6204 29 - - Of other textile materials:
                       - - - Of silk:
6204 29 12     - - - - Khadi u 20% -
6204 29 13     - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 29 19     - - - - Other u 20% -
                         - - -Other:
6204 29 91     - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 29 99     - - - - Other u 20% -
                          - Jackets and blazers:
6204 31 - - Of wool or fine animal hair:
6204 31 10      - - - Khadi u 20% -
6204 31 90     - - - Other u 20% -
6204 32 - - Of cotton:
6204 32 10      - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 32 90     - - - Other u 20% -
6204 33 - - Of synthetic fibre:
6204 33 10     - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 33 90     - - - Other u 20% -
6204 39 - - Of other textile materials:
                       - - - Of silk:
6204 39 12    - - - - Khadi u 20% -
6204 39 13    - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 39 19   - - - - Other u 20% -
                       - - - Other:
6204 39 91    - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 39 99    - - - - Other u 20% -
                        - Dresses:
6204 41 - - Of wool or fine animal hair :
6204 41 10      - - - House coats and like dresses u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 41 20      - - - Blazers u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 41 90      - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 42 - - Of cotton :
6204 42 10      - - - House coats and like dresses u 20% or -
Rs.116
per piece,
whichever is
higher -

126
6204 42 20    - - - Handloom u 20% or -
Rs.116
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 42 30    - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.116
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 42 90     - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.116
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 43 - - Of synthetic fibres :
6204 43 10     - - - House coats and like dresses u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 43 20      - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 43 90     - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 44 - - Of artificial fibres :
6204 44 10     - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 44 90     - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 49 - - Of other textile materials:
                       - - - Of silk :
6204 49 11     - - - - House coats and like dresses u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 49 12     - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher

127
6204 49 19    - - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
                      - - - Other:
6204 49 91    - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 49 99     - - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.145
per piece,
whichever
is higher
                         - Skirts and divided skirts:
6204 51 00      - - Of wool or fine animal hair u 20% or -
Rs.485
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6204 52 - - Of cotton :
6204 52 10      - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 52 90     - - - Other u 20% -
6204 53 - - Of synthetic fibre :
6204 53 10     - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 53 90     - - - Other u 20% -
6204 59            - - Of other textile materials:
                        - - - Of silk :
6204 59 11     - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 59 19     - - - - Other u 20% -
                         - - -Other:
6204 59 91     - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6204 59 99     - - - - Other u 20% -";
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6204 61, the entry “20% or Rs.285 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6204 62, the entry “20% or Rs.135 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6204 63 00,
6204 69 11, 6204 69 19 and 6204 69 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6205 20 10,
the entry “20% or Rs.85 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xix) after tariff item 6205 20 10 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“6205 20 20 - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -”;
Rs.85
per piece,
whichever
is higher

128
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6205 20 90, the
entry “20% or Rs.85 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxi) for tariff item 6205 30 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be substituted, namely:––
“ 6205 30 - Of man made fibres:
6205 30 10 - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.120
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6205 30 90 - - - Other u 20% or -”;
Rs.120
per piece,
whichever
is higher
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6205 90 11, the
entry “20% or Rs.95 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxiii) after tariff item 6205 90 11 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“ 6205 90 12 - - - - Embroidered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -”;
Rs.95
per piece,
whichever
is higher
(xxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6205 90 19
and 6205 90 90, the entry “20% or Rs.95 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(xxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6206 10, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6206 20 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.135 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6206 30, the entry “20% or Rs.95 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6206 40 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.120 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6206 90 00,
the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xxx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6207 11 00, the
entry “20% or Rs.28 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6207 19 10
and 6207 19 20, the entry “20% or Rs.30 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(xxxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6207 19 30,
the entry “10% or Rs.30 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6207 19 90,
the entry “20% or Rs.30 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;

129
(xxxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6207 21 10,
6207 21 90, 6207 22 00, 6207 29 00, 6207 91 10, 6207 91 20 and 6207 91 90, the entry
“20%” shall be substituted;
(xxxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6207 99, the entry “20% or Rs.70 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6208 11 00,
the entry “20% or Rs.80 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xxxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6208 19, the entry “20% or Rs.60 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xxxviii ) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items
6208 21 10, 6208 21 90, 6208 22 00, 6208 29 10, 6207 29 20 and 6208 29 90, the entry
“20%” shall be substituted;
(xxxix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6208 91, the entry “20% or Rs.95 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xl) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6208 92, the entry “20% or Rs.65 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xli) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6208 99 10,
6208 99 20, 6208 99 90, 6209 20 10, 6209 20 90, 6209 30 00, 6209 90 10 and
6209 90 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xlii) for tariff item 6210 10 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“6210 10 - Of fabrics of heading 5602 or 5603:
6210 10 10 - - - Personal protective garments for surgical/ u 20% -
medical use (felt or non-woven) conforming
to IS 17423
6210 10 20 - - - Surgical gowns and drapes conforming to u 20% -
IS 17334
6210 10 90 - - - Other u 20% -”;
(xliii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6210 20, the entry “20% or Rs.365 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xliv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6210 30, the entry “20% or Rs.305 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(xlv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6210 40 10, the
entry “20% or Rs.65 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlvi) after tariff item 6210 40 10 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
"6210 40 20 - - - NBC Warfare suits and the like (conforming u 20% or -
to IS 17377) Rs.65
per piece,
whichever
is higher

130
6210 40 30 - - - High Visibility Warning Clothes and the like u 20% or -
(Conforming to IS 15809) Rs.65
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6210 40 40 - - - High Altitude Clothes (Conforming to IS u 20% or -
5866) Rs.65
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6210 40 50 - - - Fighter Aircraft Clothing (Conforming to IS u 20% or -
11871) Rs.65
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6210 40 60 - - - Personal protective garments for surgical/ u 20% or -
medical use (felt or non-woven) (conforming Rs.65
to IS 17423) per piece,
whichever
is higher
6210 40 70 - - - Surgical gowns and drapes (conforming to IS u 20% or -
17334) Rs.65
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6210 40 80 - - - Clothing for special use such as FR, chemical u 20% or -";
(IS 15071, 15758), electrical (IS 11871, Rs.65
IS 16655) and industrial protection (IS 17466) per piece,
whichever
is higher
(xlvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6210 40 90 and
6210 50 00, the entry “20% or Rs.65 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(xlviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6211 11 00,
6211 12 00 and 6211 20 00, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(xlix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6211 32 00
and 6211 33 00, the entry “20% or Rs.135 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(l) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6211 39, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(li) in heading 6211, for the sub-heading 6211 42, tariff items 6211 42 10 to
6211 43 00, sub-heading 6211 49, tariff items 6211 49 10 to 6211 49 90 and the
entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
" 6211 42 - - Of cotton:
- - - Kurta or Salwar with or without Dupatta:
6211 42 11 - - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.135
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6211 42 19 - - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.135
per piece,
whichever
is higher

131
- - - Other:
6211 42 91 - - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.135
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6211 42 99 - - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.135
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6211 43 - - Of  man made fibre:
6211 43 10 - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.135
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6211 43 90 - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.135
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6211 49 - - Of other textile materials:
6211 49 10 - - - Of wool or fine animal hair u 20% -
- - - Of silk:
6211 49 21 - - - - Khadi u 20% -
6211 49 22 - - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6211 49 29 - - - - Other u 20% -
- - - Other:
6211 49 91 - - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6211 49 99 - - - - Other u 20%    -";
(lii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6212 10 00,
6212 20 00, 6212 30 00, 6212 90 10 and 6212 90 90, the entry “20% or Rs.30 per
piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(liii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6213 20 00,
6213 90 10 and 6213 90 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(liv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6214 10 10 and
6214 10 20, the entry “20% or Rs.390 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(lv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6214 10 30, the
entry “10% or Rs.390 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lvi) after tariff item 6214 10 30 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“ 6214 10 40 - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -”;
Rs.390
per piece,
whichever
is higher

132
(lvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6214 10 90, the
entry “20% or Rs.390 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6214 20, the entry “20% or Rs.180 per piece, whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(lix) for tariff items 6214 30 00 and 6214 40 00 and the entries relating
thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
" 6214 30 - Of synthetic fibre:
6214 30 10 - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6214 30 90 - - - Other u 20% -
6214 40 - Of  artificial  fibre:
6214 40 10 - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% -
6214 40 90 - - - Other u 20%    -";
(lx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6214 90 10, the
entry “20% or Rs.75 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6214 90 21 and
6214 90 22, the entry “10% or Rs.75 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6214 90 29, the
entry “20% or Rs.75 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6214 90 31
and 6214 90 32, the entry “10% or Rs.75 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted;
(lxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6214 90 39, the
entry “20% or Rs.75 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxv) for tariff items 6214 90 40 to 6214 90 90 and the entries relating thereto,
the following shall be substituted, namely:—
" - - - Scarves , cotton:
6214 90 41 - - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.75
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6214 90 49 - - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.75
per piece,
whichever
is higher
- - - Shawls, mufflers and the like of cotton:
6214 90 51 - - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.75
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6214 90 59 - - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.75
per piece,
whichever
is higher

133
- - - Shawls, mufflers and the like of man made fibres:
6214 90 61 - - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.75
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6214 90 69 - - - - Other u 20% or -
Rs.75
per piece,
whichever
is higher
- - - Other:
6214 90 91 - - - - Embroid ered with Lucknow Chikan Craft u 20% or -
Rs.75
per piece,
whichever
is higher
6214 90 99 - - - - Other u 20% or -";
Rs.75
per piece,
whichever
is higher
(lxvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
6215, the entry “20% or Rs.55 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(lxvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 6216 and 6217, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(47) in Chapter 63,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6301 10 00, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6301 20 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.275 per piece, whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6301 30 00, the
entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6301 40 00,
6301 90 10 and 6301 90 90, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6302 10, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 6302 21, the entry “10% or Rs.108 per kg., whichever is higher”
shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6302 22 00 and
6302 29 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6302 31 00, the
entry “10% or Rs.96 per kg., whichever is higher” shall be substituted;
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6302 32 00,
6302 39 00, 6302 40 10, 6302 40 20, 6302 40 30, 6302 40 40, 6302 40 90, 6302 51 10,
6302 51 90, 6302 53 00, 6302 59 00, 6302 60 10, 6302 60 90, 6302 91 10, 6302 91 90,
6302 93 00 and 6302 99 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;

134
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 6303, 6304, 6305 and 6306, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6307 10 10,
6307 10 20, 6307 10 30, 6307 10 90, 6307 20 10, 6307 20 90, 6307 90 11, 6307 90 12,
6307 90 13, 6307 90 19 and 6307 90 20, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xii) for tariff item 6307 90 90 and the entries relating thereto, the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“ - - - Other:
6307 90 91 - - - - T extile face masks, without a replaceable u 10% -
filter or mechanical parts, including
surgical mask and disposable face mask
made of non-woven textile
6307 90 99 - - - - Other u 10% -”;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 6308 00 00
and 6309 00 00, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 6310, the entry “20%” shall be substituted;
(48) in Chapter 67, in clause (a) of Note 1, for the words “straining cloth”, the
words “filtering or straining cloth” shall be substituted;
(49) in Chapter 68,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 6815 91 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) in heading 6815, after tariff item 6815 99 20 and the entries relating
thereto, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“6815 99 30 - - - Basalt fibre, filament and articles thereof kg. 10% - ”;
conforming to ASTM D3039, C1185
(50) in Chapter 69,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 6901 and 6902, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entries in column (2) and column (4) occurring against tariff item
6903 10 00, the entries “Containing by weight more than 50 % of free carbon” and
“7.5%” shall respectively be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-headings 6903 20 and 6903 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(51) in Chapter 70,––
(i) for the entry in column (2) occurring against heading 7001, the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“CULLET AND OTHER W ASTE AND SCRAP OF GLASS,
EXCLUDING GLASS FROM CATHODE-RAY TUBES OR OTHER
ACTIV ATED GLASS OF HEADING 8549; GLASS IN THE MASS”;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 7001 00 10, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 7015 10 10, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;

135
(52) in Chapter 71,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 7101 10 10, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 7101 21 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 7110 31 00 and
7110 39 00, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(53) in Section XV , in clause (d) of Note 9, for the words and figures, “products
of heading 8001”, the word “products” shall be substituted;
(54) in Chapter 72,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
7201, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 7202 11 00,
7202 19 00, 7202 21 00, 7202 29 00, 7202 30 00, 7202 41 00, 7202 49 00 and 7202 50 00,
the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 7202 60 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 7202 70 00,
7202 80 00, 7202 91 00, 7202 92 00 and 7202 93 00, the entry “5%” shall be
substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 7202 99, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 7203, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 7204, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 7205, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(ix) in heading 7210,––
(a) for tariff item 7210 30 90 and the entries relating thereto, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“- - - Other:
7210 30 91 - - - - Galvannealed kg. 15% -
7210 30 99 - - - - Other kg. 15% -”;
(b) for tariff item 7210 49 00 and the entries relating thereto, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“7210 49 - - Other:
7210 49 10 - - - Galvannealed kg. 15% -
7210 49 90 - - - Other kg. 15% -”;
(x) in heading 7212,––
(a) for tariff item 7212 20 90 and the entries relating thereto, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“- - - Other:
7212 20 91 - - - - Galvannealed kg. 15%  -

136
7212 20 99 - - - - Other kg. 15% -”;
(b) for tariff item 7212 30 90 and the entries relating thereto, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“- - - Other:
7212 30 91 - - - - Galvannealed kg. 15% -
7212 30 99 - - - - Other kg. 15% -”;
(c) after tariff item 7212 50 20 and the entries relating thereto, the
following shall be inserted, namely:—
“7212 50 30 - - - Plated or coated with aluminium kg. 15% -
7212 50 40 - - - Plated or coated with aluminium-zinc alloys kg. 15% -”;
(xi) in heading 7225, for tariff items 7225 91 00 to 7225 99 00 and the entries
relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"7225 91 - - Electrolytically plated or coated with zinc:
7225 91 10 - - - Galvannealed kg. 15% -
7225 91 90 - - - Other kg. 15% -
7225 92 - - Otherwise plated or coated with zinc:
7225 92 10 - - - Galvannealed kg. 15% -
7225 92 90 - - - Other kg. 15% -
7225 99 - - Other:
7225 99 10 - - - Plated or coated with aluminium kg. 15% -
7225 99 20 - - - Plated or coated with aluminium-zinc alloys kg. 15% -
7225 99 30 - - - Painted, coloured or coated with plastics kg. 15% -
7225 99 90 - - - Other kg. 15%    -";
(xii) in heading 7226, after tariff item 7226 99 60 and the entries relating
thereto, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
"- - - Plated or coated with zinc:
7226 99 71 - - - - Plain and corrugated kg. 15% -
7226 99 72 - - - - Electrolytically, plain and corrugated kg. 15% -
7226 99 73 - - - - Galvannealed kg. 15% -
7226 99 79 - - - - Other kg. 15% -
- - - Otherwise coated or plated:
7226 99 81 - - - - W ith aluminium kg. 15% -
7226 99 82 - - - - W ith aluminium-zinc alloys kg. 15% -
7226 99 83 - - - - Painted, coloured or coated with plastics kg. 15% -
7226 99 89 - - - - Other kg. 15%    -";
(55) in Chapter 73, in heading 7302, for the tariff item 7302 10 10 and the entries
relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"- - - For railways:
7302 10 11 - - - - Head hardened rails kg. 15% -
7302 10 12 - - - - Asymmetric rails with end forging kg. 15% -
7302 10 13 - - - - Asymmetric rails without end forging kg. 15% -

137
7302 10 14 - - - - Other than asymmetric rails and head kg. 15% -
hardened rails
7302 10 19 - - - - Other kg. 15%    -";
(56) in Chapter 74,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
7404, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 7411 and 7412, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(57) in Chapter 75, for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff
items, the entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(58) in Chapter 76, for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items
of heading 7602, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(59) in Chapter 81,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8105 20 10, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 8110 10 00 and
8110 20 00, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) in the entry in column (2) occurring against heading 8112, for the
brackets and word “(COLUMBIUM)”, the brackets and words “(COLUMBIUM
AND)” shall be substituted;
(iv) for tariff items 8112 61 00 and 8112 69 00 and the entries relating
thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
8112 61 00 - - W aste and scrap kg. 5% -
8112 69 - - Other:
8112 69 10 - - - Cadmium, unwrought; Powders kg. 5% -
8112 69 20 - - - Cadmium, wrought kg. 5% -
8112 69 90 - - - Other kg. 10%    -";
(60) in Chapter 84,––
(i) in Note 2,––
(a) in the opening portion, for the word and figure “Note 9”, the
word and figures “Note 11” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause ( a), in sub-clause ( v), for the words “Machinery or
plant”, the words “Machinery, plant or laboratory equipment” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8407 21 00, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8419 19 20, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 8421 39 20 and
8421 39 90, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(61) in Chapter 85,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8502 12 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 8502 13, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;

138
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 8502 20 90 and
8502 31 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column ( 4), occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 8502 39, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 8503 00 10,
8503 00 21, and 8503 00 29, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 8504 10, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) in heading 8518, for tariff items 8518 21 00 to 8518 30 00 and the entries
relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:––
"8518 21 - - Single loudspeakers, mounted in their
enclosures:
8518 21 10 - - - W ireless kg. 20% -
8518 2190 - - - Other kg. 20% -
8518 22 - - Multiple loudspeakers, mounted in the same
enclosures:
8518 22 10 - - - W ireless kg. 20% -
8518 22 90 - - - Other kg. 20% -
8518 29 - - Other:
8518 29 10 - - - W ireless kg. 20% -
8518 29 90 - - - Other kg. 20% -
8518 30 - Headphones and earphones, whether or not
combined with a microphone, and sets
consisting of a microphone and one or more
loudspeakers:
- - - Headphones and earphones, whether or not
combined with a microphone, and capable
of connecting through wireless medium:
8518 30 11 - - - - T rue Wireless Stereo [(TWS) Sound channel kg. 20% -
not connected by wire]
8518 30 19 - - - - Other kg. 20% -
8518 30 20 - - - Headphones and earphones, whether or not kg. 20% -
combined with a microphone, and capable
of connecting only through wired medium
8518 30 90 - - - Other kg. 20%    -";
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8518 90 00, the
entry “15%” shall be substituted;
(ix) in the entry in column (2) occurring against heading 8541, for the
words “SEMICONDUCTOR BASED TRANSDUCERS”, the words
“SEMICONDUCTOR-BASED TRANSDUCERS” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
headings 8546 and 8547, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xi) in the entry in column (2) occurring against tariff item 8549 21 00, for the
words “cathode ray tubes”, the words “cathode-ray tubes” shall be substituted;
(xii) in the entry in column (2) occurring against tariff item 8549 31 00, for
the words “cathode ray tubes”, the words “cathode-ray tubes” shall be
substituted;

139
(xiii) in the entry in column (2) occurring against tariff item 8549 91 00, for
the words “cathode ray tubes”, the words “cathode-ray tubes” shall be
substituted;
(62) in Chapter 88,––
(i) in the entry in column (2) occurring against heading 8802, for the words,
figures and brackets “OTHER AIRCRAFT, EXCEPT UNMANNED AIRCRAFT
OF HEADING 88.06 (FOR EXAMPLE, HELICOPTERS, AEROPLANES) ”, the
words, brackets and figures “OTHER AIRCRAFT (FOR EXAMPLE,
HELICOPTERS, AEROPLANES), EXCEPT UNMANNED AIRCRAFT OF
HEADING 8806” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 8802 11 00 and
8802 12 00, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in in column (4) occurring against tariff items 8807 10 00
and 8807 20 00, the entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) in the entry in column (2) occurring against tariff item 8807 30 00, for
the word “airplanes”, the word “aeroplanes” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8807 30 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(63) in Chapter 89,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8902 00 10, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8905 10 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8907 10 00, the
entry “Free” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 8908 00 00, the
entry “2.5%” shall be substituted;
(64) in Chapter 90,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9018 11 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 9018 12, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9018 13 00 and
9018 14 00, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 9018 19, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(v) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9018 20 00,
9018 31 00, 9018 32 10, and 9018 32 20, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(vi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9018 32 30, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(vii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9018 32 90, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(viii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 9018 39, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;

140
(ix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9018 41 00,
9018 49 00, and 9018 50 10, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(x) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9018 50 20, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9018 50 30,
9018 50 90, 9018 90 11, 9018 90 12 and 9018 90 19, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(xii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9018 90 21, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9018 90 22
and 9018 90 23, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9018 90 24, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9018 90 25,
9018 90 29, 9018 90 31, 9018 90 32, 9018 90 41 and 9018 90 42, the entry “7.5%”
shall be substituted;
(xvi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9018 90 43, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xvii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9018 90 44,
9018 90 91, 9018 90 92, 9018 90 93 and 9018 90 94, the entry “7.5%” shall be
substituted;
(xviii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9018 90 95,
9018 90 96, 9018 90 97 and 9018 90 98, the entry “5%” shall be substituted;
(xix) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9019 10 10, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xx) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9019 10 90, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxi) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 9019 20, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9020 00 00, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxiii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
heading 9021, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxiv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9030 31 00,
the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(xxv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9030 90 10, the
entry “7.5%” shall be substituted;
(65) in Chapter 91,––
(i) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of heading
9108, the entry “5%”, shall be substituted;
(ii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff items 9110 11 00,
9110 12 00 and 9110 19 00, the entry “5%”, shall be substituted;
(iii) for the entry in column (4) occurring against tariff item 9114 30 10, the
entry “5%” shall be substituted;

141
(66) in Chapter 95,––
(i) in clause (u) of Note 1, for the words “Electric garlands”, the words
“Lighting strings” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the entry in column (2), occurring against heading 9504, for the
words “BANK NOTES”, the word “BANKNOTES” shall be substituted;
(iii) in heading 9503, for tariff items 9503 00 10 to 9503 00 90 and the entries
relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:––
"9503 00 10 - - - Electronic u 60% -
9503 00 20 - - - Non electronic u 60% -
- - - Parts:
9503 00 91 - - - - Of electronic toys u 60% -
9503 00 99 - - - - Other u 60%    -";
(iv) for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of
sub-heading 9506 91, the entry “10%” shall be substituted;
(67) in Chapter 97,––
(i) in clause (A) of Note 5, for the words and figures “Notes 1 to 3”, the
words and figures “Notes 1 to 4” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the entry in column (2) occurring against heading 9705, for the
words “PALEONTOLOGICAL, OR NUMISMATIC”, the words
“PALEONTOLOGICAL OR NUMISMATIC” shall be substituted;
(68) in Chapter 98, for the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items
of heading 9801, the entry “7.5%” shall be substituted.

142
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
(See section 99)
In the Fourth Schedule to the Central Excise Act, in Chapter 27, in sub-heading 2710 12,
for tariff items 2710 12 39 to 2710 12 49 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely:––
Tariff Item Description of goods Unit Rate of Duty
(1) (2) (3) (4)
"2710 12 39 - - - - Solvent 145/205 kg. ….
  - - - Motor Gasoline conforming to standard
IS 2796, IS 17021, IS 17586 or IS 17076:
2710 12 41 - - - - Motor Gasoline conforming to standard kg. 14%+Rs.15.00 per litre
IS 2796
2710 12 42 - - - - E 20 Fuel conforming to standard IS 17021 kg. 14%+Rs.15.00 per litre
2710 12 43 - - - - E 12 Fuel conforming to standard IS 17586 kg. 14%+Rs.15.00 per litre
2710 12 44 - - - - E 15 Fuel conforming to standard IS 17586 kg. 14%+Rs.15.00 per litre
2710 12 49 - - - - M 15 Fuel conforming to standard IS 17076 kg. 14%+Rs.15.00 per litre.".

143
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
[See section 115(1) ]
Notification number and date Amendment Date of effect
of amendment
(1) (2) (3)
G.S.R 58 (E), dated the In the said notification, in paragraph 1, 22nd June, 2017.
23rd January, 2018 for the words “furnishing of returns
[No.349 /58/ 2017-GST (Pt), and computation and settlement of
dated 23rd January, 2018] integrated tax”, the following shall
be substituted, namely:––
“furnishing of returns and
computation and settlement of
integrated tax and save as otherwise
provided in the notification number
G.S.R. 925(E), dated the
13th  December, 2019, all functions
provided under the Central Goods and
Services Tax Rules, 2017.”.

144
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
[See section 116(1) ]
Notification number and date Amendment Date of effect
of amendment
(1) (2) (3)
G.S.R 661 (E), dated the In the said notification, in the Table, 1st July, 2017.
28th June, 2017 against serial number 2, in column (3),
[No.349/72/2017-GST, for the figures “24”, the figures “18”
dated 28th June, 2017] shall be substituted.

145
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 119(1) ]
Notification number and date Amendment Date of effect
of amendment
(1) (2) (3)
G.S.R.698(E), dated the 28th June, In the said notification, in the Table, 1st July, 2017.
2017 [No.349/72/2017-GST, against serial number 2, in column (3),
dated the 28th June, 2017] for the figures “24”, the figures
 “18” shall be substituted.

146
THE EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[See section 122(1) ]
Notification number and date Amendment Date of effect
of amendment
(1) (2) (3)
G.S.R.747 (E), dated the 30th June, In the said notification, in the Table, 1st July, 2017.
2017 [No.S031011/25/ 20170ST-I- against serial number 2, in column
DoR, dated the 30th June, 2017] (3), for the figures and words
 “24 per cent.”, the figures and
words “18 per cent.” shall be
substituted.

147
THE NINTH SCHEDULE
(See section 126)
In the Seventh Schedule to the Finance Act, 2001, for tariff item 2709 20 00 and the
entries relating thereto, the following tariff item and entries shall be substituted, namely:––
Tariff item Description of goods Unit Rate of duty
(1) (2) (3) (4)
“2709 00 10 Petroleum crude kg. Rs.50 per tonne.”.
————

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government
for the financial year 2022-2023.
————
(As passed by the Houses of  Parliament)
MGIPMRND—12LS(S3)—01-04-2022.