As INTRODUCED IN LIOK SABRA ON 
..... - -,' 
, . .' 
Bill No. 190 of 198.'» 
THE AGRICULTUltAL AND PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS 
EXPORT DEVELCJPMENT AUTHORITY BILL, 1985 
,. 
:,r 
ARltANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Sho.rt title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Power to amend Schedule. 
CHAPTER II 
AGRICULTURAL AND PRoCISSED FOOD PRoDuCTs ExPORT DEVELOPMENT 
A\TftDilrY 
4. Establishment and constitution of the Authority. 
5. Salary and,allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman 
and allowances of members. 
6. Chairman to be chief executive. 
7. Secretary of the Authority and other staff. 
8. Special provision for transfer of employees to the Authorit-y. 
9. Committees of Authority. 
10. Functions of the Authority. 
11. Power to supersede the Authority. 
CHAPTEJt III 
REGISTRATION 
12. Registration of exporters. 
13. Application, cancellation, fee payable and other matters relating 
to registration. 
14. Returns to be made by exporters. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
CLAUSES 
15. Grants and loans by the Central Government. 
16. Constitution of Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export Development Fund, 

ii 
CLAVSES 
17. Borrowing powers of the Authority. 
18. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPrER V 
CoH'J'llll)I".8T CmrrRAL GovaIoaIrr 
19. Power to prohibit or control import and export of Scheduled 
products. 
~O. DirectiOdl by. Central Government. 
21. Returns and re~rts. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOVS 
22. Penalty for making false reports. 
23. Penalties for obstructing a member or officer of the Authority 
in the discharge of. his duty and for failure to produce books 
and records. 
24. Other pell8lties., 
25. Offences by companies. 
26. Jurisdiction of court. 
27. Previous saneti~ of Central Government. 
28. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
29. Power to delegate. 
30. Suspension of operation of this JWt. 
31. Application. of other laws not barred. 
32. Power to make rules. 
33. Power to make regulations. 
34. Rules and regulations to be lad before Parliament. 
THE SHEDULE. 

" ,_"'RdB~ 
~---
tn 
'~.aJL.1"IJRAJr.~ FOOD-~"T-'DE"VE!D'P'MENr 
AUTHOFITY. BILL, 198, 
'. 
C'I:.- be/As introduced j 11 10k Sabha) 
1. page (1), against cl 1 use No 9,-
after "C'.olllD.itteps .r" insert "the" 
2. p.lge (ii), line 5,-
o fill "(bnt ro 1 by" insert 'tt he" 
3. pagG (ii), ag~inst clause NQ.2~,­
after ''Direction.s by" insert ''the'' 
4. Page (ii), aga:1ns.t clause No. 27,-
aft er "sancti::>n of" in sert "t he" 
5. Page (ii), 3.gainst clause No. 34,-
rs:u: "l3.d" ~ "laid" 
'. Page (i1), line 1 fro.n bottom,-
.!Ql: - "THE SliEDuLE" ~ "THE· s.cHEDULE" 
7. page 2, line 20,-
.n:u: "vid,,:-d .y the regul~t1ons." 
~ Itt') be, a Schedul~d pI'I'jduct. " 
8 • P'9.g e ~, Li..u e ~,-
!Q1: lip erp t u:ll" l:f@.d ''p eI"l;> at w 1 " 
9. Page 3, line 35,-
teL 11 sub- clause (i)" ~ "sub-<:13use.s (i)" 
10. P:l.gs 6, line G,_ 
tar. Ilarise" ~ Ilnriscs tl 
11. P':1ge (l, in the illargino:Ll heading to clause 9,-
ilftex "Cbm.n1t tees of" insert "the" 

1v __ .Sn.bl.iA 
CJ~RI GEl'JDA No. 2 
to 
THE affirCULTUa.'1.L Ai';'!) pqOCESSED IDeO PRODUcrS E.xPO_~T DE'J:J:LOPM'8l'4T 
AUTHa.iiTY BILL, 1985. 
c..1.o-belAs 1ntcQdll cpd in lpk S:abha) 
1. Page 3, line 21,-
.nu: ''H':)rticul tural" .r..eru1 "Horti cuI ture" 
2. pag~ 5, line 12,-
.' 
~ "Fbod Eioorts" ~ "Fbod s Bxport" 
3· Page 1 "\ - , line 11, -
~ "Fbod Exports" ~ " Ebo n. s Expo rt " 
10 .. Page 15, line 3,-
!Q.r. '!'orticul ture" ~ "F1oricul ture" 
~EW DELHI· , 
Agrahayana 11, 1907 (saka) 

BDI No.1" of 198$ 
"-'0, 
THE AGRICULTURAL AN)) PROC~ED }I"OOD PRODUCTS 
EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BILL, 1985 
. A 
BILL 
-
to prookie for the establishment of an Authority for the. development ad 
~ticm. of upoi-ts of certain agricultural an.d proceBBed food. 
products 4ftd for maffe1"$ connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament ~n the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of Illdia as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PltD.IMINARY 
• 1. (1) This Act may be called the Agriaultural and P~ed Food Short 
Products EXport Development Authority Act, 1985. title. 
extent 
(2) It extends to the whole of·India. and 
COIn-
(3) It shall come into forte on such date as the Central Govemmeat mence.. 
may, by notification in the OJBcial Gazette, appoint, and different dates ment. 
I.e ~y be qpointed for difte~nt provi$ions of this Act. 
Z. In this Act, unless the conteXt Qtherwiae requirel,- DeftDl-
(a) "Autlaority" means tbe Agricultural and Processed Food tiOlUl. 
Products Export Development AuthOrity established under section 4; 
(b) uChairman" mean~ the Chairman of the Authority; 

Power 
to 
amend 
Sche-
dule. 
EataPllsh-
ment 
and 
eoaal-
tution of 
the 
Autho-
rity. 
2 
(c) "export" llleans taking out of India by land, sea or air; 
(d) "exporter" means a person registered as an exporter of 
Scheduled products under section 12; 1. 
(e) "member" means a member of the Authority and includes the 
Chairman; 5 
(f) "prescribed" mean'S prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) "processing" in relation to Scheduled products includes the 
process of preservation of such products such as canning, freezing. 
drying, salting, smoking, peeling or filleting and any other method of 
processing which ihe Authority may, by notification in the Official 10 
Gazette, specify in this behalf; . 
. (11) "regulations" means regulations made under this Act; 
(i) "Scheduled product" means any of the agricultural or 
processed food products included in the Schedule. 
3. The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this 15 
Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the case may be. omit from, the Sche-
dule· any agricultural or processed food product and on such addition. or 
as the case may be, emission, such product shall be, Or shall cease 
vided by the regulations. 20 
CHAPTER 11 
AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSED FoOD PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT 
AtrmORITY 
_. 
4. (J) With ('ifect fro~ such date as the Central Govemment may, by 
notiication in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there s1laU be 25 
estahlished for the purposes of this Ad, an Authority to he ealled the 
Agricnltural and rroeessed Food Products EKPort Development Authority. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,· 
having perptual succession and a common seal, with power to acqUire, 
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable. and to con- 30 
tract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued~ 
(3) The head office of the Authority shall he at Delhi and the Authority 
may. with the previous approva! of tlie Central GovernDl~nt, estabUsh 
offices or agE-ncies at other places in or outside India. 
_ .. ( .. 4)_.,Thc Authorit)' shall CQ~8ist of the following members, namely: ....... 35 
(a) Q Chairman, to he appointed by the Central Gov8I'Dnient; 
(b) th(> AlP'icultural 1\farketinlf Adviser to the Go~nt ,t 
Jndia~ ex-officio; . . 
(c) one member to be appointed hy the Celltral Government 
to rep~ent the Planning Clmmission: 40 
(d) thre~ melnbers of Parliament of whom two .shall he eleeted 
1;y the HoUse of the People and oue hy the Couiadlof States; 

Ie 
15 
10 
S5 
3 
(e) eight nlcmbers to be appointed by the Central Govel'DDlellt to 
represent, respectively, the Ministries of the Central GoV8l'1U11e1lt deal· 
ing with-
(i) agriculture and rural development; 
(li) commerce; 
( Hi) finance; 
(iv) industry; 
(v) food, 
(vi) civil supplies; 
~vii) civil aviation; 
(viii) sbipping and tnmsport; 
, ._ t_i 
(f) five members. to he appointed by the Central GoVenun.ent 
by rotation in the alphabetical order to l'epresent the States and the 
Unio.n. territories: • 
Provided that an appointment under this clause shall be made 
on the ret'ommendation 01 the Govel'DJlleDt of the State, or as the 
case may be, the Union territory concerned: 
(g) seven members to be appointed by the Ce.utral Govel'DJllent 
to represent,--' 
(i) the Indian Cottncil of Agrleultural Research; 
(ii) the Notional Horticultural Board; 
(iii) tIle National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing 
federation: 
(v) the Indian Institute of Packaging; 
(t~) the Spices Export Promotion Council; and 
("ii) the Cashewnut Export Promotion Couneil; 
(h) twehe members to he appointed by the Central GoVel'DlD8Dt 
to represent,-
(i) fruit lind vegd::lble products i.udustries; 
(ii) meat, pqultry and dairy products industries: 
(iii) other ScbeduJed products industries; 
(iv) packaging industry: 
Provided that the number of members appointed to repre&ellt 
any of the groups of industries specl.fted in sub-ela1lle (i) to (,Ui) or 
the industry specified il. sub-clause (ilV) shall in no ease be leu than 
two; 
(i) two members to be appointed by the Central Government 
from amongst specialists and scientists in the field of agrieulture, 
eeanomies and marketing of SchedUled proclueta. 

. Salary 
IIa4 
allow-
ances and 
other 
con-
clitiODI of 
aervice 
of 
Chairman 
and allow';' 
ances 
of 
members. 
Chairman 
to be 
chief exe-
outive. 
Secretary 
of the 
Autho-
rity 
ad 
other 
ltd. 
4 
(5) The term 01 oRico or t.he members, otber than the member 
referred t.o ;'<1 clause (0) or suo-section (4) and the manne~ of filllnc 
~'acanc:ies nmong, and the pl'OcedUre to be followed in the discharge of 
tbeiriunctiollS by, Ule members sball be such as may be prescribed. 
(6) .Any officer of the Central Government, not being a member of 5 
the Authonty, When deputed .by that Government in thIs behalf, shall 
have the rlgnt to attend meetings of the Authority 4iJ1d take part in the 
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote. 
(7) No act or proceeding of Lhe Authority or any committee appointed 
by it under section 9 shal! be invalidated merely by reason of- 10 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of. the 
Authority or such l' lmmittee; or 
(b) any 'defect in the appointment of a person acting as a mem-
ber of the Authority or such committee; or 
(c) any irregularity in .. the procedure of the Authority Or such 15 
committee not aftecting the meri~ of the case. 
(8) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules 01 procedure in regard to the transaction of business 
at its meetings (inclL.ding the quorum at its meetings) as may be Pro-I 
vided. by the regulations. iO 
5. (1) 'Ihe Chairman shaH be entitled to such salary and allowances 
aud shall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of leave, 
pension, pro\'ide.'1t fund and other matters as may, from time to time, 
be fixed by the Central (iovenJment. 
(2) The other members of the Authority shall receive such allowances SIS 
as may be fixed by tbe Central Government. . ' 
(3) A member, other than the ex officio member, may resign his oftlce 
by giving notice thereof in writing to the Central Government and on 
such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed. to have vacated his 
oefice. SO 
~. The Chairman shall be the chief executive of the Authority and 
shall ex~cise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed .. 
7. (1) The Central Government shill appoint a Seeretary to the Autho-
rity who sh,.n exercise &Uch powers and perform iueh duties as may he 
prescribed or as mny be delegated to him' by the Chairman. S5 
(2) TheSearetary shldl be entitled to sUCh salary .. ud aUoWBDCea .d 
_hall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, 
. pmvident tfund aDd. such· other matters as may, from time to time, be fix8d 
by the Central Government. 
(3) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be presedhed, dle 40 
AUthority may appoint. such other o8leen.. .....y .. # .. 1Da7 be 

DeeeI881'Y, for the efticient performance of its fuaetions and the method 
of appoiRtment, the scale of pay and allowances and other conditions ef 
service of stich other officers and employees of the Authority sIIaIl be 
such 8S may be provided by the Authority by regulations. 
5 (4) The Chairman, the Secretary and other officers and employees of 
the Authority shall not undertake any work unconnected with th~ir 
duties under this Act except with the permission of the Central Gov-
ernment. . . 
8. (1) On the ~stablishment of the Authority, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government to transfer to the Authority, by order, and with ro . . 
eff~t from. such dale Or dates as may be specified in the order, any officer 
or other employee holding office as' such in· the Processed Food Exports 
Promotion Council (hereafter in this section referred to as the CouncU) 
imm~diately before the date on which the Authority is established: 
.< 
15 Provided that the scale of pay of the post in the Authority to which 
such officer or other employee is ttansferred shall not be lower than the 
scale of pay of the post he was holding immediately before such transfer 
and the other terms and conditions of service (including pension, leave, 
provident fund and mettical benefits) of the post to which he is transfer-
red ·sh:a11 not be less favourable than the terms and conditions of service 
10 in relation to the post held by him immediately before such transfer .. 
(2) An order under sub-section (1) may be mad.e so as to have re-
trospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of the commence-
ment of this Ad. 
(3) Before any order is issued under sub-section (1), all officers and 
employees of the Council shall be given an .option to express, in such 
15 form ~ may l)e prescribed, and within such time as may be specified 
in that behalf by the Central Government, their willingne;;s or otherwise 
to become employees of the Authority and such option once exercised 
shall be final: 
Provided that no ord .. under sub-section· (1) shall he made in relation 
go' to any officer or other employee of the Council who has intimated his 
intention of not becoming an employee of the' Authority withih the time 
·specifi.!d in that behalf: 
ProVided further that such of the officers and employees of the Council 
Who do not eXJ)ress. within the time speCified in that behalf. their int'!n-
tion of becoming the employees of the Authoritv, shall be dealt with in 
S5 the same manner and in accordance with thl'! same laws and standinJ! 
orders as would have applied immediately before the commencement of 
thi!\ Act to the emolovees of the Council in t.l-te event of' the reaucUon 
of the strength of the officers and employees of the Council. 
(4) An officer or other emplove~ transferned by an order made under 
sub..section (1.) shall I on and from th~ date of transfer, cease to be an 
40 emoloyee of the Council and become an officer or other emoloyee' of the 
Authority with such desi~ation as the Authority mav determino. and 
shall. subject to the provisions of the proviso to sub-section (1). be gov-
erned by the regulations made by the Authoritv under this Act in respect 
t of remuneration and other conditions I)f' service (inc1uding pension. 
45 leave, provident fund and medical benf'flts) and shan C'Ont!nue to be an 
~ • o~cer or other employee of the Authority. unless and until his employ-
I . mE"T"t is duly terminated by the Authoritv: . 
Special 
pro-
vision for 
traz. 
tarot 
esn-.,.... 
to the 
Autho-
rity. 

Com· 
mittee. 
of 
Autho-
rity. 
nmctioaa 
o! the 
Autho-
rity. 
6 
Provided that till such time as the regulations referred to above gov-
erning the conditions of service of its offi~ers or other employees are 
framed by the Authority, the relevant laws and standing orders appli-
cable to the officers and employees of the Council shall continue to be 
applicable to them. 5 
(5) If a question arise whether the terms and conditions of service 
prescribed in the regulations framed by the Authority in respect of any 
matter, including remuneration, pension, leav~, provi~ent fund .and medi-
cal benefits, are less favourable than those attached to the post held by 
an officer or other employee immediately before his transfer to the Autho- 10 
rity, the decision of the 'Central Government in the matter shall be final. 
t. (1) The AuthOrity may appoint such committees as may be necessary 
for the efticient discharge of its duties aIid performance of its functions 
under this' Act. 
(2) The Authority shall have the power to co-opt as members of any 15 
committee appointed under sub-section (1) such number of persons, who 
are not members of the Authority, as it may think fit and the persons so 
co-opted shall have the right to attend the m'!etings of the committee 
and take part in its proceedings but shall not have the right to vote. 
(3) The persons co-opted as members of a committee under sub- 20 
section (2) shall be entitl'!d to receive such allowances for attending 
meetings of the committee as may be fixed by the Central Government. 
10. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to undertake, by.sucn 
measures a~ it thinks fit, tbe development and promotion, under the 
control of the Central Government, of export of Scheduled products. 25 , 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the measures referred to therein may provide for-
(a) the development of indu.m.es relating to the Seheduled 
produet .. for export by way of providin2 financial assistance or otber. 
wille for undertakinl!' survey~ and feasibility studies, partieioatio.~ in So 
~ equity eapital througb joint ventures and other re1ief1ll and 
subsidy schemes; 
(0) the registration of persons as exporters of the Scheduled 
products on payment of such fees as may be prescribed; 
(e). the fixing of standards and specifications for the Sclieduled 35 
products for the purposes of export; 
(d) th~ carryin~ out of insDection of meat and meat products 
in anv slauSlhter house, processina plant, stora'le premises, convey-
ances or other places where such products are kept or h~ndled for 
. the purpose of ensuring the qual~ty of such products; 
ee) the improvi~g of packat.ng of the Scheduled products; 
(1) the imprt;>vine of tbe marketing of the Scheduled products out-
side India; 
(gf the promotion of export oriented production and development 
of the Scheduled products; 45 
(h) the collection of statistics from the owners of factories, or 
establisliments engaged in the production, processing,packaging, 

" ' .... , 
marketing or export of the Scheduled products or from such other 
persons as may be prescribed on any matter relating to the Scheduled 
products; and the publication of the statistics so collected, or of any 
portions thereof or extracts therefrom i 
5 (i) the training in various aspects of the industries connected 
with the Scheduled products; 
(j) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
11. (1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the Authority 
is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the performance 
10 of, the duty imposed on it by or under this Act or has exceeded or 
abused its powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient cause, failed to 
comply with any direCtion issued by the Central Government under 
section 20, the Central Government may, by notificati()n in the Official 
Gazette, supersede the Authority for such period as may be specified in 
I~ the notification: 
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-sect: :ln, the 
Central Government shall give reasonable time to the Authority to 
Rhow cause why it should not be superseded and shall conSider the 
explanation and objections, if any, of the Authority. 
~o (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section '(1) 
superseding the Authority,-
(a) all the members of the Authority shall, notwithstanding, 
that their term of office has not expired as from the date of ~uper­
session, vacate their offices as such members; 
25 (b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the pro-
visions of this Act, be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the 
Authority shall, during the period of supersession, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may 
direct; , 
30 (e) all property vested in the Authority shall, during the period 
of supersession, vest in th'e Central Government. 
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the 
notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may-
(a) extend the period of sUpersession for such further period as 
~5 It may consider necessary; or 
(b) reconstitute the Authority in the manner provided in 
section 4. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION 
40 12. (1) Every person exporting anyone or more of the Scheduled 
products shall, before the expiration of one month from the date on 
which he undertakes such export or before the expiration of three 
months from the date of coming into force of this section whichever Is 
later, apply to the Authority to be registered as an exporte'r of the Sche-
45 duled product. or Scheduled products: 
Provided that the Authority may, for suflicient reason, extend the 
time-limit for registration by such period as it thinks fit. 
Power 
to super. 
sede the 
Au~ho­
rity. 
Regis-
tration 
of ex-
porter •. 

Appli-
cation, 
cancella-
tion, fee 
payable 
and 
other 
matters 
rela-
ting 
to re-
giatra-
\Ion. 
Returns 
loDe 
made· 
by ex-
,.rters. 
Grants 
or loans 
by the 
Central 
Gove~ 
ment. 
Consti-
tutionol 
AgrI-
cultural 
and 
Procesaed 
Food 
Pro-
duct. 
J:xport 
Deve-
lopment 
F\md, 
8 
·(2) Registration once made shall continue to be in foree until it is 
cancelled by the Authority. 
13. -:qtIe form of application for registration under section 12 .an~ fOl" 
the cancellation of such registration, the fee payable on 'Such applIcatIons, 
the particulars to be included in such applications, the procedure to be 5 
followed in granting and cancelling registration and the registers to be 
kept by the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
14. (1) Every exporter, referred to in sub-section (1) of section 12, 
shall furnish to the Authority at the prescribed time and in the pres-
cribed manner such returns as may be prescribed. IO 
(2) The Authority may authorise a member or any o~ its ofticers to 
inspect any processing plant or any other establishment of the exporter 
at any time to verify the accuracy of any return made under thM section. 
CHAPTER tV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
15. The Central Government may, after due appropriation madl" by 
Parliament "y law in this behalf, pay to the Authority by way of grants 
or loans such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit 
for beiDg utilised for the purposes of this Act 
15 
16. (1) Tliere shall be formed a Fund to be called the Agricultural !20 
and Processed ,Food Products Export Development Fund and there shall 
be credited thereto-
r . 
(a) any sums of money which the Central Government may, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, 
provide from and out of the proceeds of cess credited under section !21: 
4, of the Agricultural and Processeid Food Products Export Cess Ad, :> 
1985, after deducting therefrom the expenses of collection of the cess 
and the amount, if any, refunded; 
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of registration and 0 
other matters under, this Act or the rules made thereunder,j 3 
(e) any grants or loans that may be made by the Central Gov. 
ernment for the purposes of thh Aet under section 15; and . 
(d) any grmtB or loans that may be made by any State Gov. 
emmeilt, . volnntary organisation or other institutiOD for the PUl'pOsetl 
of this A~t; 35 

• 9 
Provided that no such grant, loan or donation shall be credited to 
the Fund except with the prior approval of the Central Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for-
(4) meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 
5 10; 
(b) meeting the salaries, allowan<:es and other remuneration 
of the members, officers and other employees, as the case may be, 
of the Authority; 
(c) meeting the other administrative expenses of the Autho-
10 rity and any other expenses authorised by or under this Act; and 
(d) repayment of any loan. 
17. Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Authority 
shall have power to borrow on the security of the Agricultural and Pro-
cessed Food Products Export Development Fund or any other asset for 
15 carrying out the .purposes of this Act. 
18. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other rele-
vant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
20 (2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by 
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall 
be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3)Tbe Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person 
25 appointed: by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General gene-
rally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in 
particular, shall have the right to dema~ the production of books, 
30 accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him. in this 
behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annual-
35 iy to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same 
to be laid before each House of Parlilment. 
Borrow-
.... 
power. 
of the 
Autho· 
rity. 
Accounts 
and 
audit. 

Power 
to pro- , 
hibit 
or con-
trol 
imports 
and 
exports 
of Sche-
duled 
pro-
ducts. 
Dir.ec-
~ions by 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Returns 
and 
reports. 
IG 
CHAPrER V 
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVEltNMENT 
19. (1) The Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise 
controlling the import or export of the Scheduled products, either generally 5 
or in specified classes of cases. 
(2) All Scheduled products to which any order under sub-sectien 
(1) applies, shall be deemed to be goods of which the export has been 
prohibited under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962, and all the pro-
visions of that Act shall have effect accordingly. 
52 of 
10 196:!. 
(3) If any person contravenes any order made under sub-section 
(1), he shall, without prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to which 
he may be liable under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, as ap-
plied by sub~ion (2), be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, ·or with fine, or with both. 
20. The Authority shall carry out such directions as may be issued 
to it from time·to time by the Central Government for the efficient ad-
ministration of this Act. 
I~ 
21. (1) The Authority shall furnish to· the Central Government at 110 
such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the 
Central Government. may direct, such returns and statements and such 
particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the 
promotion and. development of the export of the Scheduled products, 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, require. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) , th~ 25 
Authority shall, as soon as pOSSible, after the end of each financial year, 
submit to the Central Government a report in such form and betore 
SUch date, as may be prescribed, giving a true and full .account of its 
aetivities,· policy lind programmes during the previous flnancilU year. 
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be So 
laid, as soon as may be, after it is received, before each House of Par- . 
Hament .. 
CHAPI'ER .vI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
12; Any person who; being required by or under this Act to furnish 35 
any return, fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing 
mlY partiCular which is false and which he knows to be false or does 
not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine Which may extend 
to five hundred rupees. 
12 of 
1982. 

... 
5 
Z3. Any person who-
(4) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairman in writ-
ing or any officer or other employee of the Authority authorised in 
this behalf by the Central Government or by the Authority, in the 
exerCise of any power conferred, or in the discharge of any ~uty 
imposed on him by or under this Act; or 
PenaltieB 
for 
obstruc-
tine a 
member 
or 
otficer 
of the 
Autho-
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other rity in 
record fails to produce such book or record when required to do so the dis-by or under this Act, 
10 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend, to one thousand rupees, 
or witll both. 
24. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the con-
travention of the provisions of this Act or of any ruies made thereunder 
15 other than the provisions, the punishment for the contravention where-
of has been provided for in sections 19, 22 and 23, shall be punio;hable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both and 
in the case of a cohtinuing contravention with an additional fine which 
20 may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which such contraven-
tion eontinues after conviction for the first such contravention. 
25. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
25 the business ef. the company as well as the company shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and &ball be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to .any punishment, if he proves that the offence 
30.was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all. due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), w;here 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
35 nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the compa·ny. such director, mana-
ger, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
40 Explanation.-For the purposes of this section.-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner 'in the' ftrm. 
charge 
of his 
d~ty' 
and 
for 
failure 
to 
produce 
booke 
and 
records. 
Other 
penal-
tiel. 
01fenc~ 
by com-
panies. 
,. 

Juris-
dictiOD 
of 
court. 
.PreriOUI 
sanctica 
otthe 
Central < 
Govern-
menl 
Protec-
tion of 
aetloD 
'IIIba 
mCOOd 
faith. 
pqwer 
to 
delegate. 
Sua-
pension of 
operation 
oftbJa 
Act. 
ARill-·' 
Uaa 
of othtl' 
1 ...... 
DOt 
barred. 
uf 
26. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first, class shall try any offence punishable under this 
Act. 
%'1. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall 
be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Govern- 5 
ment. 
21. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the Central Government, or the Authority or any committee appointed by 
it or any member of the Authority or such committee, or any officer or 
other employee of the Central Government or of the Authority or any other 10 
person authorised by the Central Government or the Authority, for any-
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act 
or the rules made thereunder. 
21. The Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act (not 15 
being the power to make rules under section 32) may also be exercised 
in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the order, by such officer or authority as may be specified therein. 
30. (1) If the Central Government is 'satisfied that circumstances 
have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions im- 20 
posed by this Act should cease to be imposed or if it considers neces-
sary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to such extent and either inde-
finitely or for such period as may be specified in the notification, the 
operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. 25 
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has under 
sub-section (1) been suspended or relaxed indefinitely, such suspension 
or relaxation may, at any time while this Act remains in force, be re-
1!u,ved by the Central Goverrunetit by notification in the Oftlcial 
G~~. ~ 
31. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not indero-
&atioB of the provisions of any other law for the time being In force. 
Power 32. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
tomU,e " Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
nil •. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- 35 
,oing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
I. •. 
(a) the term of oftlce of the members [other than the member 
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4] the manner 
of m.ting vacancies' among, and the procedure to be followed in the 40 
dilcharge of their functions by the members, under sub-section (5) 
., .ectUm 4; 

(b) the powers which may be exercised a~d the duties whick 
may be performed by the Chairman as the chief executive of the 
Authority under section 6; 
(e) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which 
shall be performed by the Secretary of the Authority under sub-
section (1 ) of section 7; 
(d) the control and restrictions subject to which other offtcers 
and employees may be appointed by the Authority under sub-
section (3) of Rection 7; 
10 (e) the form in which and the time within which option may 
be given by the officers and employees of the Processed Food Export\! 
Promotion Council under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(f) payment of lees for the registration of exporters of Schedul-
ed products under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10; 
15 (g) persons ,other than the owners from whom the collection of 
statistics in respect of any 'matter relating to Scheduled products 
may be made under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 10; 
(h.) the additional matters in respect of which the Authority 
may undertake measures in the discharRe of its functions under 
110 clause (j) of sub-section (2) of section 10; 
(i) the form and the manner of making application for re-
gistration and for cancellation of registration, the fee payable 
on such application and the procedure to be followed in granting 
and cancelling registration and the conditions governing such regis .. 
25 tration, under section 13; 
(;) the time at which and the manner in which an exporter shall 
furnish returns to the Authority under sub-section (1) of section 14; 
(k) the form in which the accounts of the Authority shall be 
maintain.ed under sub-section (1) of section 18; 
30 • (l) the form and manner in which and the time at whicli the 
Authority shall furnish returns and statements to the Central Gov-
ernment under sub-section (1) of section 21; 
(m) the form in which and the date before which the Authority 
shall furnish to the Central Gov!!mment the report of its actf-
35 vities and 'pro,gramme under sub-section (2) of section 21; 
(n) any other matter which Is to be or may be prescrfbe~ under 
this Act, ' 
33. (1) The Authority may, with the previous sanction of tlie Central 
Government, bV notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations 
40 not inconsistent with the provisions of' this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is neceasary 
or expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of tlU 
A~. . 

Rul_ 
and 
re-
,w.a-
tiona 
to be 
laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
.,....~ ... If 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, such regulations may provide for all -or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the times and places at which meeting!! of the Authority or 
any committee thereof, shall be held and the procedure to be 5 
followed thereat and the number of members which shall form a 
quorum at a meeting under sub-section (8) of section 4; 
(b) the method of appointment, the conditions of service and 
the scales of pay and allowances of any of the officers and other' 
employees of the Authority under sub-section (3) of section 7; 10 
(c) generally for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the 
Authority. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, modify or rescind any regulation sanctioned by it G.nd tlte re-
gulation so modified or rescinded shall have effect only in such -modi- 15 
fled form or be of no effect· as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or rescission shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything done under the regulation before its modification or rescis-
sion. 
~ Ewry ~ and every regulation made under this Act shall· be ao 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made. before each House of ParUa-
o ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of thC! session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid. both Houses agree in making any modifi- 25 
cation in the rule or regulation, as the case may be, or both Houses agree 
that the nile or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, the 
rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any- So 
thing previously done under that rul~ or regulation. 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (iI)] 
1. Fruits, vegetables and their products. 35 
2. Meat and meat products. 
3. Poultry and poultry products. 
4. Dairy products. 
5. Confectionary, biscuits and bakery products. 
6. Honey, jaggery and sugar products. .. 
7. Cocoa and' its prOdu~ts, chocolates of all kinds. 
8. Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages. 
9. Cereal pToducts. 
10. Cashewnuts, gl'Oundnuts, peanuts and walnuts. 

11. Pickles, chutneys and papads. 
12. Guar gum. 
13. Forticulture and floriculture products. 
14. Herbal and medicinal plants. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Agricultw'al se~tor of the economy contributes significantly to our 
expotts and would have to continue to do so. Increasing reliance shall, 
however, have to be placed on exports of agricultural and processed food 
products which lead to higher realisation through added value. Value 
addition would also generate econom~c activity and employment in the 
country. 
2. Although the potential for exports of processed food products is 
good, there have been several constraints inhibiting its growth. The food 
processing industry is by and large in the small scale sector USing techno-
logy of processing and packaging which is outdated. In order to have a 
stable market, it is necessary to guarantee the strict standards of quality 
expected by importing countr:es and to maintain consistency. This ~'ould 
require inputs of research technOlOgy' and a considerable degree of organi-
. sational effort 
3. At present the Processed Foods Export Promotion Council looks 
after exports of these products. The Council does not have any statutory 
baCking to undertake quality control. It is also not equ!pped to generate 
production of value added products or to effectively promote their ex-
ports. It has, therefore, been considered necessary to replace the Council 
by a statutory authority to be designated as Agricultural and Processed 
Food Products Export Development Authority. It will co-ordinate its 
activities with the national bodies like Horticulture Board and State Go-
venments for generating production for export and with research insti-
tutes for development of value added products. It would also be able to 
undertake q.uality certification and unify the existing jnspection and 
quality control for products su('h as meat and ment products. 
4. In order to enable the author~ty to discharge its functions effectively 
it is proposed, by a separate Bill, to provide for the levy by way of a 
cess of the duty of the customs on all the Scheduled products which are 
exported. The intention is to make over, after due appropriation by Par-
liament, by law the proceeds of the cess to the authority. 
5. The Authority is proposed to be constituted, among others, with 
representatives of the Central and State Governments, Parliament, trade, 
Export Promotion Councils and specialists in the field. The main fwictions 
proposed to be assigned to this Authority are to develop processed food 
industry by way of providing flnancial assistance for undertaking surveys 
and feasibility studies, participation in the equity capital through joint 
ventures and other relief and subsidy schemes, registration of exporters ot 
the Scheduled products, flxing of standards and specifications for Sche-
duled product.s for purposes of exports, carrying out inspection of 
meat and meat products in any slaughter house, processing plant, etc., 
improvement III packaging of Scheduled products and marketblg of the 
products outside India and promotion of export-oriented productlnn and 
16 

product development of Scheduled pl'oducts. The Bill contains a provi-
sion that it shall be the duty of the Authority to provide, by such 
measures 31> it thinks fit, the development and promotion under the control 
of the Central Government, of export of agticul tural and processed food 
productstncluded in the Sch~ale thereof'ln8:inly with a view to enabl:ng 
it to undertake the activities mentioned above. Power has also been 
taken for the Central Government to prohibit or· rontrol the imports and 
exports of the Scheduled products. 
: 6. "The Bm' seeks' to a~hieV~ the above objects. 
I NEW DELHI; ARJUN SINGH. 
The 16th rtovember, 1985. 

Notc,o/acn...ea 
Clause I.-This clause specifies the title of the Act, "the extent of 
its application and date of its commencement. 
Clause 2.-This clause contains the definitien of v8riolJS words .and 
expressions used in the Act. 
Clcwse 3.-This clause empowers the Central Govemment to amend 
the list ot products specified in the SChedule. 
Clause 4.-This clause errapowers the Central Government to esta-
blish and constitute an Authority to be called the Agricultural and Pr0-
cessed Food Export Promotion Council to administer the Act (herein-
after referred to as the Authority). 
Olause 5.-This clause emPowers the Central Government to fix the 
Ealary and allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairman 
of the Authority. . 
Clause 6.-This clause lays down that the Chairman shall be the 
Chief Executive of the Authority alld shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be prescribed. 
Clause 7.-This claUlle empowers the Central Government to appoint 
8 Secretary" to the Authority and prescribe his powers and duties, sala-
ries and allowances and other conditions of service. 
Clause 8.-This clause empowers the Central Govemment to trans-
fer employees of the Processed. Food Export ~motion Council to the 
Au"thority. . 
Clause 9.-This clause provides for the constitution of its commit-
tees by the Authority. 
Clause IO.-This clause defines the functions of the Authority. 
Clause It.-This clause provides for the supersession of the Autho-
rity by the Central Government. 
Clause 12.-This clause provides for compulsory registration of· ex-
porters of Scheduled products. 
Clause 1'3.- This clause deals with the procedure of registration of 
exporters and the fees payable for such registration. 
ClaUBe 14.-This clause provides tor the submission of periodical 
retums by exporters. 
Clause 15.-Th1s cJause enables the Central Government" to pay " 
trant. and loans and" other sums of money to the Authority. 
18 

19 
Clause 16.- This clause provides fOr the constitution of Agricultural 
aDd Processed Food Products Export Developmp.nt F'und. 
ClaUBe 17.-This clauae enables the Authority to borrow funds. 
Cl.at&Be 18.-This clauae deals with the maintenance of proper 
account. by the Authority and its audit by the Comptroller and. Auditor.: 
.General of India. .. 
C14u..e 19.-'llWI clauae enables the Central Government to prohibit, 
restrict or otherwise control; import or export of Scheduled products. 
Clause 20.- This claUJe empowers the Central Government to issue 
ctirections to the Authority for the eftl.cient administration of the Act. 
Clause 21.-This clause requires the Authority to furnish periodical 
returns and reports to the Central Government. 
Clause 22.-This clause provides for penalties for making false re-
ports. 
Clause 23.- This clause provides for penalties for restricting a 'Tlem-
ber or officer of Authority to discharge of his duty and for failure to pro-
duce books and records. 
Clause 24.-This clause provides for penalties for the contravention 
of the provisions· of the Act other than those provided for in clauses 19, 
22 and 23 and for contraventions of rules made under the Act. 
C'ause 25.-ThiS clause fixes criminal liability on the directors and 
officers of companies ~or the offences committed by the companies. 
Clause 26.-This clause deals with the jurisdiction of criminal courts 
to try oftencel under the Act. 
Clause 27.-This clause lays down' that the previous sanction Qf the 
Central Government would be neceasary fpr production under the Ad. 
Clause 28-This claUtle provides for protectioD to the Government, 
the Authority and any members and offtcers thereof for anything done· OJ:' 
intended to be done in good faith under the Act. 
Clause 29.-This clause empowers the Central Government to dele-
gate its powers (except power to make rules) to any oMcer or Autho-
rity. 
Clause 30.-This clause empowers the Central Govemment to sus-
pend or relax in public interest any restriction imposed by the Act. 
Clause Sl.-This clause lays down that the prOVision of the Act shall 
be· in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other 
law.) . 
Cl41U1e 32.-This clause empowers the Central Government to make 
rules· for· carrying· out the purposes of the Act. 
CZawe 33.-This clause empowers the AuthOrity to make regulations 
for the purpOse of giving effect to the· provisions of the Act. . 
Clawe M.-Tbis clause lays down that every rule and regulation 
made under the Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. Sub-clauses (1), (3) and (4) of cliluse 4 of the Bill pr~vide respectively 
for the establishment, offices and cbnstitution of·the Agricultural Proces·~ 
sed Food Products Export Development Authority. Clause 5 provides 
that the Chairman of the Authority shall be entitled to such salariefl and 
allowances as may be fixed by the Central. Government. The allowances 
payable to the other members w~ll have to be prescribed by rules undeL' 
clause 32 of the Bill. Clause 7 provides for the appointment of tlie Secre-
tary, other offi-:-ers; and employees of the Authority. The Secretary wilJ 
be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be determined by the 
Central Government. The other officers and employees' of the Authority 
will be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be ~rovided for 
by regulations. under clause 33 (2) (b) . 
2. Clause 10 provides for the functions of the Authority and these in-
clude, inter-aLia, the development of industries relating to Scheduled pro-
ducts for export by way of providing financial assistance or otherwise for 
undertaking surveys· and feasibility studies, participation in the equ~ty 
capital through joint ventures and other reliefs and subsidy schemes. 
3. The afore-ment~oned prOvisions of the Bill involve expenditure 
towards:-
(a) payment of salaries. allowances, etc., of the Chairman, mem-
bers, offtcers and other employt=eS Qf the Authority, and 
(b) meeting other administrative expenses of the Authority in-
cluding expenses .for discharging its functions. 
4. Clause 16 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Fund to be 
called the Agricultural and Processed Food Products ·Export Development 
Fund and the F)1nd is to be applied for meeting the afore-mentioned· ex-
penditure. The Fund will consist, inter alia of various fees· which will 
be collected by the Authority, the sums paid to it by the Central Govern-
ment (vide clause 15) or by nay person ~'1d the sums realised by the 
Authority in the discharge of its functions .. 
5. It is not possible at the present stage to °ndicate the expenditure 
involved. However, it is estiinated that a non-recurring expenditne of 
Rs. 20,00,000/-is likely to be incurred inWally on the establishment of the 
Authority. A recurring eJtpeDditure of about Rs. 80;00,000/- per an.num" 
is likely to be incurred by the AuthOrity. When the Authority expands 
its activities, its expenditure may in"rea"e. The Authority will meet its 
expenditure from its own fund" and~ paYr:a'leT\ts mac1e to it by the Ce~t~al 
Government after due appropriation made· by Parliament· by law· in that 
behalf .. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to add to, or 
omit from, the Schedule to the Bill any agricultural or processed food 
product. 
2. Clause 5 empowers the Central Government to fix salary and allow-
ances of the Chairman and allowances of other members of the Agri-
cultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority. 
3. Clause 9 empowers the Central Government to fix the allowance 
Ilf the co-opted members attending the meetings of the committees 
of the Authority. 
4. Clause 32 gives power to the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the purposes of the legislation. The matters in respect of 
which rules may be made relate, inter alia, to thetrem af office and other 
conditions of service of the members of the Authority, the powers which 
may be exercise and the duties which may be performed by the Chair-
man as the Chief Executive of the Authority and also by the Secretary 
of the Authority, the control and restrictions subject to which other offi-
cers and employees of the Authority may be appointed; the form in 
which option may be given by the officers and employees of the' Proces-
sed Food Exports Promotion Council; the payment of fees for the regis-
tration of exporters ot Scheduled products; the form and manner in 
which the account of the Authorit; are to be maintained and other 
matters of procedural or administ~ti'v. nature. 
5. Clause 33 empowers th~ Authority to ,make, regulatiol)S not in~ 
consistent with the proposed legisl~ti,~n and ~e rul,es. ~4~ thereunder 
for' enabling the Authorit~ to' di~a~s~ . its ~~tions. The matters in 
relation to which the Authority may make regulations have been detail-
ed in sub-clause (2) of the clause. The matters, inter alia, relate to the 
times and places at which meetings of the Authority or any committee 
thereof shall be held and the procedure to be followed thereat; the me-
thod at aPPQintment, the conditions of service and the scale of pay and 
allowances of the officers and employees of the Authority. 
6. The delegation of power under clau!'le 3 is considered. necessary 
with a view to enable the Central Government to effect necessary chan-
qes in the Schedule to meet the requirements of changing conditons of 
international market and thereby promote the export of agricultural and 
processed food products. The delegation of legislative power under the 
remaining clauses relates to administrative detail and procedure and is 
of routine nature. The delegation of legislative power involved is, there-
fore, of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
• 
BILL 
to provide for the .tabliahment of an Authority for tbe dewlopment 
and promotion of exports of certain agricultural and prooell8d food 
products and for. matters connected therewith. 