Bill No. 190 of 2015
THE  GIRL  CHILD  (PREVENTION  OF  COMMERCIALISED
TRAFFICKING, REHABILITA TION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the  prevention of commercialised trafficking of girl child wherein a girl
child is forced into prostitution after luring, procuring or kidnapping her or dedicating
 her as devadasi for commercial gains by providing deterrent punishment including
capital punishment for such trafficking and for rehabilitation of and other welfare
measures for such girl child to be undertaken by Government and for matters
 connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Girl Child (Prevention of Commercialised Trafficking,
Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
and extent.
Definitions.5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "girl child" means a female who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "trafficking" includes forcing the girl child into prostitution or for any unlawful
and immoral purpose or procuring or supplying the girl child for such purpose or
dedicating the girl child as devadasi or bhavin to ultimately end up as prostitute or
hiring or obtaining possession of  the girl child for promiscuous sexual purposes; and
(e) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the
same meanings, respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The commercialised trafficking of girl child, in any manner, whatsover, is hereby
prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever,—
(a) forces a girl child to prostitution for commercial gains, notwithstanding the family
relation of such girl child with the accused, shall be punished with death;
(b) lures, procures or takes charge of a girl child for indulging in immoral traffic of such
girl child for the purposes of prostitution or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for life and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(c) hires or otherwise obtains possession of a girl child for her promiscuous sexual
abuse shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees;
(d) provides a girl child to his customers including any domestic or foreign tourist for
prostitution or for any unlawful and immoral purpose shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but may extend to life
imprisonment and also with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but may extend
to five lakh rupees; and
(e) dedicates a girl child as devadasi or bhavin, notwithstanding that the person is a
natural guardian of the girl child, shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be
less than five years but may extend to ten years and also with fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees.
5. (1) Any girl child forced into commercialised trafficking covered under this Act
shall be rescued by the appropriate Government through the local police and produced
before a Magistrate or Judicial Officer so designated by such Government for being lodged
in a shelter home which shall be established by that appropriate Government.
(2) Every girl child rescued and lodged in a shelter home under sub-section (1) shall
be provided,—
(a) boarding and lodging with meals and other necessities of daily life free of cost;
(b) medical care free of cost;
(c) education including vocational, technical and medical education including training
wherever required free of cost;
(d) public employment through reservation and other means; and
(e) such other facilities as may be prescribed.
Prohibition of
girl child
trafficking for
commercial
purposes.
Girl child
forced into
commercialised
trafficking to
be rescued by
the
appropriate
Government.
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6.  The appropriate Government shall provide rehabilitation and such other welfare
measures for a rescued girl child, forced into commercialised trafficking in such manner
as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Welfare
measures.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is a matter of grave concern that these days commercialised trafficking of girl child is
going on in a very large scale and many a time in the name of adventure tourism in many parts
of the country particularly, in Goa, Mumbai, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and other
tourist destinations. Unfortunately, girl child trafficking or prostitution is rampant not only in
our country but throughout the world and more so, in Asian and African countries where
poverty persists in a big way. More and more adolescent girls are being forced into
commercialised prostitution by pimps, anti-social elements, organised criminal gangs, brothel
keepers, hoteliers, tour operators and in many cases even by their natural guardians and near
and dear ones. Mostly the girls are lured on one pretext or the other promising a decent and
comfortable lifestyle and forced into trafficking. In other cases the girls are kidnapped and
forced into prostitution. The girls are now even brought in from neighbouring countries like
Nepal, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Bhutan, etc. for commercialised trafficking by organised gangs.
In some parts of the country the young girls are dedicated to temples as devadasi or bhavin
and then used for trafficking. For this shoddy affairs all the tourists cannot be blamed but a
few tourists do indulge in sex tourism.
The lives of the girls children prostitutes are in constant danger due to deadly AIDS
and other sexually transmitted diseases. But those who are involved in commercialised girls
child trafficking are least bothered about these hapless girl children and deserve deterrent
punishment. It is, therefore, proposed that whoever forces a girl child into prostitution
should be awarded death penalty. Those who procure the girl child for sexual pleasure and
those who provide the girl child to the clients should get life imprisonment. Similar other
proposals have also been made in this Bill so that the hapless innocent girls are saved not
only from the cruel and inhuman profession of prostitution but also from the dreaded disease
of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
July 6, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of shelter homes for the rescued
girls child from trafficking with provision of basic necessities of life, education, medical care,
etc. Clause 6 provides for rehabilitation and other welfare measures for rescued girl child.
Clause 7 provides for adequate funds to be provided by the Central Government for carrying
out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. Though it is very difficult to estimate the expenditure at this
juncture it is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—1494LS(S3)—17.07.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the  prevention of commercialised trafficking of girl child wherein a girl
child is forced into prostitution after luring, procuring or kidnapping her or dedicating
 her as devadasi for commercial gains by providing deterrent punishment including
capital punishment for such trafficking and for rehabilitation and other
welfare measures for such girl child to be undertaken by Government
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P.)