Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE LOKPAL  AND LOKAYUKTAS AND OTHER RELATED LAW
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to amend the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and further to amend the
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Lokpal and Lokayuktas and other related law
(Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
CHAPTER I
AMENDMENT OF THE LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS ACT, 2013
2. In the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
in section 4,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(c) the Leader of Opposition recognised  as such in the House of
the People or where there is no such Leader of Opposition, then, the
Leader of the single largest Opposition Party in that House —Member;”;
1 of 2014. Amendment
of section 4.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 190 of  2014
5
10

2
(ii) after clause (e), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that the eminent jurist shall be nominated for a period of
three years and shall not be eligible for re-nomination.”;
(b)  for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member or the nomination of
an eminent jurist shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of
a Member in the Selection Committee.”;
(c) in sub-section (3), after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that no appointment of a person in the Search Committee
or the proceedings of the Search Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of
any vacancy or absence of a Member in the Selection Committee or absence of
a person in the Search Committee, as the case may be.”.
3. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "in the rank of Secretary to  the Government
of India", the words "in the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India"
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "not below the rank of Additional Secretary
to the Government of India", the words "not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India" shall be substituted.
4. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for clause (f), the following
clause and Explanation shall be substituted, namely:—
"(f) the headquarters of the Lokpal shall be in the National Capital Region and
the benches thereof shall sit at such other places as the Lokpal may, by regulations,
specify.
Explanation.—The expression "National Capital Region" shall have the meaning
assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board
Act, 1985.".
5. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words, figures and letter "or
section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946" shall be omitted.
6. In section 44 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) A public servant shall, within a period of thirty days from the date on
which he makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation to enter upon his office,
furnish to the competent authority the information relating to—
(a) all his assets, including—
(i) immovable property owned by him, or inherited or acquired
by him or held by him on lease or mortgage, either in his own name
or in the name of any member of his family or in the name of any
other person;
(ii) movable property inherited by him or similarly owned,
acquired or held by him;
(b) all his debts and other liabilities, incurred by him directly or
indirectly,
under the relevant provisions of the Acts or the rules or regulations, in case of—
(A) public servants referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (
1)
of section 14, in the manner provided in the Representation of the People Act,
1951 and the rules made thereunder;
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 44.
2 of 1985.
43 of 1951.
25 of 1946.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(B) public servants referred to in clauses (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) of
section 14, in the manner provided in the All India Services Act, 1951 and the
rules and regulations made thereunder or the rules made under the provisions of
article 148 or article 309 of the Constitution, as the case may be;
(C) public servants referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 14,
in the manner provided under the relevant Acts and the rules and regulations
respectively applicable to them; and
(D) public servants not specifically covered under ( A) to ( C), in such
manner as may be specified, by regulations by the Lokpal.";
(b) sub-section (5) shall be omitted;
(c) for sub-section (6) and the Explanation, the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the competent authority shall, in public interest, ensure that the
information referred to in sub-section (2), is published in such manner as may be
prescribed, by 31st August of that year.".
7. In section 59 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),  for clause (k), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(k) the manner of publication of information,  in public interest, relating to
assets and liabilities of public servants under sub-section (6) of section 44;".
8. In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (d), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(da) the manner of furnishing information to the competent authority by public
servants under clause (D) of sub-section (2) of section 44;".
CHAPTER II
 A
MENDMENT OF THE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT ACT, 1946
9. In the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (hereinafter referred to as the
Special Police Act), in section 4BA,—
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections  shall be  substituted,
namely:—
"(1) There shall be a Directorate of Prosecution, headed by a Director, for
conducting prosecution of cases under this Act.
(2) The following persons shall be eligible for consideration for
appointment as Director of Prosecution, namely:—
(a) an officer from the Indian Legal Service holding the post of Joint
Secretary and who is eligible for appointment as Special Public Prosecutor
within the meaning of sub-sections (8) and (9) of section 24 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(b) in the absence of an eligible officer referred to in clause ( a), a
person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than fifteen
years and has experience in handling cases on behalf of the government
relating to offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, the
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 and such other laws relating to
economic offences.";
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) In case of difference of opinion between the Director and the Director of
Prosecution, the matter shall be referred to the Attorney - General for India for his
advice and such advice shall be binding.
Amendment
of section 59.
Amendment
of section 60.
Amendment
of section
4BA.
61 of 1951.
49 of 1988.
15 of 2003.
2 of 1974.
25 of 1946.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(6) The annual performance appraisal report of the Director of Prosecution
shall be recorded and maintained in the Ministry of Law and Justice, in such
manner as may be prescribed.".
10. After section 6A of the Special Police Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of recording and maintenance of the annual performance
appraisal reports under sub-section (6) of section 4BA;
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.".
Insertion of
new section 7.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014), providing for the establishment of a
body of Lokpal for the Union and making enabling provision for establishment of Lokayukta
for States to inquire into allegations of corruption against certain public functionaries, was
enacted and brought into force with effect from 16th January, 2014.
2. Sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (the Lokpal Act)
provides for a Selection Committee for making recommendations to the President for
appointment of the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal. As per the existing provision in
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 4, the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People
is one of the Members of the said Selection Committee. Sub-section (1) of section 4 does not
contain any provision as to how the eminent jurist is to be recommended for nomination by
the President under clause (e) of sub-section (1) or how the Search Committee shall be
constituted by the Selection Committee under sub-section (3), when there is no Leader of
Opposition recognised as such in the House of the People. Therefore, it is considered
appropriate to amend clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Lokpal Act and make
enabling provision for inclusion of the Leader of the single largest Opposition Party in the
House of the People as a Member of the said Committee. Further, sub-section (1) of
section 4 does not specify any tenure for the eminent jurist. It is, therefore, proposed to
insert a proviso to sub-section (1) so as to lay down that the eminent jurist shall be nominated
for a period of three years and shall not be eligible for re-nomination.
3. It is also proposed to amend sub-section (2) of section 4 so as to provide that no
appointment of a Chairperson or a Member or the nomination of an eminent jurist shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of a Member in the Selection Committee,
on the lines of the recent amendment made in the Delhi Special Police Establishment
Act, 1946. Similarly, it is proposed to add a proviso to sub-section (3) of section 4 so as to
provide that no appointment of a person in the Search Committee or the proceedings of the
Search Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of a Member
in the Selection Committee or absence of a person in the Search Committee, as the case may
be.
4. It is proposed to amend section 44, with consequential amendments in sections 59
and 60 on account of the following reasons, namely:—
(a) Section 14 of the Act defines “public servant”, which, inter alia, includes
Prime Minister, Ministers and the Members of either House of Parliament. Section 44 of
the Act makes provision for declaration of assets and liabilities by the public servants.
In this regard, the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) makes detailed
provisions which provide for conduct of elections of the Members of Parliament, their
qualifications and disqualifications for the membership of the Houses, corrupt practices
and other offences, etc. The said Act and the rules framed thereunder make elaborate
provisions for filing of affidavits giving full details of the movable and immovable
property and the consequences of filing false affidavits, etc. In view of this, it is
proposed to provide that the provisions of the Representation of the People Act
should be applicable to them as regards the manner of filing of information regarding
their assets and liabilities, instead of making a different provision under the
Lokpal Act. This will bring coherency between the Lokpal Act and the Representation
of People Act.
(b) In case of Government servants, there is a requirement of filing of property
returns both at the time of joining service and annually, giving details of property
transactions, under the rules framed under article 148 and article 309 of the Constitution
5

6
and the Acts of Parliament such as the All India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951). The
existing rules which regulate the property transactions of the Government servants are
much elaborate and comprehensive in comparison to what is intended to be provided
under section 44 of the Lokpal Act. Hence there is need for harmonising the said Act
and the Rules with the provisions of the Lokpal Act.
(c) In addition to the categories of public servants covered in (a) and (b) above,
there are public servants in statutory and autonomous bodies whose conduct is
regulated in terms of relevant Acts applicable to them and the rules and regulations
made thereunder, and this also requires to be harmonised with the provisions of the
Lokpal Act.
 (d) For the remaining categories of public servants not specifically covered
under clauses ( a) to ( c) above ( e.g. NGOs, etc.), the power to frame appropriate
regulations for matters relating to furnishing of information about assets and liabilities
by them should appropriately vest in the Lokpal which may either extend any set of
rules or regulations applicable to government servants for such categories of public
servants, or provide for a separate set of regulations, under its powers to make
regulations.
It is accordingly proposed to amend sub-section ( 2) of section 44 to provide for a
scheme wherein the filing of information by public servants under the provisions of the
section are brought in harmony with the provisions of the respective Acts, Rules or
Regulations, as applicable to different categories of public servants. It is also proposed to
amend sub-section (6) in order to enable the Central Government to prescribe the manner in
which information furnished by public servants of different categories is to be published,
keeping public interest in view, by the respective competent authorities. It is also proposed
to amend sections 10, 16 and 23 of the Lokpal Act.
5. Section 4BA of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), as
inserted by the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013, provides for the establishment of a
Directorate of Prosecution headed by a Director of Prosecution, who will function under the
overall supervision and control of the Director of the Delhi Special Police Establishment. The
provisions of section 4BA do not lay down any eligibility conditions for appointment to the
post of Director of Prosecution. In view of this, it is proposed to substitute sub-sections (1)
and (2) of section 4BA with new sub-sections, so as to provide for appropriate eligibility
conditions for appointment to the post. It is also proposed to insert two new sub-sections
after sub-section (4) of section 4BA so as to ensure functional independence to the Director
of Prosecution in the Delhi Special Police Establishment.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; DR. JITENDRA SINGH
The 15th December, 2014.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause (k) of sub-section (2) of section 59 of the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (the Lokpal Act), so as to empower the Central Government
to make rules for the purpose of prescribing the manner in which the competent authority
shall, in public interest, ensure that the information referred to in sub-section (2) of section 44
is published.
2. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (da) in sub-section (2) of section 60
of the Lokpal Act, so as to empower the Lokpal to make regulations specifying the manner of
furnishing information to the competent authority by public servants under clause ( D) of
sub-section (2) of section 44.
3. Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purpose
of carrying out the provisions of Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. Sub-clause (2)
of the said clause specifies that such rules may provide for the manner of recording and
maintenance of the annual performance appraisal reports of the Director of Prosecution in
the Delhi Special Police Establishment, under sub-section (6) of section 4BA. Sub-clause (3)
of clause 10 of the Bill provides that the rules made by the Central Government under the
proposed new section 7 are required to be laid before each House of Parliament, as soon as
they are made.
4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made under the proposed
amendments are matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE LOKPAL AND LOKAYUKTAS ACT, 2013
(1 OF 2014)
* * * * *
4. (1) The Chairperson and Members shall be appointed by the President after obtaining
the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of—
* * * * *
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Member;
* * * * *
(e) one eminent jurist, as recommended by the Chairperson and Members referred
to in clauses (a) to (d) above, to be nominated by the President—Member.
(2) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid merely by reason of
any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(3) The Selection Committee shall for the purposes of selecting the Chairperson and
Members of the Lokpal and for preparing a panel of persons to be considered for appointment
as such, constitute a Search Committee consisting of atleast seven persons of standing and
having special knowledge and expertise in the matters relating to anti-corruption policy,
public administration, vigilance, policy making, finance including insurance and banking,
law and management or in any other matter which, in the opinion of the Selection Committee,
may be useful in making the selection of the Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal:
Provided that not less than fifty per cent. of the members of the Search Committee shall
be from amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
Other Backward Classes, Minorities and women:
Provided further that the Selection Committee may also consider any person other
than the persons recommended by the Search Committee.
* * * * *
10. (1) There shall be a Secretary to the Lokpal in the rank of Secretary to Government
of India, who shall be appointed by the Chairperson from a panel of names sent by the
Central Government.
(2) There shall be a Director of Inquiry and a Director of Prosecution not below the
rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent, who shall be appointed
by the Chairperson from a panel of names sent by the Central Government.
* * * * *
16. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,—
* * * * *
(f) the benches of the Lokpal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi and at such other
places as the Lokpal may, by regulations, specify.
* * * * *
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 197 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 or section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 or section
19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, the Lokpal shall have the power to grant
sanction for prosecution under clause (a) of sub-section (7) of section 20.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XIII
D
ECLARATION OF ASSETS
44. (1) * * * * *
(2) A public servant shall, within a period of thirty days from the date on which he
makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation to enter upon his office, furnish to the competent
authority the information relating to—
(a) the assets of which he, his spouse and his dependent children are, jointly or
severally, owners or beneficiaries;
8
Appointment
of Chair-
person and
Members on
recommenda-
tions of
Selection
Committee.
Secretary,
other officers
and staff of
Lokpal.
Constitution
of benches of
Lokpal.
Power of
Lokpal to
grant
sanction for
initiating
prosecution.
Declaration
of assets.
2 of 1974.
25 of 1946.
49 of 1988.

9
(b) his liabilities and that of his spouse and his dependent children.
* * * * *
(5) The information under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) and annual return under
sub-section (4) shall be furnished to the competent authority in such form and in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The competent authority in respect of each Ministry or Department shall ensure
that all such statements are published on the website of such Ministry or Department by
31st August of that year.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “dependent children” means sons
and daughters who have no separate means of earning and are wholly dependent on the
public servant for their livelihood.
* * * * *
59. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
( j) the form and the time for preparing an annual return giving a summary of its activities
during the previous year under sub-section (5) of section 44;
(k) the form of annual return to be filed by a public servant under sub-section ( 5) of
section 44;
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT ACT, 1946
(25 OF 1946)
* * * * *
4BA. (1) There shall be a Directorate of Prosecution headed by a Director who shall be
an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, for conducting
prosecution of cases under this Act.
(2) The Director of Prosecution shall function under the overall supervision and control
of the Director.
* * * * *
Director of
Prosecution.
Power to
make rules.

GMGIPMRND—3696LS(S3)—16-12-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
to amend the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 and further to amend the Delhi Special
Police Establishment Act, 1946.
————
(Dr. Jitendra Singh, Minister for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.)