1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO MUMBAI BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra for the
purposes of implementation of development and welfare schemes for the women,
children, senior citizens and poor people living in Mumbai and for matters
connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to
Mumbai  Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, there shall be paid in five years such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of
India, being not less than rupees fourteen thousand and six lakh crore, as the Parliament
may by due appropriation made by law in this behalf provide, as special financial assistance
to Mumbai.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  190 of  2017
Special
Financial
Assistance to
Mumbai.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
45
(2) The special financial assistance under sub-section (1) shall be provided to the
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai to meet the cost of development work and
welfare schemes as may be undertaken by the State Government of Maharashtra for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section (2),
the development works and welfare schemes of Mumbai may include,—
(a) creation and maintenance of water conservation bodies, digging of open
wells, ponds and desiltation of such bodies, from time to time;
(b) promotion of rain water harvesting as a movement;
(c) afforestation particularly on vacant or barren and waste land;
(d) setting up fodder Banks at conspicuous places;
(e) creation of foodgrains Banks at conspicuous places to help the farmers and
other villagers;
(f) initiating welfare measures for improving the conditions of agricultural
workers, senior citizens, women, children, and poor people living in Mumbai;
(g) improving the health and education standards of the children particularly
the girl child;
(h) creation of employment opportunities in Mumbai for employment throughout
the year and particularly for the period of natural calamities;
(i) providing potable water for the people and livestock;
(j) providing skill development training to the youth particularly the unemployed
ones;
(k) creation of good quality infrastructure of roads, electricity, schools, colleges
and transport;
(l) establishing community centres;
(m) establishing cold storages and warehouses for the farmers; and
(n) such other provisions as the State Government of Maharashtra may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mumbai, known for its valour, rich traditions and culture, prosperity and development
both in urban areas and rural areas, is presently suffering the worst. This trend has to be
stopped in Mumbai through massive water conservation with check dams and other
structures to arrest rain water run off. The traditional methods of water conservation through
digging of open wells, ponds, lakes and such other bodies and time to time desiltation of
such water bodies needs to be undertaken. Rain water harvesting has to be promoted as a
mass movement in Mumbai. Afforestation on a large scale particularly on barren and
wastelands has to be promoted in Mumbai.
Unfortunately regions of Mumbai are not developed in comparison to other regions
of the State in terms of infrastructure facilities like that of potable water, roads, electricity,
sanitation and other development indicators such as employment, per capita income and
education particularly of the girl child. Welfare measures for the senior citizens, widows,
physically handicapped or infirm do not exist in Mumbai. The Government has to provide
all these facilities and work towards containing the desertification and give the requisite
push to the much desired development in Mumbai.
However, all this require massive financial resources which are beyond the capability
of the State Government of Maharashtra. Appropriate Central financial assistance is required
in Mumbai to overcome the financial crunch in Mumbai.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE
July  7, 2017.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for special financial assistance to the Municipal
Corporation of Greater Mumbai to be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India by the
Central Government every year which shall not be less than fourteen thousand and six lakh
crore rupees to be spent by the State Government of Maharashtra for development works
and welfare schemes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra for the
purposes of implementation of development and welfare schemes for the women,
children, senior citizens and poor people living in Mumbai and for matters
connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2238LS(S3)—27-10-2017.