 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill  No.  190  of  2022
THE FOOD SAFETY AND  STANDARDS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
DR. DNV SENTHILKUMAR S., M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government  may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5
Short title and
commencement.

2.  In section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
“(a) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(ca) “child” means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of
sixteen years;”;
(b) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ha) “diabetes” means a non-communicable disease that occurs either
when pancreas does not produce sufficient insulin or when the body becomes
resistant to insulin and leads to serious damage to the heart, blood vessels,
eyes, kidneys and nerves;”; and
(c) after clause (zs), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(zsa) “soft drink” means water based flavored drink usually with added
carbon dioxide and natural or synthetic sweeteners used interchangeably with
carbonated drinks or aerated drinks or sweetened beverages and includes,—
(i) soda;
(ii) cola;
(iii) carbonated water;
(iv) juice;
(v) nectar;
(vi) syrup;
(vii) still drinks;
(viii) ready to drink caffeine containing beverages;
(ix) sports drinks; and
(x) energy drinks;”.
3. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
“ CHAPTER IIA
REGULATION OF SALE OF SOFT DRINKS CAUSING DIABETES
AMONGST CHILDREN
17A. The soft drink containing high sugar, calories, saturated fat or any other ingredient
beyond limits stipulated and detrimental to health and causing diabetes of children shall bear
label warning about the presence of excess ingredient in black bold letters.
17B. The sale of soft drinks as labelled under 17A to any child shall be prohibited.
17C. All soft drink labelled under section 17A shall not be advertised in print, television
or any other form targetting children below the age of sixteen years.
17D. Whoever sells a labelled soft drink in contravention of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be imposed such rate of sugar tax as the Central Government may, in
consultation with State Governments specify.
17E. Whoever advertises a labelled soft drink in contravention of provisions of this
Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto Six months
and fine which may extend upto rupees twenty-five thousand .”.
5
10
15
20
25
2
Amendment of
section 3.
Insertion of new
Chapter IIA.
30
34  of  2006
Labelling of soft
drinks.
Prohibition of saleof soft drinks to
child.
Prohibition onadvertising of
labelled soft drink.
Imposition ofsugar tax for saleof labelled soft
drink.
Punishment foradvertisement of
labelled soft drink.
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the recent past Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI) an United States
based health advocacy group in its report titled “Carbonating the World” says “producers
of sugar-sweetened beverages are investing heavily in low and middle income countries in
the wake of declining sales in wealth and developed countries”. As various laws of the land
ensures freedom to conduct business and trade but it has to come up with reasonable
restriction. The point which pricks the conscience is that always developing countries has
been seen as dumping yard for goods which did not sell properly in those countries and
shift to low and middle income countries. The same happened when cigarette sales sagged
in the United States where companies were swiftly shifting to developing countries.
Specifically the multinational companies spend several billion dollars in the country such as
Brazil, China, India and Mexico in the entire process of soft drinks making and advertize
their product to maximize the sales. Indian soft drinks industry has an annual sale of more
than US $ 10 billion and about to grow six to seven per cent. annually.
India is experiencing increased consumption of sugar-sweetened carbonated drinks
as recent statistics released by International Diabetes Federation (IDF) shows that 77 million
adults living with diabetes. In past edition of same IDF has estimated that 1,28,500 children
and adolescents with diabetes in India. According to a study published in the Indian Journal
of Endocrinology and Metabolism it has estimated that India is home to about 97,700 children
with Type-1 diabetes mellitus. If we consider under-reporting or not reporting the actual
figures may be higher. Type-1 diabetes in the children means is that their body no longer
produces insulin which needed to regulate blood sugar. Usually Type-1 diabetes  occur at
adolescence age precisely at 14-16 years of age.
Consuming sugar–sweetened carbonated drinks is major reason for Type-2 diabetes
among overweight or obese children. Quoting from WHO e-LENA by Director of Policy,
World Obesity Federation, London UK “… consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages
has been suggested as a contributory factor to the rising levels of childhood obesity or
overweight…” which in turn result in cause of  Type-2 diabetes a case where body produces
insulin but not able to use it or often called as insulin resistance. Drinking sugar–sweetened
beverages contribute to increase weight gain. WHO recommends 6 teaspoon of sugar a day
which is approximately 25 g of sugar. A half litre of sugary carbonated drinks contributes
about 80% of recommended added sugars to be consumed in a day. Consumption rapidly
increases blood sugar levels and this can lead to tiredness and increased hunger even in
people without diabetes, so it has to be looked in a comprehensive way that restrict the
sales of soft drinks for reducing the risk of Type-1 diabetes of all type.
The proposed Bill foresees two pronged approach in restricting the sales of soft
drinks. Firstly, applying sugary tax in India as is being followed in more than fifty countries.
As India also has  high tax on aerated beverages as high as twenty-eight per cent. GST but
the need is to tax all type of soft drinks and spend the amount received from tax on health
and nutritional aspect. Secondly,  restricting the advertisement of soft drinks targeting
children and adolescence, who may not be aware of persuasive intent. There is evidence
that restriction of child-focused advertisement on sugary sweetened beverages improved
child dietary habits and decrease soft drink consumption. The consumption of soft drinks
or sugar–sweetened beverages or carbonated or aerated drinks among children  who may
not have the awareness to know the persuading intent is often resulting in regular

consumption of soft drinks among children below sixteen years has to be restricted by
keeping their health potential and reduce the risk of diabetes among them.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; DNV SENTHILKUMAR S.
November 26, 2021.
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLES  117(1)  AND 274(1)
                                                         OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy   of    letter   No.  P.15025/159/2021-FR   dated   22  September, 2022  from
Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya, Minister of Health and Family Welfare and Chemicals and Fertilizers
to the  Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The    President,  having   been   informed   of   the   subject   matter    of     the    Food
Safety   and   Standards   (Amendment)   Bill, 2022  (Amendment  of   Section  3,  etc.)  by
Dr.  DNV Senthilkumar S., Member  of   Parliament,  has  recommended  for  introduction  of
the  Bill  under  articles  117(1)  and  274(1)  of  the  Constitution  in  Lok  Sabha.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE  FOOD  AND  SAFETY STANDARDS ACT , 2006.
(34 oF 2006)
* * *               *      *                           *
3. (1)  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * *               *      *                           *
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Food Authority;
  *                      *                    *                               *
(h) “Designated Officer” means the officer appointed under section 36;
  *                      *                    *                               *
(zs) “sample” means a sample of any article of food taken under the provisions of
this Act or any rules and regulations made thereunder;
   *                      *                    *                               *
Definitions.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. , M.P .)