LOK SAIHA 
CORRIGENDUM 
to 
'Y-iB BII-, AND COHPANY LIMITE:.-; (ACQUISITIOli JlD TRAl.fSFER OF T_ IJDERT,A.l\IN GS AND 07HER PRJP3RTIES) BILL, 1980 , 
(To be/As introdt;.ced in L9k Sabha) 
P agp. 15, line 1,-
for "Tranfer" read II 'I'r aT! s-Pe r" 
~::"';i;l DELqI; 
NQyember 21, 1980 __ _ 
Lartika 30, 1<)02 (Saka) 

-2 5 NUV 1S80 
Bill No. 190 of 1_ 
THE BIRD AND COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANs. 
FER OF UNDERTAKINGS AND OTHER PROPERTIES) BILL, 1980 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
AlCQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY AND 01' 
SHARES HELD BY THE CoMPANY IN THE SPECIFIED COMPANIES 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, Central Government df the under .. 
takings of the Company. 
4. Transfer and vesting of shares held by the Company in the 
specified companies. 
5. General effect of vesting. 
6. Central Government or the Government company not to be 
liable for prior liabilities. 
7. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the under-
takings of the Company in a Government company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. Payment of amounts to the Company and specified companies. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMEN'l', ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company. 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings 
of the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
CHAPTER V 
PaOVISI01lr RELATING TO EMPLOY1Z8 OF THE COMPANY 
11. Continuance of employees. 
12. Provident fund and other funds. 

·1 
11 'I I 
cmAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
13. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
14. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
15. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government 
company. 
16. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
17. Priority of claims. 
18. Examination of claims. 
19. Admission or rejection of claims. 
20. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants. 
21. Disbursement of amounts to the, Company laDd po8IeSIIion of 
certain machinery, equipment, etc. 
22. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the 
general revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
, MucEI.wlQOUS 
23. Act to have overriding effect. 
'24.' CdAtracts to" cease' tdhave E!ftect Wiess tattfied'by the Central 
Government or Government company. 
25. Penal ties. 
, "26. '(!)fft!UCtiS 'by eompanies. 
27. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
28. ~$k)n -of: pewars. 
29. Power to make rules. 
30. Power to remove·~o .. lt_. 
131. :",l,aad ~sniDg. 
SCHEDULE I. 
SCHBDULEIL 
. , 
I' '. __ ' 
, , 1 \l , 
Ii • 
j 
~ .. -', '/,' .. , 
J 
,; 

THE BIRD ANI') COMPANY LIMITED (ACQutSmON AND ''I'RAX~ 
FER OF UNDERTAKINGS AND OTHER PROPERTIES) BILL, 1980 
A 
BIlL 
to provide for the ocquisition and. transfer. of· t1t.e underi&kin91 of the, 
Bird and Company Limited f07' the purpose of· en.au.ring, the _ con«-. 
nuity of production of goods which are vital to the needs of the 
country and for the acquisit10n crt sharf!! held: by' the Bt1d and 
Company Limited in the specified companies for the p1t7'pOft' cy/ 
securing to those undertakings the facilities and advantages derived 
by reason Of such shareholding with: -respect to the operation and 
functioning of those undertaldngs and also to enable the Central 
Government to exercise such rontrol over the affairs of the specified 
::-ompanies as is necessary to ensure that the affairs crt ~ho,e com-
panies are not mismanaged and for matte1's connected therewith' or 
incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS the Bird and Company Limited were engaged in the manu-
facture of E.O.T. cranes and other varieties of cranes; polystyrene based 
eation exchange resin; equipment for fertilizers, oil'reftberies, steel 

Short 
title and 
com-
meDC8-
manto 
• , 
plants, petro-chemical and other industries; tanks and vessels of varioua 
ehapes and sizes; water treatment equipment and other types of equip- ~ 
ment for the control of water pollution and were also engaged in various 
other activities; 
ANn WHEREAS the top management of the Bird and Company Limited S 
had so mismanaged the affairs of that Company as to cause heavy losses 
to the Company and had also managed the affairs of the Company in a 
manner prejudicial to the interests of the Company and the public 
interest; 
AND WHEREAS in view of the mismanagement aforesaid, the Central 10 
Government had, in pursuance of the provisions of section 408 of the 
. , .. 
. / ' '. 
Companies Act, 1956, appointed !'ix directors on the Board of directors 1 of 1951. 
of the Bird and Company Limited; 
AND WHEREAS investment of a large amount is necessary for the main-
tenance and development of the production of the undertakings of the J' 
Company; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary in the public interest to acquire the 
undertakings dI the Bird and Company Limited to enable the Central 
Government to have such investment made and to ensure that the 
interests of the general pUblic are served by the continuance, by the 2() 
undertakings of the Company, of the manufacture, production and 
distribution of goods or articles which are essential to the needs of the 
economy of the country; 
AND WHEREAS the Bird and Company Limited is holding shares in the 
specified companies which are either engaged in the production, distri- 2S 
bution or marketing of goods which are vital to the needs of the country 
or are engaged in providing finance to other companies which are so 
engaged and it is expedient in the public interest to acquire the sald 
shares to secure for the undertakings of the Company the facilities and 
advantages derived by reason of such shareholding with respect to the 30 
operation and functioning of such undertakings and also to enable the 
Central Government to exercise, through such shareholdings, such con-
trol on the affairs of those companies as may be necessary to prevent 
their mismanagement; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 3J 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
Plu!:LIMINABY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bird and Company Limited 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings and Other Properties) Act, 40 
1980. 
(2) It shall be 'deemed to have come into for. on the 2:;th day ot 
October, 1980. 

5 
1 of 1958. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requirel,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 25th day of October, 1980. 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments ap-
pointed under section 13; 
(c) "Company" means the Bird and Company Limited, being a 
company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, and having its re-
gistered office at Chartered Bank Buildings, Calcutta-700001, in the 
State of West Bengal; 
(d) "notification" means a notification published in the OffiCial 
10 Gazette; 
15 
20 
,...., 
1 at 1956. _YI 
25 
m 
,-
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(f) "share" means a share, whether equity or preference, held 
by the Company in the capital of a specified company and includes 
any such share (lledged by the Company with any bank or any other 
creditor; 
(g) "specified company" means a company specified in Schedule 
I' , 
(h) "specified date" means such date as the Central Government 
may, for the purposes of any provision of this Act, by notification, 
specify, and different dates may be specified for different provisions 
of this Act; 
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but de-
fined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meanings, reSl?ec-
tively, assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE OOMPANY AND 
OF SHARFS HELD BY THE COMPANY IN THE SPECIFIED COMPANIES 
,: 3. On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company and the 
30 right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakin2's 
shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central 
Government. . .... -I ." I 
Deftni-
tiona. 
i'ransfer 
to, and 
vesting 
in, Central 
Govern-
ment 
of the 
under-
takings 
ot the 
Company. 

Tranlll.· 
and 
vesting of 
shares 
held 
by the 
Company 
in the 
specift~ 
compa-
nie.. 
General 
effect of 
vesting. 
.. 
. I 
C. (1) On the appointed day, all the shares h&ld by the Compcy.J.n 
the specified companies shall, by virtue of this Act, stand tl'llJlSferred 
to, and vest in, the· Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall be deemed, on and fr&m the ap-
pointed day, to have been registered in the Register of Membem of the 5 
concerned specified company as the holder of each share which stands 
transferred to, and vested in, it by virtue of the pcovisions of sub-sec-
tion (1). 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pro-
visions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not be deemed to affect,-
(a) any right of a specified company subsisting, immediately 
before the appointed day, against the COInl?any to recover from it 
any sum of money on the ground that the Company has not pain or 
credHed to the specified company the whole or any part of the . .v::llue 
of the shares held by it, or on any other grO'Und whatsoever; or 
(bY any right of a specified company subsisting, imT:'lediately 
before the appointed day, against the Company to receive an; pay-
ments due from the Company. 
5. (1) The undertakfngs of the Company shall be deemed to include 
10 
all assets, rights, leaseoolds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all 20 
property, movable and immovable, including land.,. buildIngs, workshops, 
stores, instruments, machinel'y and equipment, cash balances, cash on 
hand, reserve funds, investments. book debts and all other rights and 
interests in. or arising out of. such property as were 'immediately before 
the appointed dllY in the ownersh'ip. pOSlSession. power or control of the 25 
Company. whether within or outside India. and all books of account, 
registers and other documents of whatever nature relating thereto. 
(2) All properties as aforesald which have vested in the Central ('rOV-
emment. whether unoer sectinn 3 or section 4, shall. by force of such 
vestin~. be freed and dischar~ed from any trust, obligatfon, mort~a~e. ~I) 
char~e. lien and all other incumbrances affecting them, and any attach-
ment, lnjunction, decree or order of any court or other authority restrfct-
ing the nose of such properties in any manner or appo'intin~ any receiver 
in respect of the whole or any part of such properties shalJ be deemed 
to have been withdrawn. 3 
(~) Everv mortg8~ of anv property which has· ve8ted undet' -this 
Act in the Central Government and every .person holding an,cbarp, 
lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any suchpl'opP.rty, shall p,ive, 
within such time and in such mm"mer as may be t>r~rihed.· an inti-
mation to the Commissioner of ~u('h mortgage, charge, lien or other 40 
interest. . . 
(4) For the rem ova' of doubts, it i~ hereby dp.clared that the mort-
~a~e 01 any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other person 
holding any charge. lien or other interest in, or fn relation to, any such 
property shan be entitled to claim, in accordRnce with h1s rl'~hts and 45 
interests. payment of the mort~~e money or other dues, in whole or in 
part, out of the amounts sr)eclfted in section 8, but no such mort~a~e, 
char~e, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any pmperty 
which has vested in the Central Government. 

't' ! 
s 
(5) Any·'liCIDC8'JOrotker· baiJtttanUmt'gr.a&ted to; t,he; Onwpany 'inre1a· 
tion to any 'UDd:el'takalg wbitb· has vested':in the Central Oovemmmt 
. uacier'sect1on3,'at any 1Iime>·bef«e·the appointed day and in faroe'illlllle-
diately bet.re that day, shall' continue to be in' force on and after such 
, day' -in accordance' with its tenor 'in relation to, and for the purposes of, 
BUCh undertaking; and on aDd fyom· the date of vestingOrf such ,undertak-
ing 'wnder section 7, in a Government company, that Government company 
shall be deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instrument 
as if such licence or other instrument had been granted' to sueh Govern-
10 ment company and such Government company shall hold it for the re-
mainder of the period for which that company would have held it under 
the tenns thereof. 
'(6) If, on' the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceelllmg of 
whatever' nature' in relation to any property which has vested in the 
IS Central Government, whether under section 3 or under section 4, insti-
tuted or preferred by or against the Company is pending, the saine 
shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way prejudicially aft"!Cted 
by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of 
anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding 
20 may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the Central 
Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed 
under section 7, to vest in a Government company, by or against such 
company. 
/ 
6. (1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior 
2 5 to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the Company and shall 
be enforceable against it and not against the Central Government, or, 
where the :undertakings of the Company are di,rected, under section 
7, to vest in a Govermnent company, against such company. 
3S 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no 
liability of the Company in lI'elation to its undertakings, or in rela-
tion to any share held by it in a specified company, in respect of 
any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable against 
the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the Com-
pany are directed under section 7 to vest in a Government company, 
against such company; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority in relation to the undertakings of the Company or in 
relation to any share held by the Company in a specified company 
40 passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against 
the central Government, or where the undertakings of the Com-
pany are directed under section 7 to vest in a Government 
company. against such company; 
45 (c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed 
. day, for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being 
in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, 
... here . the Wldertaldngs of the Company are directed under section 
'7, ·to vest'in a Government company, against such company'. 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
Or the 
Govern-
ment 
company 
not to 
be liable 
for prior 
liabilities. 

Power 
of Cen-
tral 
Govern-
ment 
to direct 
'VeIIt1ng 
of the 
under-
takinp 
of the 
Company 
ina 
GoverH-
meat 
compa,.. 
Payment 
of amounta 
to the 
Company 
and jIpe-
cifted 
compa-
nies. 
t 
1. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in, section 3. the centra! 
Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing 
to comply with such terms and conditions as that Government may 
think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the 
company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 5 ~ 
to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under 
section 3. shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, 
vest in the Government company either on the date of the publica-
tion of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a 
date e8ll'lier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the 10 
notification. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, vest under sub-section (1), in a Government com-
pany that Government company shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such J 5 
undertakings, and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Govern-
ment in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights ltnd liabilities, res-
pectively, of that Government company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. (1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, 
under section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title 
and interest of the company in relation to its undertakings there shall 
20 
be paid by the Central Government to the Company in cash and in the 25 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an aggre",te amount of rupees two 
hundred and eighty-three lakhs. 
(2) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, 
under seetion 4, of the shares held by the Company in the specified 
companies, there shall be paid by the Central Government to the Com- 30 
pany in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, an aggregate 
amount of rupees twenty-seven lakhs. 
(3) The amount specified in sub-section (1) and the amount specified 
in sub-section (2) shall carry simple interest of four per cent. per 
annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on 35 
the date on which payment of such amount i. made by the Central Gov-
ernment to the Commissioner. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabili-
ties of the Company, in relation to its undertakings, shall be met, in 
accordance ~th the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company, 40 
from the amounts due to the Company under sub-section (1) and sub-
section (2). 

lollt5e. 
, 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE ColtPANY 
t. (1) The general superintendence, direction, control and manage-
ment of the aftairs and business of the undertakings of the Company. 
S the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the 
Central Government under sectiC'n 3, shall,-
10 
(a) where a direction h<1S been made by the Central Govern-
ment under sub-section (1) of section 7, vest, on and from the date 
specified in such direction, jn the Government company specifted 
therein; 
(b) where no such direction has been made by the Central 
Government, vest, on and from the appointed day, in one or more 
Custodians appointed by the Central Government under sub-section 
(2), 
15 and thereupon the Government ccmpany so specified or the Custodian 
or Custodians so appointed, as ~he case may be, shall be entitled to 
exercise to the e~lusion of all other persons, all such powers and do 
all such things as the Company is authorised to exercise and do in re-
lation to its undertakings. 
20 (2) The Central Government may appoint an individual or a Govern-
ment company as the Custodian of the undertakings of the Company 
in relation to which no direction :-tas been made by it under sub-seetloD. 
(1) of section 7. 
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the undertakings 
25 of the Company S'Ueh remuneration as the Central Government may 
fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government. 
10. (1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company in a Government company or on the appointment of a CUBe 
todian, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings of 
30 the Company immediately before such vesting or appointment, shall be 
bound to deliver to such Government company or Custodian, as the case 
: may be, all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in 
their custody relating to the undertakings of the Company. 
(2) The Central Government may b-sue such directions as it may 
35 deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Government com-
pany or the Custodian as to the I?owers and duties of such Government 
company or Custodian and such Government company or Oustodian 
may also, if it is considered nece::;sary so to do, apply to the Central 
Government at any time for instr~ctions as to the manner in which the 
40 management of the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted or 
in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such management. 
(3) The Custodian shall maintain an account of the undertakings of 
the Company in such form and manner and under such conditions as may 
be ~rescribed and the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, shall apply 
4S to the Jludit of the account so maintained as they apply to the audit ot 
UIe accoWlts of a company. 
Managi;. 
ment, 
etc .• of 
the 
under-
takings 
of the 
Company. 
Duty of 
persons in 
charge of 
manage-
ment 
of the 
under-
takings 
of the 
Company 
to deliver 
all assets, 
etc. 

Conti· 
nuance 
of em· 
ployees. 
Provi· 
dent 
lund 
and 
other 
funds. 
Appoint-
ment of 
Commis-
lioner of 
Pay-
menu. 
t 
CHAPTER V 
P~VISION RELATING TQUlPWYEES OF TH& COMPANY 
11. (1) Every employee of the Company, employed in connection with 
any undertaking owned by it, shall, on and from the a}:Qohlted day,' 
become an employee of the Centra] Government, and where such under- S 
taking is vested in a Government company under this ACt, beeome, 
on and from the date of such vesting in such Government company, an 
employee tQereof and shall hold office or service under the Central 
Govefnment or the Government company> as the case may be, with the 
same rights and privileges as to ;>ension, gratuity and other matters as 10 
would have been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting 
and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under the 
Centcal Government or the Government company, as the case may be, 
Is dUly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of 
service are duly altered by the Cer.tral Government or the Government 15 
company, as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in foroCe, the tranafer 14 of 1947. 
of the services of any omcer or other person employed in any under· 
taking owned by the COlTlJ?any to the Central Government or the Gov- !lO 
ernment company shall not entitlE' such officer or other employee to any 
compeo.sation under this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, triLunal 
or other authority. 
12. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 25 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the 
pe~aon employed in any of the undertakings of the Company, the monies 
relatable to the employee, whose services have become transferred by 
or under this Act, to the Centra! Government or the Government 
company, shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, 30 
to the credit of such provident, t;!lperannuation, welfare or other fund, 
staftd transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government or the Gov-
emment co~ny, as the case may be. 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to 
the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may 35 
be, shall be dealt with by that Government or the Government company 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONEJI. OF PAYMENTS 
13. (1) The Central Government shaD.. for the purpose ofdiabur.u.. 40 
tIae amounts payable to the Company wuler aection 8, by notificatioo., 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments. 
(2~ Tbe Central Government may appoint such other penons as it 
may thiak It to assist the ColltlDiasioner aDd t.bere1l)lOn the CoaamiIIIi .... 
er may Udborise ODe or more of such penons allO to exercise aUar A7 45 
of tIae power. exercilaWe by him under this Act aDd di&erent ....... _ 
may be authorised to exereite diJIerent pow .... 

9 
, 
(.9) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been confer-
red on that person directly by thi., Act and not by .way of authorisation. 
5 (4) The saluies and allowances of the Commissioner and other per-
sons appointed under this section shall be defrayed out of the Consoli-
dated .... d ef India. 
14. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the 
specifted d,te, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
10 Company the amounts specified in section 8. 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in 
favour of thE' Commisostoner, in the Public Aceount Of India, and even" 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited 
by him to the credit of the sai~ deposit aecount and the safd deposit 
J5 account shall be operated by the Commissioner. 
(3) Records shall be maintained bv the Commissioner in respect of 
the undert8ktn~ of the Companv and the shares held by it in the speci-
fled companies, in relation to which payment has been made to him 
under this Act. ' . 
20 (4) The interest accruing on the amount standin~ to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to, the benefit 
of the Company. 
15. (1) The Central Government or the Government company, as the 
ca!le mav he, shall be entitlecl to receive. up to the !lpecified d::lte, to the 
25 exclu!lion of all other persons, Rny mnnp.v clue tn thp. Company, or the 
Gnvprnment cnmpany. Anti realised aftf>r the I'Ippointed dAy, noh1vith-
><:tanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed . '...---\ -, day. :~~ ,..~, .~! 
(2) The Central ('..nvemment or the Government company, af! the 
30 case may hp., may make a claim to the Commissioner with re~ard to 
ever" payment made hy it after the appointed day for dis('.hal'llin~ any 
liability of the Companv in relation to any period prior to the appointed 
day: and every such claim shall have priority in accordance with the 
priorities attachin~, under this Act, to the matter in relation to 
35 which lIuch liability har. been discharged by the Central Government or 
the Government company. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this A~t, the liabilities ot the 
Company in respect of any tT"l'lnsnction prior to the appointed day, 
which have not been dis~h~rf!ed an 0r before the specified date, shall be 
40 the liabilities of the Company. 
t6. Every person having n claim Rgainst the Company shall prefer 
c;uch claim before the Commissioner within thirty daye; from the rpeci-
fled date: . ..~ .. 
Provided that if tl!e Comn1il'lsioner is latisfied that the claimant was 
45 prevented by suftlclent cause from preferring the c1~tm· within the 
Pay-
ment by 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to the 
Commil-
sioner. 
Certain 
powers of 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Claims 
to be 
made 
to the 
Commis-
sioner, 

Priority 
of claims. 
Exami-
nation of 
c1aims. 
Admia-
sion or 
rejection 
Df claims. 
10 
, 
said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter. 
1'1. The claims arising out of the matters specified in Schedule . n 
shall have priorities in accordance with the following principles, 
naDDely:-- S 
(4) Category I shall have precedence over aU other"·categOries 
and Category II shall have precedence over Category III, and so on; 
(b) the claims Rpectfied in each of the categories, shall rank 
equally and be paid in fun. but, if the· amount is insufficient to 
meet such claims in full, the:'v' ~hal1 abate in equa1 proportions and 10 
be paid accordingly; 
(c) the question of' disChM'ging any liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if 8 surplus is 
left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately' 
higher category. IS 
18. (1) On receipt of the claim.:: made under section 16, the Commis-
siotler shall aN'ange the claims in the order of priorities specified in 
Schedule II and examine the same in accordance with such order of 
priorities. 
(2) If. on an examination of the . claims, the Commissioner is of 20 
opinion that the amount paid to !'tim under this Act is not sufficient 
to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not 
be required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category. 
19. (1) After examining the clflims with reference to the priorities 
set out in Schedule II. the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or 2S 
before which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be 
excluded kom the benefit of the disbursements made by the 
Commissioner. 
(2)' Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall 
be given by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the 30 
English language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the 
regional language as the Commissioner may consider SUitable, and 
every such notice shall call upon the claimant to ftle the proof of his 
claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertise-
ment. 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
time specified by the Commfs~!ioner shall be excluded from the disbur-
sements made by the Commissioner. 
3S 
(4) The Commissioner f;hall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of 40 
refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable opport-
unity of being· heard; by order In writing,' admit Or ·reject tlie 'claim in 
whole or in p¥t: 

D of 1908. 
II 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own pro-
cedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, including 
the place or plaoes at which he may hold his sittings and shall, for the 
purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same 
S powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, while trying 8 suit. in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
IU material object producible afol evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of wit-
nesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to 
J 5 be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
45 of 1860. the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a 
civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code 
2 of 197.. of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(7) A claimant, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the C01ll-
20 missioner. may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal. 
civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose juris-
diction the registered office of the Company is situated: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is 
appointed to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to the High Court 
25 at Calcutta, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
than two Judges of that High Court. 
20. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect 
of such claim shaH be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due, and, on such payment, the 
30 liability of the Company in respect of such claim sha!! stand discharged. 
21. (1) If, out of the monies paid to him in, relation to the under-
takings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities 
as specified in Schedule II, the CommIssioner shall disburse such balance 
to the Company. 
35 (2) Where any machinery, equipment or other property, has ves~ed, 
under this Act, in the Central Government or the Government 
company, as the case may be, but such machinery, equipment or other 
property does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, 
to continue to possess such machinery, equipment and other property on 
40 , the same terms and! conditions under which they were' possessed by the 
Company immediately before the appointed day. 
Disburse-
ment of 
money by 
the Com-
missioner 
to clai-
mants. 
Disburse-
ment of 
amounts 
to the 
Company 
and pos-
session of 
certain 
machi-
nery, 
equip-
ment, ete. 

Undill-
burled 
orUD-
c:aimed 
amount 
to be 
deposited 
to the 
general 
revenue 
lICCOunt. 
Act to 
haVe 
over-
riding 
e1!ect. 
Contractl 
toceue 
to have 
et!ect 
we ... 
ratified 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Penal-
ties. 
l!l 
a Jwry money paid to the Commissioner whichremain.mdlbutaed 
or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which tile 
office of the Commiaio:ner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before hi~ office is finally wound up, to the general 
revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money , 
so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer 
had not been made, and the order, if any, for payment 01 the claim, 
being treated as an order for the refund of revenue. 
CHAPl'ER VII 10 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. The provIsions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law. 
other than this Act. or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal 15 
or other authority. 
24. Every contract entered into by the Company in relatlon to the 
undertakings owned by it. which has vested in the Central Government 
under section 3, for any service. sale or supply, and in force immediately 
before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period of 20 
one hundred and eighty days from the appointed day. cease to have 
effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, 
in writing, by the Central GovE-rnment or Government company, in 
which such undertakings have been vested under this A(:t, and in 
ratifying such contract, the Central Government or Government com- 25 
pany may make such alteration or modification therein as it may think 
fit: 
Provided that the Central Government or Government company shall 
not omit to ratify a contract and shall ~ot make any alteration or medi-
fication in a eontract- 30 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or 
has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests 
of the Central Government or such Government company; and 
(b) except after giving to the parties to the contract a reason-
able opportunity Of being heard and except after recording. in writ- 35 
ing, its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein. 
25. Any person who-
(a) having in his possession. custody or control any property 
forming part of any undertaking of the Company, or ahy share held 4') 
by the Company in any specified company, wrongfully withholds such 
property or share from the Central Government or Government 
company; or 
(b) wrongNlly obtains posseesion of, or retains any property 
forming part of any undertaking of the Company or wilfully with- 45 
holds or fails to furniih to the Central Government or Government 

t 
60mpuy or any penon specified by that Govenunent 01' GovertlDlent 
company, Rny document relating to such undertaking or share 
which may be in. his posseISion, custody or control or fails to deliver 
to the Ceoual Government or Government company or any persoD 
specified by that Government or Government company, any assets, 
books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, 
custody or control, relating to the undertakings of the Company or 
any share held by the Company in any specified company; or 
(c) wrongfuMy recovers or destroys any property forming part 
10 of any undertaking of the Company or prefers any claim under this 
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
or grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with fine which may extend to ten th0'US8nd rupees, or 
I S with both. 
26. (1) Where an offence punishable under this Act has been com-
mitted by a company, every person who at the time the offence was 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 
the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
20 be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
2S diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where 
any offence under this Act has heen conunitted by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
30 manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director,· 
manageF, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accord-
ingly. 
3S 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a finn 
or other association of individuals; 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
27. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or the Custodian of the undertakings of the Com-
pany or the Government company or any oftlcer or other person autho-
40 rised' by that Government or Government company for anything which 
is in good faith done or intenied to be done under thia Act. 
Offences 
by com-
panies. 
Protec .. 
tion of 
action 
taken 
in,ood 
f.th. 

Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
Power-to 
remOW' 
diffteut· 
u.,-
14 
28. (1' The Central GOvernment may, by notifteatioD., direct that a11 
or ; any -of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
pow~s conferred. by this section and section 29 and section 30, may also 
'be >exerclsed by such person or persons as may be specified in' the 
rwtification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section 
(1), the person to whom su~h power has been delegated shall act under 
the direction, control and w.perV'ision o'f the Central Government. 
29. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
5 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 10 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an inti-
mation shall be giveit to the Commissioner under sub-section (3) of 15 
section 5; 
(b) the form and the manner in which, and the conditions under 
which, accounts shall be maintained by the Custodian as required 
by sub-section (3) of section 10; 
(c) the manner in which the monies in any provident' fund or 20 
other fund referred to in section 12 shall be dealt with; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 25 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirt.y days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive 'Sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule go 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified 'form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously d:me under that rule. 
30. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions ,of this 3S 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsi~tent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
" Provided that no .such order thall be made after the expizi' of a 
period of two years from the appointed day. 

18 of 1980. 
15 
31. (1) The Bird and Company Limited (Acquisition and Tranf~r of 
Undertakings and Other Properties) Ordinance, 1980, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repenl, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have b~en done or 
5 taken under the corresponding previsions of this Act. 
10 
15 
20 
SCHEDULE I 
[See s:ection 2 (g) ] 
1. Bisra Stone Lime Company Limited 
2. 'B'Urrakur Coal Company Limited 
3. Birds Trading and Investme!lts Company Limited 
4. Eastern InvestmC!1ts Limited 
5. Garuda Investments Limited 
6. Karanpura Development Company Limited 
(including Funders' Shares) 
7. Kinnison Jute Mills Company Limited 
8. Kumardnubi Fireclay ano Silica Works Limited 
9. Lawrence Investments and Property Company 
Limited 
10. Ondal Investments Compnn~' Limited 
11. Orissa Minerals Dcvc]opmcpt Company' Limited 
12. Scndra Investments Cumpany Limited 
13. Birds Employees' Co-operative Society Limited 
14. Becker Gray and Company (1930) Limited 
115 15. Karanpura Collieries Limited-Preference Shares, 
having registered office at 11, British Indian Street, 
Calcutta-700069. 
16. Calcium Carbide and Chemicals Ltd., having re-
gistered office at 161/1, Mahntma Gandhi Road, 
go Calcutta-700007 (Partly paid). 
35 17. Holman-Climax (Rock Drills) Limited 
18. Holman-Climax Manufacturing Limited 
40 19. Patya Tea Company Limited, having registered 
ot!:ce at 12, Dilkusha Street, CalC'Utta-700017. 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I Having 
I Registered 
I Office at 
I Chartered 
>- Bank 
I Buildings, 
I Calcutta-
I 700001. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
j 
"1 Having 
I Registered 
I Office at 
I Dolphin 
~ Court, 7-~ 
I Middleton 
I Street, 
I Calcutta-
J 700016. 
Repeal 
and 
ssvinJ., 

.6 
20: The Titaghur Paper Mills Company L1mltecS. 
having registered office at 95, Park Street, 
Calcutta-700016. 
21. Sonak'lnda Baling Company Limited, having re-
gistered office in BangIa Desh. 
SCHEDULE II 
(See sections 17, 18, 19 and 21) 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE m' LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY 
Category l-
5 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of 10 
the Company. 
(b) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the 
Company to the Provident Fund, Employees State Insurance Fund, 
Life Insurance Corporation premium and any other an-car under 
any law for the time being in force (excluding gratuity). 
Category II-
Principal amount of secured loans advanced by-
(i) Central Government; 
(ii) State Government; 
(iii) Banks; 
(iv) public financial institutions. 
Category III-
Principal amount of uns?cured loans advanced by-
(i) Central Government; 
(ii) . State Government; 
(iii) Banks; 
(iv) public financial institutions. 
Category IV-
(a) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of 
carrying on any trading or manufacturing operations. 
(b) Any dues payable to the State Electricity Boards on other 
Government or semi-Government institutions for supply of goods 
or services. 
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances. 
Category V-
15 
20 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues 
Government, State Government and local authQrities, 
3-to Central ) 
(b) Any other loans or dUel, 

STATEMENT OF OB.IECTS AND REASONS 
Messrs. Bird and Company Limited was engaged in production of 
goods vital to the various basic industries like fertilisers, petroleum 
products, steel, petro-chemicals and power generation. Production of 
the Company had been going down in the recent years and the Company 
started incurring losses since 1973-74. The Company Law Board, who 
had received complaints regarding mismanagement of the Company. 
came to the conclusion in 1976 that the affairs of the Company were 
being conducted in a manner oppre~sive to the members and prej'Udicial 
to the interests of the Company, its employees and the public interest, 
and appointed under section 408 of the Companies Act, 1956, five Gov-
ernment Dire~tors on the Board of the Company, and subsequently also 
a Managing Director. The Comou'lY Law Board also ordered an investi-
gation in respect of the Company under section 237 (b) of the Companies 
Act, 1956. 
2. Appointment of Government Directors, however, did not improve 
the functioning of Bird and Corr..pany Limited. The production con-
tinued to decline. Turnover of the Company dropped from Rs. 15.38 
crores in 1975-76 to Rs. 4.2"3 crOf('!; in 1979-80. The accumulated losses 
increased to Rs. 5.68 crores and the liabilities went up to Rs. 9.0 crores 
by March, 1980. The Company could not execute orders in time for 
want of working capital. The Central Government gave counter 
guarantee to the Chartered Bank in 1977 on the basis of which the Bank 
could issue guarantees to the Company's C'<lstomers up to an amount of 
Rs. 1.0 crore, and also gave guarantees to the Industrial Reconstruction 
Corporation of India in 1980 for an aggregate amount of Rs. 1.15 crores 
for provision of working capital to the Company. However, functioning 
of the Company continued to be unsatisfactory and it was not able to 
generate sufficient funds to finance the production. Not only the produc-
tion suffered and losses increased, but the Company was finding it 
difficult to obtain fresh orders from the customers who lost faith in the 
Company's ability to execute orders. 1500 employees of the Company 
had not received their full wages :md salaries. The undertaking of the 
Company was on the verge of closure; and if it had been allowed to be 
closed down, it would have adversely affected the production of goods 
vital to the needs of the country. Industrial Development Bank of India 
had, therefore, prepared a scheme for rehabilitation of the undertaking. 
The scheme required an investment of Rs. 140 lakhs to be provided by 
the Central Government. 
3. Messrs. Bird and Company Limited is a leading company in a 
group of 23 other companies engaged in manufacturing, mining, trading 
and investment activities. While two of the companies are subsidiaries 
of the Company, the other companies in the group are under varying 
degrees of control of the Company through its direct shareholding or 
by shareholding by the investment companies in the group. The Com-
pany provides marketing and management services to some of the group 
companies. The man'Ufacturing companies in the group are engaged 
17 

in production of goods which are vital to the needs of the country. 
There had been several allegations against the management of some of 
these companies indicating misuse of the companies, mismanagement, 
misfeasance or malfeasance. The Company Law Board ordered investi-
gations in 1977 under section 237 (b) of the Companies Act, 1956, in 
respect of some of these companies. Four of the companies have already 
been nationalised. Management of two of the companies has been taken 
over under the provisions of the Industries (Development and Regula-
tion) Act, 1951. It was in the public interest to acquire the Company's 
share in the group companies t') secure for the undertakings of the 
Company the facilIties and advantt',ges derived by it by such sharehold-
ing and to enable the Central Govt!rnment to exercise such control on 
the affairs of th~ companies a3 may be necessary to prevent their 
mismanagemen t. 
4. In view of the circumstan'CE'~ explained above, the Central Gov-
ernment decided that it would he in the p'ublic interest to acquire the 
undertakings of the Bird and C:)!npany Limited, its investments in its 
two subsidiary companies and share: held by the Company in the other 
group companies. The Bird and Company Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings and Other Properties) Ordinance, 1980 (No. 
18 of 1980) was promulgated by the President on 25th October, 1980 
to give effect to this decision. 
5, The Bill seeks to replace 1h<> said Ordinance. 
DR. CHARANJIT CHANANA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 12th No-vember, 1980. 
),.v' 

tINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-section (1) of section 8 of the BiJ1 provides for payment in cash 
and in the manner specified in Chapter VI of the Bill, an aggregate amount 
of rupees two hundred and eighty-three lakhs for the transfer to, and 
vesting in, the Central Government the right, title and interest of the 
Company in relation to its undertakings. Sub-section (2) of section 8 
provides for payment in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI 
of the Bill, an aggregate amount of rupees twenty-seven lakhs for the 
transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the shares held by 
the Bird and Company Limited in the speci'fied . companies as shown in 
Schedule I of the Bill. The total expenditure on payment of compen'3a-
tion will, therefore, be of the orner of rupees three hundred and ten 
lakhs. 
2. Sub-section (3) of section 8 of the Bill provides for payment of sim-
ple interest at the rate of 4 ()er cent. per annum in regard to the amounts 
specified under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 8 for the 
period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which 
payment of such amount is made by the Central Government to the Com-
missioner of Payments. It is e3timated that this amount will be of the 
order of Rs. 1,03,333 per month. 
3. Section 13 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall appoint 
a Commissioner of Payments and may also appoint such other persons as 
it may think fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Commio;;-
sioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to exercise all or 
any Of the powers exercisable by him and that the salaries and allowances 
of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under the section shall 
be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expen-
diture on this account is likely to be of the order of Rs. 15,000 per month. 
4. After the Central Government appointed Directors on the Board of 
the Bird and Company Limited it became necessary for it to provide guar-
antees to banks and financial institutions for provision of funds to the 
Company. Counter guarantee was provided. to the Chartered. Bank to 
enable the Bank to execute the guarantees to the customem of the Com-
pany up to an amount of rupees one crore. To the extent the Company 
has incurred any liability to the Chartered Bank up to the appointed day 
'Under these arrangements, and to the extent such liabilities are not 
covered by the compensation amount provided in the Bill, such liabilities, 
if any, will be cleared by the Central Government to the extent and in 
the manner as provided in the counter guarantee. However, it is not 
possible to give even a rough estImate at this stage. 
5. The Central Government have also provided guarantee.;; to the In-
dustrial Reconstruction Corporatio'1 of India for provision of loans up to 
rupees one hundred and fifteen lakhs to the Bfrd and Company Limited.. 
The terms of guarantees providp. that in the event of nationalisation of 
the Company, the guarantees shall become enforceable forthwith. The 
19, 

~() 
Central Government will, therefore, be required to pay the outstanding 
amounts under these guarantees as per the terms of the guarantees, though 
a part of the amount may be later covered by the compensation amount 
provided in the Bill. 
6. Funds will be provided by the Central Government for revival and 
rehabilitation of the undertaking and to cover cash losses during the first 
year. The requirements are estimated·.at Rs. 140 lakhs. 
7. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
Don-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of which 
the rules may be made, inter aHa, relate to the time within which, and 
the manner in which, an intimation regarding any mortgage, charge, 
lien, etc., on the property which has vested in the Government may be 
given to the Commissioner of Payments, the form and manner in which, 
and the conditions under which, accounts shall be maintained by the 
Custodian and such other matteH: as are required to be specified by 
rules. 
2. The matters in respect of whic:h the rules may be made are matter. 
of procedure or administrative detail. The delegation of legislattft 
power is, thus, normal in character. 

LOK SABHA 
6-
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
Bird and Company Limited for the purpose of ensuring the conti-
nuity of production of goods which are vital to the needs of the 
country and for the acquisithn of shares held by. the Bird and 
Company Limited in the spe:::ified complnies for the purpose of 
securing to those undertakings the facilities and advantages 
derived by reason of sllch shareholding with respect to the opera-
tion and functioning of those undertakings and also to enable the 
Central Government to exercise such control over the affairs of the 
specified companies as is n<)~es5ary to ensure that the affairs of 
those companies are not mis'11anaged and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto, 
(Shri Charanjit Chanana, 
Minister of State in 
the MiniEf;ry of Industry.) 