Be it
follows:—

AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA
31६0

Bill No. 190 of 2000

THE INCOME-TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Surt PRAKASH ParaniPe, M.P.

A
BILL
Gjurther{to amend the Income-Tax Act, 1961.)
enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

1, (1) This Act may be called the Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. In section | of the income-Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by

notification in the Official Gazette appoint but that date shall not be earlier than
Ist April 2003.

3. After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:—

“1A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961,—

(a) where a return of income has been filed before the commencement
of this Act by any person for any assessment year, proceedings for the
assessment of that person for that year may be taken and continued as if this
Act had not been passed;

jul

Short title and
commence-
ment,

Amendment of
section 1.

Insertion of
new section
1A.

Savings.


2

(b) any proceeding pending on the commencement of this Act before
any income-tax authority, the Appellate Tribunal or any court, by way of appeal,
reference, or revision, shall be continued and disposed as if this Act had not
been passed;

(०) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of any
assessment for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 2000, may be initiated
and any such penalty may be imposed under this Act;

(d) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of any
assessment for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 2000 or any earlier
year, which is completed or after the Ist day of April, 2000, may be initiated
and any such penalty may be imposed under this Act;

(०) where, in respect of any assessment completed before the
commencement of this Act, a refund falls due after such commencement or
default is made after such commencement in the payment of any sum due
under such completed assessment, the provisions of this Act relating to interest
payable by the Central Government on refunds and interest payable by the
assessee for default shall apply;

(0) any sum payable by way of income-tax, super-tax, interest, penalty
or otherwise under the principal Act may be recovered under this Act, but
without prejudice to any action already taken for the recovery of such sum
under the Principal Act.

Repeal of 4. The Finance Act, 2000 is hereby repealed.

Finance Act,

2000.

Substitution of 5. For section 294 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
new section जि. pamely:—

section 294.

Abeyance of “294. The provision of this Act shall not have effect for a period of three years
the Act for from the date of coming into force of Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000 and the
certain period. Act shall be deemed to be inforce from the Ist April 2003 automatically”.

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Income Tax-(Amendment) Bill 2000 aims at providing an opportunity to make
innovative introspection beginning at the lowest level of tax administration to the highest
level at Central Board of Direct Taxes. It aims at encouraging a full-fledged debate at
every quarter of taxpayers to the tax legislators in the Parliament.

The Income-tax law in our country has been an ever-changing piece of legislation.
‘Thousands of amendments have been introduced in the last two decades. Those include
even conceptual changes introduced through Finance Acts without meaningful debate.
We are not even aware that our conceptual understanding has taken a circuitous route. We
have travelled.

-From Provisional assessments to non-provisional assessments
-From prima facie adjustments to non-prima facie adjustments to rectification

-From no intimation only if no adjustment to intimation even if no adjustment in
every case and now to no intimation at all.

-From rebate to straight deduction from income regime to rebate agai

Now we talk of deduction in exemptions whereas the taxpayers expect otherwise.

Every time conceptual changes were made, new ideas emerged and were put in
practice by both the taxpayers and the tax gatherer, giving rise to numerous litigations.
The provisions for prima facie adjustments is a fine example. The Provision was abused
so much so that it must have achieved a distinction of being the most litigated single
section in the Income Tax Act 1961. But this was not enough, when with the help of courts
the law on the subject was settled and humanized, all of a sudden it was removed totally
from 1-6-1999 for reasons not known to anybody.

Recent lapses observed and commented upon by the Comptroller and Auditor
General, in respect of Assessment etc. should leave no one in doubt that the tax gatherer
has not done his work dutifully. Every provision to bring accountability for the executors
has been resisted or circumvented. The much-published one-by-six scheme has not brought
any addition to revenue except addition to the number. Was this the plan behind increasing
the tax base? On the other hand, arrears held in abeyance in court disputes are mounting to
new highs. As per the latest CAG report, taxes amounting to Rs. 44,143 crores could not
be collected as these cases were kept in abeyance in courts, tribunals and revenue appellate
authorities. Also, the Report states that the number of assesses has gone up from 1.35
crores to 1.75 crores, but there is a decrease in revenue by 3.48% which is surprising.

Equally true is the fact that, the taxpayers are harassed in such a way that he has
become panicky and has preferred to be out of the tax net for the fear of being harassed.
Number of pending tax cases in courts is increasing day by day. ‘This should convince
anyone about the wide spread dissatisfaction in regards to the tax administration amongst
the taxpayers and the public at large.

Professionals on their part are a confused lot. They cannot render proper advice in
this ever-changing legislation, In the absence of the long term policy the law lacks stability.
Voluntary Disclosure Schemes and Amnesty Schemes coming at regular intervals have
not only added to the'confusion but have transformed honest taxpayers to not-true-to-
themselves characters, The laudable objective to bring the black money to the fore has
never been achieved.

To sum up every component of the tax law viz. the taxpayers, the tax gatherers, the
professionals and the legislators are not a happy lot. In other words, the change we have
legislated so far, has done no credit to us parliamentarians.

3


4

Recently, the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mr. Mathahir had declared year 1999 as
Tax-free with no corporate tax & income tax for a period of one year, resulting in increased
spending and consumption.

The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill is, therefore, intended to have widespread and
exhaustive (both intensive and extensive) debate on every aspect narrated earlier. To create
a better conducive environment, the Bill Provides for the Income Tax Act, 1961 to remain
in animated suspension. For the next two years, let us concentrate to clear whatever is
pending. There will be no additions. We shall be able to stee: clear through the meaningful
debate in this period. After two years, we start on a clean siate empowered by the
conclusions drawn from the debate in every quarter. The loss of revenue caused by
suspension of Income Tax Act, 1961 can be recovered by proportionate increase in indirect
taxes on selective basis.

Let there be no direct tax for the next two years and let the black money flow freely
in the country for the next two years which would lead to increased spending and
consumption during which we can chalk out a simplified and admissible tax structure for
the people of this country,

New Dewi; PRAKASH PARANIPE
August 25, 2000.

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter No. 149/294/2000-TPL, dated 22 November, 2000 addressed to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha by Shri Yashwant Sinha, Minister of Finance].

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Income-Tax
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (Amendment of section 1, etc.) by Shri Prakash Paranjpe, M.P.,
has recommended under articles 117(1) and 274(1) of the Constitution, the introduction
of the proposed Bill in Lok Sabha.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INCOME Tax Acr, 1961
(43 oF 1961)
* * * * . * *
1. (J) This Act may be called the Income Tax Act, 1961.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on the Ist day of
April, 1962.

* * * * * * *

294. If on the Ist day of April in any assessment year provision has not yet been
made by a Central Act for the charging of income-tax for that assessment year, this Act
shall nevertheless have cffect until such provision is so made as if the Provision in force in
the preceding assessment year or the provision proposed in the Bill then before Parliament.
whichever is more favourable to the assessee, were actually in force.

* * * * * * *

Short ttle,
extent and
‘commenceinent,

Act to have
effect pending
legislative
Provision for
charge of tax


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Income Tax Act, 1961.

(Shri Prakash Paranjpe, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4951LS—30.11.2000