As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

27 su 2001

Bill No. 191 of 2000

‘THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
हर कि
Suri Basupes Acuaria, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

1, (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Shee ae

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

2, After article 21 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— सम जम
21&.

“21A. (1) The right to free and compulsory education to all children upto Free and
the age of fourteen years is hereby guaranteed. aid
(2) It shall be the duty of the State to enforce this right in such manner as it may from
to time by law determine.”

3. Article 45 of the Constitution shall be omitted. Omission of

article 45.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

As present, there is no law in the country)to ensure compulsory education amongst
the school going children) Article 45 of the Constitution, of course, enjoins upon the
Government to provide for free and compulsory education for all children upto the age of
fourteen years. But being a part of Directive Principles of State Policy, this article is not
judicially enforceable in the Courts of Law. Of course, the Government both at the Centre
and States have taken some steps to enforce the Provisions of this article and encourage the
schools and other primary institutions for increasing the mass literacy, However, in actual
Practice not much has been achieved and ignorance and illiteracy still continue to be the
major problems of our society. The National Policy on Education, 1986 as modified in 1992
declares in unequivocal terms that free and compulsory education shall be provided to all
children upto the age of fourteen years before we enter into twenty-first century. This has
also remained just a paper declaration and it is time फ we take up the matter with greater
Seriousness. In 1993, the Supreme Court in a far reaching judgement has held that children
of this country must have fundamental right to free and compulsory education upto the age
of fourteen years. In the context of this judgement, it is considered essential that educational
rights of the citizens should be more appropriately included in the Part III of the Constitution
which guarantees some basic fundamental rights to all the citizens of India,

Hence this Bill.

New जहा; BASUDEB ACHARIA
November 21, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education upto age of fourteen
years to every child. To implement the provisions of the Bill, some schools have to be
opened and teachers have to be appointed in those schools. There will be some expenditure
in respect of salaries and allowances of teachers, etc. As far as Union territories are
concerned, the whole expenditure will be met by the Central Government, The State
Governments will bear the expenditure from their respective Consolidated Funds in
connection with the implementation of the provisions of the Bill although some financial
assistance may be extended by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.

It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees eight thousand
crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees eight thousand crore is also likely
to be involved.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE ConsTITUTION OF INDIA

* * . * *
PART IV
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
* * . * *
Provision 45. The State shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the

दि, commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education. for all childves

cducatien’ Until they complete the age of fourteen years,

for chil- * * * rs
dren.