1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE BACKWARD
AND DROUGHT AFFECTED REGIONS OF VIDARBHA AND
MARATHWADA BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the backward and drought affected regions of
Vidarbha and Marathwada for the purpose of all-round development of the regions and
for ensuring the welfare of farmers, agricultural labourers, landless labourers, poor
women, old aged persons and the unemployed youth and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the Backward
Regions of Vidarbha and Marathwada Act, 2016.
Bill No. 191 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may, by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the backward and drought affected regions of Vidarbha and Marathwada to meet the costs
of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State of Maharashtra with the
approval of the Government of India for the purpose of ensuring the welfare of farmers,
farming labourers, landless labourers, poor women, old aged persons and the unemployed
youth and for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the
State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
backward and
drought
affected
regions of
Vidarbha and
Marathwada.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Vidarbha and Marathwada regions of Maharashtra State have been subjected to
economic and social backwardness other than being riddled with the lack of water resources
and drought related issues. Consequently, there has been a continuous rise in the number of
suicides by farmers in these regions. Government reports indicate that the farmers are affected
by drought in all the villages of Marathwada region and in many villages of Vidarbha. The
real picture of these regions is such that in all the areas where drought situation is prevailing,
the farmers are compelled to commit suicides and are forced to sell their land to usurers at
throw-away prices. Their wards are being deprived of school education. Labourers are
wandering about in cities in search of jobs. The farmers are concerned about the issue of
cattle-fodder also. Lack of availability of clean potable water is also an issue in villages.
For the purpose of ensuring the welfare of farmers, agricultural labourers, landless
labourers, poor women, old aged persons and the unemployed youth of these regions and
for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of the State's resources, there is a
need to quickly implement development schemes in these regions. Along with this, in order
to meet the costs of various schemes to be undertaken by the Maharashtra State with the
approval of the Government of India, there is a need for the provision of special financial
assistance to Vidarbha and Marathwada backward regions.
Through such steps, issues being faced by these regions at present like lack of water
resources and drought and economic backwardness can be addressed. This will go a long
way in extending the prevalence of justice among people, reinforce national unity and
strengthen good governance.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
July 1, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India as Parliament may, by due appropriation provide as special
financial assistance to backward and drought affected Vidarbha and Marathwada regions of
the Maharashtra State. For the purpose of ensuring the welfare of farmers, agricultural
labourers, landless labourers, poor women, old aged persons and the unemployed youth of
these regions and for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of the State's
resources, there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may, by appropriation provides as special financial assistance to
the backward regions of Vidarbha and Marathwada to meet the costs of such schemes.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. As the amount to be disbursed as special financial assistance to Vidarbha and
Marathwada regions by due appropriation of law by Parliament shall be determined after the
schemes to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of the Central
Government, at this stage, it is not possible to estimate the recurring expenditure to be
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved in this behalf.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the backward and drought affected regions of
Vidarbha and Marathwada for the purpose of all-round development of the regions and
for ensuring the welfare of farmers, agricultural labourers, landless labourers,
poor women, old aged persons and the unemployed youth and for the
development, exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1458LS(S3)—25.07.2016.