5
                                       AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
Byy
SHRI D.M. KATHIR ANAND, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, after section
10, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“10A. (1) Every scheduled commercial bank shall lend to the micro, small and medium
enterprises at the rate of one per cent. plus the rate of fixed deposit of such banks.
Short title and
commencement.
 Bill No. 191 of  2022
Insertion ofnew sections 10Aand 10B.
27 of 2006.
Lending rate andlimit for lendingof collateral free
loans.

2
(2) Every micro, small or medium enterprise shall be entitled to collateral free loan
of upto rupees two crore from scheduled commercial banks.
10B. The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify suitable incentives
to increase the inflow of equity capital in micro, small and medium enterprises.”.
Incentives toincrease theinflow ofequity capital.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 aims to provide for
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of micro,
small and medium enterprises in the country. The said Act, as well as the guidelines issued
by the Reserve Bank of India in its circular dated 1st July, 2011 and the recommendations of
various committees and task groups have brought about considerable positive changes in
various areas of development of competitiveness of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSMEs).
However, the MSMEs, that contribute to nine per cent of the country’s Gross Domestic
Product (GDP), forty-five per cent of the manufactured output, forty per cent of our exports
and that employs an estimated ten million people, continue to face serious bottlenecks in its
development. Lack of access to adequate and timely credit at a reasonable cost is the most
critical problems faced by this sector. Hence, there is an urgent need to make it mandatory by
law for scheduled commercial banks to provide affordable lending rates to MSMEs.
The Bill, hence, aims to ensure lowest lending rates to MSMEs, fixed at one per cent.
plus the rate of interest for fixed deposits of the scheduled commercial banks in the coutnry.
This would ensure more credit flow to the MSME sector, without hurting commercial banks,
as they will continue to have freedom to fix lending rates to other sectors or units. The Bill
also aims to make it mandatory for scheduled commercial banks to offer MSMEs, collateral
free loans, up to rupees two crore. These two key changes in the principal Act would revive
MSMEs through increased credit flow.
Hence this Bill.
       NEW DELHI;                                                             D.M. KATHIR ANAND
July 6, 2022.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Act, 2006.
————
(Shri D.M. Kathir Anand, M.P .)