1
Bill No. 191 of  2015
THE  SPECIAL IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT FUND
(FOR FOREST AREAS)  BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Special Irrigation Development Fund for the
development of irrigation facilities in the forest areas and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth  year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Irrigation Development Fund (For Forest
Areas) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)‘‘ forest area’’ means any district where more than thirty-three per cent. of the
total geographical area is covered by forests and has been declared as the forest area
by the State Government concerned or the Central Government, as the case may be, for
the purposes of this Act;
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

(b) ‘‘Fund’’ means the Special Irrigation Development Fund constituted under
section 3  of  this Act; and
(c) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall Constitute a Fund to be known as the Special
Irrigation Development Fund for the development of the irrigation facilities in the forest
areas of the country.
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, contribute such amount to the Fund as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of the Act.
4.  (1) A State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the case may be,
shall  forward  the details of the required infrastructure and the estimated cost of the
irrigation  development project of the forest areas falling in their respective territories to the
Central  Government.
(2) The Central Government, on receipt of such details, shall provide funds to the
State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the case may be, for the
development of irrigation facilities in the forest areas in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The funds provided under sub-section ( 2) shall be used for the following
purposes:—
(i) expeditious completion of ongoing irrigation projects in forest areas;
(ii) construction of small ponds for the use of farmers in the forest areas;
(iii) digging wells,  bore wells in the forest areas;
(iv) installing electric pumps for irrigation in the forest areas;
(v) providing pipes for irrigation to the farmers living in the forest areas;
(vi) meeting costs incurred on implementing the "Lift Irrigation Scheme" based
on the water resources of the forest areas;
(vii) renovation of old ponds and water reservoirs in forest areas; and
(viii) construction of canals.
(4) The State Governments the Union territory Administration getting funds under
sub-section (2) shall furnish the details of expenditure incurred on the irrigation develop-
ment works in forest areas to the Central Government in such manner and in such time as may
be prescribed.
(5) In case any State Government or Union territory Administration fails to utilise the
funds for the purpose it was released or fails to produce the details under sub-section (4), the
Central Government shall withhold sanction of funds to such State Government or Union
territory Administration.
5. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Special
Irrigation
Development
Fund.
State Govern-
ment/Union
territory
Administration
to send
details of the
infrastructure
and cost
required for
the
development
of irrigation
facility in
forest areas.
2
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, has put some restrictions on the use of forest
land for non-forest purposes. Due to this, irrigation projects and other development activities
cannot be undertaken in the forest areas. It is neither justified nor appropriate to deprive the
people who have been living in forest areas since time immemorial from getting facilities for
their upliftment. A large number of proposals relating to irrigation projects in the forest areas
are pending approval in the Ministry concerned. Due to lack of irrigation facilities, people
living in the forest areas have to depend on rain despite having the water reservoirs. Due to
non-availability of irrigation facilities, the production in forest areas is low which compels
them to live in extreme poverty. The agricultural production has suffered due to increase in
number of small holdings as a result of division in families. The small holding has also made
it difficult for them to run their families. In case, the irrigation facility is provided even to
small holdings of  land  it may enable the farmers to sustain their lives. Therefore, the
Government should take initiative to create a Fund for the betterment of farmers.
It is becoming more and more difficult for the farmers living in forest areas to cultivate
their lands due to non-availability of irrigation facilities. Farmers are committing suicide due
to heavy indebtedness to local money lenders who charge high rates of interest. To save the
farmers of the forest areas from the hardship presently being faced by them, there is a need
to constitute a Special Irrigation Development Fund for the forest areas.
State Governments do not have sufficient funds for the development of Irrigation
Projects in the forest areas. Therefore, there is a need to set up a Fund by the Central
Government for the development of Irrigation Projects in the forest  areas to facilitate better
irrigation facilities in the forest areas and to ensure better living standard to the farmers of
these areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
July 3, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Special Irrigation Development Fund
for the forest areas. Clause 4 provides for the release of funds to the State Government for
the development of irrigation projects in the forest areas. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crores from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crores is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide for the constitution of a Special Irrigation Development Fund for the development
of irrigation facilities in the forest areas and for matters connected therewith.
.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1416LS(S3)—17-07-2015.