1
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in sub-section ( 3), after clause ( b), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(c) he is qualified for appointment as a District Judge”.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 192 of  2018
14 of 1947. Amendment
of section 7.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
3. In section 7A of the principle Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (aa), the following
clause and proviso thereto shall be inserted, namely—
"(aaa) he is qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court:
Provided that the appointment to a Tribunal of any person not qualified under clause (a)
or (aa) shall be made in consultation with the High Court of the State in which the Tribunal
has or is intended to have its usual place of sitting.".
4. In section 7B of the principle Act, for sub-sections (2),  (3) and (4), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) A National Tribunal shall consist of one person only from each State that are
affected by the dispute to be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding officer of a
National Tribunal, unless he is, or has been, or  is qualified for appointment as, a Judge
of a High Court:
Provided that the appointment to a National Tribunal of any person who is not
or has not been a Judge of a High Court shall be made in consultation with the High
Courts of the States that are affected by the dispute.
(4) The Central Government may, if it is so thinks fit, appoint two persons from
each State that are affected by the dispute, as assessors to advise the National Tribunal
in the proceeding before it.”.
Amendment
of Section 7B.
Amendment
of Section 7A.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The original section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 while laying down
qualifications for appointment as a member of the Industrial Tribunal included, inter alia,
persons "qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court". Article 217 (1) of the
Constitution provides inter alia that a person who has for at least ten years been an advocate
of a High Court shall eligible for appointment as a Judge of a High Court. Thus, advocates
with ten years' practice at the Bar were eligible for appointment as a member of the Industrial
Tribunal or the Labour Appellate Tribunal under the then provisions. It is not discernible as
to why the present provisions of sections 7, 7A and 7B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
omitted the above category of persons from the qualifications for appointment of presiding
officers of Labour Courts, Industrial Tribunals and National Industrial Tribunals.
"Industrial and labour disputes" is a subject covered under the Concurrent List in
entry 22 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. Some State Legislatures have amended
the provisions of sections 7 and 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 in their application
to the respective States concerned. For example, the States of Goa, Gujarat and Maharashtra
have  amended section 7 expressly making advocates with seven years' practice at the Bar
eligible for appointment as a presiding officer of a Labour Court, amongst others.
The Bill seeks to amend the above-mentioned sections to achieve the stated objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
November 28, 2018.

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947
*****
7. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
one or more Labour Courts for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter
specified in the Second Schedule and for performing such other functions as may be assigned
to them under this Act.
(2) A Labour Court shall consist of one person only to be appointment by the appropriate
Government.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a presiding officer of a Labour
Court, unless—
(a) he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) he has, for a period of not less than three years, been a District Judge or an
Additional District Judge; or
*****
7A. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute one or more Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating
to any matter, whether specified in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule and for
performing such other functions as may be assigned to them under this Act.
(2) * ****
    ( 3) A person shall not be qualifed for appointment as the presiding officer of a
Tribunal, unless—
(a) he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or
(aa) he has, for a period of not less than three years, been a District Judge or an
Additional District Judge;
*****
7B. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
one or more National Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, involve questions of national importance or are of
such a nature that industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be
interested in, or affected by, such disputes.
(2) A National Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the Central
Government.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding officer of a National
Tribunal, unless he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court.
(4) The Central Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to
advise the National Tribunal in the proceeding before it.
*****
Labour Courts.
National
Tribunals.
Tribunals.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2128LS(S3)—14-12-2018.