1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 192 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION TO VICTIMS OF VERMIN WILD ANIMALS
AND CROP RAID  BILL, 2017
By
ADV. JOICE GEORGE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compensation to victims of wild animals declared as vermin and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Compensation to Victims of  Vermin Wild
Animals and Crop Raid Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "carrying capacity" means the maximum population size of the species that
the protected area can sustain indefinitely, given the food, habitat, water and other
necessities available in that area.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(b) "crop raid" means an act of entering into a cultivated area by the wild animals
and causing the damage to the entire crop;
(c) "Fund" means the Vermin Wild Animals and Crop Raid Compensation Fund
constituted under section 7;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "Scheme" means the Scheme for compensation to persons affected by vermin
wild animals and crop raid framed under section 4;
(f) "vermin" means noxious, objectionable or disgusting animals collectively,
that appear in human habitation and poses harm to human lives, agricultural crops,
domestic animals or which carry disease and includes any wild animal as declared as
vermin under section 62 of the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972; and
(g) "wild animal" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under the
provisions of the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972.
(2) The words and expression used but not defined in this Act shall have the same
meanings as assigned to it under the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Expert Team in each State to recommend for notification of wild animals which may be
declared as vermin.
(2) The Central Government shall, on the recommendations of the Expert Committee
constituted under sub-section (1) and after conducting carrying capacity study, notify wild
animals causing or intending to cause harm to human life and property or causing
destruction to agriculture crops, due to overpopulation in the protected areas and scattered
over to human habitations and plantations as vermin.
(3) The Central Government shall also take necessary steps to contain the population
of wild animals in the protected area and other habitats within the carrying capacity so as to
prevent them from scattering over to the human habitations and plantations and causing or
intending to cause crop raid, damage to human life and properties.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate a
Scheme for payment of compensation to persons affected by vermin wild animals or crop
raid.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the scheme shall
include:—
(i) area with clear administrative boundary to which the scheme shall be applicable;
(ii) declaration of wild animals as vermin and reasons thereof;
(iii) date on which the scheme shall cease to operate; and
(iv) the recommendation of stakeholder and expert team consultation, carrying
capacity studies and stakeholder surveys.
5. The Scheme shall be administered by such authority, not lower in rank than the
district Collector, as may be specified by the Central Government.
6. Every person affected by the vermin wild animals or crop raid shall apply to the
District Collector or such other authority specified under section 5 for the payment of
compensation in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
Central
Government
to constitute
an expert
team in each
State to notify
wild animals as
vermin.
Central
Government
to formulate a
Scheme for
compensation
to persons
affected by
vermin wild
animals and
crop raid.
Administration
of the Scheme.
Person
Affected by
vermin wild
animals to
apply to the
District
Collector for
compensation.
53 of 1972
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Vermin Wild Animals and Crop Raid Compensation Fund to which the Central Government
and State Governments concerned shall contribute every year in such ratio as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Fund shall be utilized for payment of compensation to the persons affected by
crop raids or otherwise by vermin wild animals.
(3) The Fund shall also be credited from corporate social responsibility funds and
wildlife protection activists, as donations.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The Central Government may issue directions to the concerned State Governments
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have affect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under his Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of Vermin
Wild Animals
and Crop Raid
Compensation
Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds.
Power to issue
directions.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The population of wild life in the protected areas including National parks, wildlife
sanctuaries and reserved forests is increasing beyond the carrying capacity of the protected
areas due to strict implementation of laws, growing concern of the environment and wild life
protection authorities. Due to the population beyond carrying capacity, the wild animals are
forced to come out from their natural habitat and migrate to the human habitations including
thickly populated areas. Due to these phenomena, the man-animal conflict is increasing day
by day and in most of the cases, the human beings are at the receiving end. Due to animal
attack and crop raids, residents are losing their life and property. In the event of loss of life or
damage to the properties or agricultural crops, there is no provision giving the affected
parties a statutory right to get their damages adequately compensated. There is no provision
of law enabling the stakeholders to cull the wild animals so as to contain their population
within the carrying capacity of their natural habitats such as the National Parks, the wild life
sanctuaries, reserved forest and other protected areas. Therefore, it is highly required to
have a legislation conferring rights on the citizens to get their damages due to attack by wild
animal adequately compensated and also to cull the wild animals for the purpose of containing
their population within the carrying capacity of their natural habitats.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; JOICE  GEORGE
August 4, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Expert Team to notify wild
animals as vermin. Clause 7 provides for the constitution of a Vermin Wild Animals and Crop
Raid Compensation Fund. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide
adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will
involve expenditure from Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees two hundred and ten crore would involve from the Consolidated
Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen lakhs is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compensation to victims of wild animals declared as vermin and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Adv. Joice George, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2241LS(S3)—03.11.2017.