Bill No. 192 of 2015
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
RAJASTHAN BILL, 2015
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Other Backward Sections of people and for the development, exploitation
and proper utilisation of its resources
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Rajasthan
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Rajasthan.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
10

2
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of  people or for the development, proper utilisation and exploitation of the
resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Rajasthan is socially and economically backward. Problems of poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy as well as measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of
weaker sections in the region are required to be addressed urgently by initiating new
development schemes in a time-bound manner. Being a border State, Rajasthan is strategi-
cally located and it is in the nation’s interest that its development needs are addressed. It is,
therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial assistance
to the State of Rajasthan for its all-round development including the welfare of weaker
sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast resources. Such a step of
providing financial assistance to this State would go a long way in building this nation more
and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
July 7, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide,
as special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Rajasthan  as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

GMGIPMRND—1454LS(S3)—17.07.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Other Backward Sections of people and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilisation of its resources.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)