As wrkobUCED IN Lok SABHA

21 sue 14

Bill No. 192 of 2000.

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suki Basavawacoup ६0.08, M.P
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Pariiament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India 85
|

। 1. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. रा कक,
I (2) It shall come into force at once. Se

5 2. पा article 177 of the Constitution, — ‘Ameadment

(i) the words “and the Advocate-General for a State” shall be omitted; RENN)

(ii) the words “in the House in which he is not a member” shall be added at the
end.

1


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, the Advocate-General who is appointed by the Governor shall have the
right to speak in and to take part in the proceedings of, but does not have the right to vote
in, the House of the Legislature of the State, Since Advocate-General is not an elected
Tepresentative, it is not proper to confer him the right to speak in and to take part in the
Proceedings of the House. Whatever advice he would like to offer could be given to the
Governor and through the Governor, the same may be passed on to the House. In order to
ensure supremacy of the House, it is proposed{to omit the provision tegarding the powers
conferred on the Advocate-General to speak in and to take Part in the proceedings of the
House.")

Hence this Bill.

New Detar; BASAVANAGOUD KOLUR
October 30, 2000.


ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution of India. id

रू * * * * . *

177. Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a State shall have the right to
speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly of the
State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, both Houses, and to speak in,
and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislature of
which he may be named a membei, but shall not, by virtue of this article, be entitled to
vote.

* * if * * * .

Rights of
Ministers and

General as


LOK SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basavanagoud Kolur, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—516iLS—29-11-2000.