LC 
K 
5.
L.liHA 
CCRRI 
r;END~.·' 
to 
THE 
Ml:~LP0LIFS 
PJ1D 
RESTR 
TCT::: 
'·IE 
T?,,,D;: 
-
p~CnCES 
(!'.~jEiO-·ENr) 
RILL, 
198C 
(Lo. 
P~!:'~_J-J1tr~!:l~c~2 
__ .~ 
__ L()k_ 
S 
a~hCl) 
Page 
3, 
line 
9 
from 
bo 
ttom,-
~.!ter 
"increasing" 
J.nsert-
"import 
prices 
of 
crude 
oil 
dnd 
oil 
products 
and 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
prOposed" 
NEW 
DElHI; 
~,Jo 
vembe 
r 
20, 
1980· 
}(artika 
29, 
1902 
{Saka; 

" As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
24 NO~ .:,80 
Bill No. 192 of 1980 
THE MONOPOLIES AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 19'80 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Monop()lie.~ and Restrictive Trade Practices ActJ 
1969. 
Br-; ;~ enactC'd by P'lrliament i~l the Thirty- first Yt~ar of the Uep-J.blic 
of India as follows:--
1. (1) This Act may be called the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices (Amendment) Act, 1980. 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 13th day of 
October, 1980. 
2. In section 2 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 
54 of 1969. 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,-
10 
15 
(i) in clause (d), after Explanation VI, the following Explanation 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"Explanat-ion VII.-Where goods of any description pro-
duced in India by an undertaking have been exported to a 
country outside India, then the goods so exported shall not be 
taken into account in computing for the purposes of this clause-
(i) the total good~ of that description that are produced 
in India by that undertaking: or 
(ii) the total goods of that descrfptfon that are pro-
duced, supplied or distributed in India or any substantial 
part thereofj"; 
Sltort 
title and 
Com-
mence-
Mento 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 

Repeal 
and 
saving. 
\2 
'~\, '(ii) in clause (;), after Explanation IV, the following Explana-
tion shall be inserted, namely:-
"E;t:planation V.-Whcre goods of any description produced 
in India by an undertaking have been exported to a country 
outside India, then the goods so exported shall not be taken 5 
into accO'unt in computing for the purposes of this clause-
(i) the total goods of that description that are pro-
duced in India by that undertaking; or 
(ii) the total goods of that description that are pro-
duced, supplied or distributed in India or any substantial 10 
part thereof;". 
3. (1) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (Amend-
ment) Ordinance, 1980 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such rep~al, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shan be 15 
deemed to have been dene or taken under the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 
14 of 1980. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
One of the problems being faced by the industry in boosting produc-
tion for export arises from the concept of 'dominance' and the approvals 
required by 'dominant' undertakings under the Monopolies and Restric-
tive Trade Practices Act, 1969. Any undertaking whi'ch produces one-
third or more of any goods that are produced in India and bas assets of 
more than one crore of rupees is deemed to be 'dominant' in the said 
goods. Any scheme of expansion of production capacity by such an 
undertaking requfres the undertaking to seek clearance under the Act 
and follow the procedure laid down for this purpose. Even where an 
undertaking exports a substantial volume of its production and even 
where the undertaking seeks to expand its production solely for purposes 
of export, it still requires clearance under the Act for which the proce-
dures laid down delay the implementation of the project. 
2. In actual fact, however, what has to be prevented is dominance or 
monopoly only in relation to goods made available within the country. 
The original intent of the Act was to reduce monopolistic and restrictive 
trade practfce9 within the country; and, to that extent, the portion of the 
production exported does not become relevant for the domestic consumer. 
It is sienificant that for determining dominance in the matter of supplies, 
imports are added. However, exports are not deducted, even though 
exported products do not affect supplies in the domestic market. 
3. With a view, therefore, to make explicit the original intent of ths 
Act, it was decided to amend the Act to provide that the goods produced 
by an undertaking and exported to a country outside India shall not be 
taken into account in computing the total goods of that description pro-. 
duced in India by that undertaking, or the total goods of that description 
produced, supplied or distributed within the country, for the pur-
pose of determining the dominance of that undertaking in relation to such 
goods. Having regard to the urgent need to step 'Up our export earnings, 
to meet the balance of payments deficit likely to arise from increasing 
amendment would not alter the position in regard to the only matter of 
relevance, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1980 (14 of 198'\) was promulgated by the President on the 
13th October, 1980, to give effect to the above object. 
,t The Bill seeks to. replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
P. SHIV SHANKER. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th November, 1980. 

Defi-
nitions. 
ANNEXURE. 
(54· OF 19(9) 
• ~ • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(d) "dominant undertaking" means an undertaking which 
either by itseli or along with inter-connected undertakings,-
(i) pro.:hll es, supplies, dlS tributes or otherwlSe controls 
nO.t less than one-third of the total goods of any description 
tbat are produced, supplied or distributed in India or any 
substantial part thereof, or 
(u) provides or otherwise controls not less than one-third 
of any services that al'e rendered in India or any subatantial 
part thereof: 
Provided that for the purposes of this clause, the goods pro-
duced by an undertaking which does not employ-
(a) more than fifty workers on any day of the relevant 
year, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is 
being carried on with the aid of power or is ordinarily so 
carried on, or 
(b) more than one hundred workers on any day of the 
relevant year, and in any part of which a manufacturing process 
is being carried on without the aid of power or is ordinarily 
so carrIed on, 
shall not be taken into account. 
Explanation I.-Where not less than one-third of the produc-
tion, supply, distribution or control of any goods or the provision 
or control of any service is ::hared by inter-connected undertakings, 
each such undertaking shall be . deemed, for the purposes of this 
Act, to be a dominant undertaking. 
Explanation II.-Where any goods of any description are the 
subject of different forms of production, supply, distribution or 
control, every reference in this Act to such goods shall be construed 
as reference to any of those forms of production, supply, distribu-
tion or control, whether taken separately or together or in such 
groups as may be prescribed. 
4 ..... 

5 • 
Explanation lII.-Any undertaking which, either by itself or 
along with inter..connected undertakings, produces, supplies, distri-
butes or controls one-third of any goods or provides or controls 
one-third of any services acccrding to any of the following criteria, 
namely, value, cost, price, quantity or capacity, of the goods or 
services or the number of workers employed for the production, 
supply, distribution or contrnl of such goods or for the rendering 
of such services, shall be deemed to be a dominant undertaking. 
Explanation IV.-In determining the question as to whether an 
undertaking is Or is not a dominant undertaking, regard shall be had 
to-
(i) the lowest production made, or services rendered, by the 
undertaking concerned cl'uring the relevant year, and 
(ii) the figures publi~hed by the Central Government with 
regard to the total production made or services rendered in India 
or any substantial part thereof during the relevant year. 
Explanation V.-For the purposes of Explanation IV, production 
indudes supply, distribution 0'." control of goods. 
E:rplanation VI.-For the purposes of this clause, "relevant year" 
means anyone year out of the three calendar years immediately 
preceding the preceding calen1ar year in which the question· whether 
an undertaking is or is not a dominant undertaking is determined . 
... ... ... ... ... 
(j) "monopolistic undertaking" means-
(i) a dominant undertaking which, or 
(ii) an undertaking wl-oich, together with not more than two 
other independent undertakings,-
(a) produces, supplies, distributes or otherwise controls 
not less than one-halt of the total goods of any description 
that are produced, supplied or distributed in India or any 
substantial part thereof, or 
(b) provides or otherwise controls not less than one-half 
of the services that arc rendered in India or any substantial 
part thereof: 
Provided that for the purposes of this clause, the goods produced 
by an undertaking which does not employ-
(A) more than fifty workers on any day of the relevant year, 
and in any part of which a manufacturing process ls being carried 
on with the aid of power or is ordinarily so carried on, or 
(B) more than one hundred workers on any day of the rele-
vant year, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is 
being carried on without the aid of power or is ordinarily so 
carried on, 
shall not be taken into account. 

6 
Explanation I.-Any undertaking which, either by itself or along 
with not more than two other independent undertakings, produce., 
supplies, distributes or controls one-half of any goods or provides or 
controls one-half of any services according to anyone of the follow-
ing criteria, namely, value, cost, price, quantity or capacity, of the 
goods or services or the number of workers employed for the produc-
tion, su:?ply, distribution or control of such goods or for the 
rendering of such services, shaIl be deemed to be a monopolistic 
undertaking. 
Explanation n.-In determining the question as to whether an 
undertaking is or is not a monopolistic undertaking, regard shall be 
had to-
(i) the lowest production made, or services rendered by the 
undertaking concerned dur;ng the relevant year, and 
(ii) the figures published by the Central Government with 
regard to the total production made or services rendered in India 
or any substantial part thereof during the relevant year. 
EXf·lanation Ill.-For the purposes of Explanation II, production 
includes supply, distribution nr control of goods. 
Explanation IV.-For the purposes of this clause, "relevant year" 
means anyone year out of the three calendar years immediately 
preceding the preceding calend:u year in which the question whether 
an undertaking is or is not a monopolistic undertaking is determined . 
• • • • • 

..... LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
-I 
{urther to amend the Monopolies aT'.d Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 
(Shri Shiv Shankar, 
Mini~ter of Law, Justice 
and Company Affairs.) 