Bill No. 192-F of  2019
O                                                                                                                       INAL
THE CHIT FUNDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 20TH NOVEMBER, 2019
RAJYA  SABHA ON 28TH NOVEMBER, 2019)
ASSENTED  TO
 ON 5TH DECEMBER , 2019
ACT NO. 41 OF 2019

1
THE CHIT FUNDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Chit Funds (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Chit Funds Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,—
(i) in clause ( b), after the word “ kuri”, the words “, fraternity fund, Rotating
Savings and Credit Institution” shall be inserted;
(ii) clause (d) shall be omitted;
(iii) clause (h) shall be omitted;
(iv) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
40 of 1982. Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No. 192-F of 2019

2
‘(ja) “gross chit amount” means the sum-total of the subscriptions payable
by all the subscribers for any instalment of a chit without any deduction of
discount or otherwise;
(jb) “net chit amount” means the difference between the gross chit amount
and the discount, and in the case of a fraction of a ticket means the difference
between the gross chit amount and the discount proportionate to the fraction of
the ticket, and when the net chit amount is payable otherwise than in cash, the
value of the net chit amount shall be the value at the time when it becomes
payable;’;
(v) clause (m) shall be omitted;
(vi) after clause (p), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(pa) “share of discount” means the share of the subscriber in the amount
of discount available under the chit agreement for rateable distribution among
the subscribers at each instalment of the chit;’.
3. Throughout the principal Act,—
(i) for the words “chit amount”, the words “gross chit amount” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the word “dividend”, the words “share of discount” shall be substituted; and
(iii) for the words “prize amount”, the words “net chit amount” shall be
substituted.
4. For section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“11. (1) No person shall carry on chit business unless he uses as part of his name
any of the words “chit”, “chit fund”, “ chitty”, “kuri”, “fraternity fund” or “Rotating
Savings and Credit Institution” and no person other than a person carrying on chit
business shall use as part of his name any such word.
(2) Where at the commencement of this Act,—
(a) any person is carrying on chit business without using as part of his
name any of the words specified in sub-section (1); or
(b) any person not carrying on chit business is using any such word as
part of his name,
he shall, within a period of one year from such commencement, add as part of his name
any such word or, as the case may be, delete such word from his name:
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers necessary in the public
interest or for avoiding any hardship, extend the said period of one year by such
further period or periods not exceeding one year in the aggregate.”.
5. In section 13 of the principal Act,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “rupees one lakh”, the words “rupees three
lakhs” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2),––
(a) in clause ( a), for the words “rupees six lakhs”, the words “rupees
eighteen lakhs” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (b), for the words “rupees one lakh”, the words “ rupees three
lakhs” shall be substituted.
Substitution
of words to
certain
expressions by
certain other
expressions.
Substitution of
new section for
section 11.
Use of words
“chit”, “chit
fund”, “ chitty ”,
“kuri ”,
“fraternity
fund” or
“Rotating
Savings and
Credit
Institution”.
Amendment
of section 13.

3
6. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the words “two subscribers”,
the words “present in person or through video conferencing duly recorded by the foreman”
shall be inserted.
7. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) after the words “at least two other subscribers who are present”, the words
“in person or through video conferencing” shall be inserted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where two subscribers required to be present under
sub-section (2) of section 16 are present through video conferencing, the foreman
shall have the minutes of the proceedings signed by such subscribers within a
period of two days of the date of the draw.
”.
8. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (b), for the words “five per cent.”, the words “seven per cent.” shall
be substituted;
(ii) in clause (f), the word “and” shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(fa) to exercise his right to lien against the credit balance in other non-prized
chits; and”.
9. In section 85 of the principal Act, in clause (b), for the words “one hundred rupees”,
the words “such amount as may be specified, by notification in the Official Gazette, by the
State Government” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment
of section 85.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—4430RS—12.12.2019.