5
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 192 of  2022
THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං E.T. Mඈඁൺආආൾൽ Bൺඌඁൾൾඋ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920.
     Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) 
Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

2
 2. In section 12 of the Aligarh Muslim  University Act, 1920, in 
sub-section (1), for the words, “University Mosque”, the words “University Mosque 
or the administrative blocks of the Special Centres” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 
section 12.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Special Centres of  the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) were started 
ten years ago. The special centres are satellite campuses of the AMU intended to 
address the higher educational needs of the muslim community. For this purpose, 
three locations were identified—Malappuram in the State of Kerala, Murshidabad 
in the State of West Bengal and Kishanganj in the State of Bihar.
This idea of establishing off campus centres was the first of its kind in India and 
therefore, no proto model per se was in existence. In tune with the suggestions from 
different sources, the proposal was drawn up on the strength of section 12 (2) of 
Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1981 which read as follows:-
“(2) The University may also, with the sanction of the Visitor and subject to the 
Statutes and Ordinances, establish and maintain such Special Centres, Specialised 
Laboratories or such other institutions for research or instruction as are necessary 
for the furtherance of its objects either on its own or in cooperation or collaboration 
with any other institution.
Subsequently, the President of India in the capacity of visitor accorded approval 
to establish special centres in the year 2010 pursuant to the AMU Court’s resolution, 
executive council’s approval and the academic council’s approval (AMU 2016a, 
2016).
The Special Centres of the AMU are established to increase access of the 
students from the concerned State/region to higher education. However, the number 
of students studying in these centres is more from outside the State. This is mainly 
due to the policy of fifty per cent. of reservation of seats for the internal candidates. 
With the establishment of high schools at the AMU Special Centres, the students 
of the region can also benefit from the internal reservation policy of the university 
in their admission to graduation and post graduations programmes offered by the 
AMU Centres.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920 
with a view to empower the University to establish and maintain high schools within 
a radius of fifteen miles from the Special Centres of the University in addition to the 
existing provision of the establishment of high school from the University Mosque. 
Hence this Bill. 
 Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;          E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER 
10 August, 2022.

4
ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Aඅං඀ൺඋඁ Mඎඌඅංආ Uඇංඏൾඋඌංඍඒ Aർඍ, 1920
(40 ඈൿ 1920)
*  *  *  *  *               *
 12. (1) The University shall, subject to the Statutes, have power to establish and 
maintain High Schools within a radius of fifteen miles from the University Mosque. 
  ( 2) The University may also, with the sanction of the Visitor and subject 
to the Statutes and the Ordinances, establish and maintain such Special Centres, 
Specialised Laboratories or such other institutions for research or instruction as are 
necessary for the furtherance of its objects either on its own or in cooperation or 
collaboration with any other institution.
*  *  *  *  *                *
Power to 
establish 
and maintain 
High Schools 
and other 
institutions.

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920.
(Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, M.P .) 