                                                            Bill No. 193 of 2022
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
TAMIL NADU BILL, 2022
By
DR. T. SUMA THY (A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu for the
purpose of sustainable and balanced development of growth-oriented
infrastructure such as housing, drinking water , roads, sanitation, creation
of grain and fodder banks, skill development, cloud seeding, contour
bunding and welfare schemes for the women, children, senior citizens
and people living below poverty line in the State and for encouraging
traditional water conservation through lakes, ponds, wells,
rainwater harvesting and afforestation and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1)This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the
State of Tamil Nadu Act, 2022.
(2)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special
financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of such schemes
of development as may be undertaken by the Government of Tamil Nadu with
the approval of Union Government for the purposes of—
(i) improvement of drinking water facilities in the State;
(ii) implementation of schemes aimed at improving the health
and educational standards of girl child;
(iii) implementation of welfare measures aimed at improving the
condition of agricultural and migrant labourers;
(iv) providing for measures aimed at lowering of infant mortality
rate, improving the maternal health and promoting institutional
delivery in the State;
(v) providing employment to members of families living below
poverty line and unemployed youth through skill development;
(vi) providing water and sanitation facilities in rural and urban
areas;
(vii) creating good quality infrastructure of roads, highways, street
lights, schools, colleges and transport;
(viii) creating awareness amongst people about disaster
preparedness plan and training them to deal with disasters;
(ix) creation and maintenance of water conservation bodies such
as check dams in the State of Tamil Nadu;
(x) digging of open wells, ponds and desiltation of such bodies
from time to time under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005;
(xi) encouraging and providing irrigation facilities to the farming
sector and promotion of drip irrigation facility in these regions;
(xii) capping the cultivation area of sugarcane crop and promotion
of drought resilient crops;
(xiii) promotion of rain water harvesting and watershed
development to ensure replenishment of groundwater;
(xiv) afforestation particularly on vacant or barren and waste
land with the help of villagers and village Panchayats including
community afforestation;
(xv) promotion of growing fodder and setting up fodder and
foodgrain Banks at conspicuous places;
(xvi) initiating welfare measures for improving the conditions of
agricultural workers, senior citizens, women, children and poor people
living in these regions;
(xvii) establishing cold storages and warehouses for the farmers;
(xviii) settling the debt of farmers;
(xix) providing compensation and relief to farmers and
agricultural labourers for any damage to crops caused due to rainfall
deficit, pest attack, flood, hailstorm or any other natural calamity;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Tamil Nadu.

3
(xx) encouraging and providing sustainable practices like organic
farming coupled with modern irrigation facilities like drip irrigation,
contour bunding and sprinklers to farmers;
(xxi) promotion of research and development through Krishi
Vigyan Kendra in agriculture and drought management to ensure
better and inexpensive inputs like seeds, fertilizers and pesticides;
(xxii) promotion of research and development in sectors like
livestock and poultry;
(xxiii) promoting food processing industries based on local
agricultural products;
(xxiv) implementation of social awareness campaigns through
non-Governmental Organisation and Self-Help groups relating to
farmer credit, water literacy and drought management through
change in cropping pattern;
(xxv) promotion and implementation of cloud seeding through
silver iodide in the State; and
(xxvi) such other provisions as the Government of the State of
Tamil Nadu  may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act which appears to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of
this Act.
5
10
15
25
20 Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Tamil Nadu needs assistance from the Central Government
for the successful completion of various schemes being undertaken at
present with an aim to improve the standard of life of the people, improve
the level of education and health condition of the girls, to encourage the
girl students of families living below poverty line to pursue higher
education and also to provide incentives for people living below poverty
line to pursue higher education. The condition of farmers and agricultural
labourers in the State, their welfare and protection are of paramount
importance. Central assistance to the State is also needed for the holistic
development and further reduction in the maternal and infant mortality
rates.
Recurring droughts have made the State farmers to seek support from the
Government. The situation is where droughts have been a frequent occurrence
during the past fifty years has to be stopped through massive water
conservation with check dams and other structures to arrest rain water
run off.
The traditional methods of water conservation through digging of open
wells, ponds, lakes and such other bodies and time to time desiltation of such
water bodies needs to be undertaken. Rain water harvesting has to be promoted
as a mass movement in this regions. Afforestation on a large scale particularly
on barren lands and wastelands has to be promoted in these regions involving
villagers and village Panchayats by providing incentives. This can certainly
arrest the desertification in these regions. Unfortunately certain backward
regions of the State are not much developed in comparison to other urban
regions of the State in terms of infrastructure facilities such as potable water,
roads, electricity, sanitation and other development indicators such as
employment, per capita income and education particularly of the girl child.
Welfare measures for the senior citizens, widows, physically handicapped or
infirm do not exist in these regions of the State. Tamil Nadu has to be allocated
its fair share of resources by the Central Government. As a welfare State, the
Government has to provide all these facilities and work towards giving a
requisite push for overall and all round development of the State.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;       T. SUMA THY(A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAP ANDIAN
6 July, 2022.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament
may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance to the
State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as
may be undertaken by the State of Tamil Nadu with the approval of the
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve
expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India for providing special
financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu. As the sums of moneys
which will be given to the State of Tamil Nadu as special financial
assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only
after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the State Government are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring or non-
recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu for the
purpose of sustainable and balanced development of growth-oriented
infrastructure such as housing, drinking water, roads, sanitation, creation
of grain and fodder banks, skill development, cloud seeding, contour
bunding and welfare schemes for the women, children, senior citizens
and people living below poverty line in the State and for encouraging
traditional water conservation through lakes, ponds, wells,
rainwater harvesting and afforestation and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P .)