1
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2018
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Information Technology Act, 2000, section 66A shall be omitted.
Bill No. 193 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
21of 2000.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Omission of
section 66A.
5

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 was declared unconstitutional
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its landmark decision in Shreya Singhal v. Union of India
in 2015. However, legal database and media reports have shown that section 66A continues
to be used by law enforcement agencies including the police, trial courts and even High
Courts.
Several Cases that were filed under section 66A before the Shreya Singhal judgement
in 2015 continue to be investigated by the police and tried in courts and new cases have also
been filed after the judgement, despite the fact that the provision has been declared
unconstitutional by the highest court of the land.
Section 66A violates Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India. In
the Shreya Singhal judgement, the Supreme Court held that "it is clear that section 66A
arbitrarily, excessively and disproportionately invades the right of free speech and upsets
the balance between such right and the reasonable restrictions that may be imposed on such
right.".
In view of  aforesaid judgement of  the Supreme Court, Cases under section 66A
currently being investigated or prosecuted must be quashed and no new cases should be
registered under section 66A. Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, must
also be deleted from the statute book.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL
November  27, 2018.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
******
66A. Any person who sends, by means of a computer resource or a communication
device,—
(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing character;
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of causing
annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal intimidation,
enmity, hatred or ill will, persistently by making use of such computer resource or a
communication device; or
(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of causing
annoyance or inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient
about the origin of such messages, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and with fine.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, terms "electronic mail" and  "electronic
mail message" means a message or information created or transmitted or received on a
computer, computer system, computer resource or communication device including
attachments in text, images, audio, video and any other electronic record, which may be
transmitted with the message.
******
Punishment
for sending
offensive
messages
through
communication
service, etc.

MGIPMRND—2127LS(S-3)—14-12-2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)