Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 193 of 2024
THE REGULATION OF DEEPFAKE BILL, 2024
By
Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the creation and use of deepfake technology, ensuring legal boundaries  
for its application and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This act may be called the Regulation of Deep Fake Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect. 5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) “consent” means voluntary and wilful agreement, either in writing or orally, by 
a person in a sound state of body and mind and of legal age, without any coercion, fraud 
or error and not obtained under any duress or fear;
(c) “Deepfake” means an electronic image or photograph, audio recording, video 
recording, motion picture film, multimedia, or any technological representation of 
speech or conduct substantially derivative thereof of an AI -generated content where 
it appears to be authentically depict any speech, image or conduct of a person who 
did not undertake in such a speech or conduct or with the intent to convincingly and 
deceptively depict subjects or issues or represent individuals engaging in actions, 
making statements, or being in circumstances that did not occur or exist in reality;
(d) “digital content forgery” means the act of utilization of technologies, such as 
artificial intelligence and machine learning methodologies, to create or alter audio, 
visual, or textual content with the purpose of deceiving; 
(e)” digital watermark” means the act of embedding information that is intended 
to be difficult to remove into an output, including an output such as text, an image, 
an audio, a video, software code, or any other digital content or data, for the purposes 
of verifying the authenticity of the output or the identity or characteristics of its 
provenance, modifications, or conveyance and thereby preventing unauthorized use or 
manipulation; 
(f) “intermediary”, means any particular electronic records, means any person who 
on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any 
service with respect to that record and includes telecom service providers, network 
service providers, internet service providers, web-hosting service providers, search 
engines, online payment sites, online-auction sites, online-market places and cyber 
cafes;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) “social media intermediaries” means digital platforms which primarily or solely 
enables online interaction between two or more users and allows them to create, upload, 
share, disseminate, modify or access digital content using its services within a virtual 
community; and 
(i) “Task Force” means the Deepfake Task Force established under section 4.
3. Any person, who creates, distributes, disseminates or shares deepfake(s) without the 
consent of the individual(s) involved or without digital watermark, as defined under this 
Act, –– 
(a) with the intent to humiliate or otherwise harass the person falsely exhibited, 
provided that the advanced technological false personation record contains sexual 
content of a visual nature and appears to feature such person engaging in such sexual 
acts or in a state of nudity; 
(b) with the intent to cause violence or physical harm, incite armed or diplomatic 
conflict, or interfere in an official proceeding, including elections, provided that the 
advanced technological false personation record poses a credible threat of instigating or 
advancing such actions; and 
(c) in the course of criminal conduct related to fraud, false personation, or identity 
theft, shall be guilty of a criminal offence.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette within 
six months from the date of commencement of this Act, establish a Deepfake Task 
Force for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Task Force shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members, as may 
be prescribed. 
Definitions.
2
5
10
15
20
Recognition 
of creation 
and sharing of 
deepfake(s) 
as a criminal 
offence.
Establishment 
of Deepfake 
Task Force.
25
30
35
40
45
50

(3) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salaries, remuneration and other 
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
members, shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Task Force shall,—
(a) assist the Central Government to combat the national security implications of 
deepfakes;
(b) evaluate the prevalence of deepfake(s) affecting the citizens, businesses in India 
and the functioning of the Central and State Government;
(c) conduct appropriate research and develop technologies to detect, or otherwise 
counter and combat, deepfakes and other advanced image manipulation methods and 
distinguish such deepfakes or related forgeries from legitimate audiovisual recordings 
or visual depictions of actual events;
(d) provide support, both administrative and scientific, to other Federal entities 
researching such technologies;
(e) evaluate the risks, encompassing privacy concerns, linked to the utilization of 
digital content forgery and deepfake(s) within India;
(f) evaluate the influence of digital content forgery and deepfake(s) on civic 
participation, including the electorate;
(g) determine and recommend the extent of penalties to be imposed on offences 
under the Act on a case-to-case basis;
(h) evaluate the feasibility of incorporation of blockchain technology to monitor 
and verify the authenticity of digital content circulated in public domain to ensure a 
secure and tamper-proof validation process; and
(i) facilitate discussion and appropriate cooperation between the Central and 
State Government and relevant private sector technology enterprises or other non-
governmental entities, including academic and research institutions, regarding the 
identification of deepfakes or other advanced image manipulation methods.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Fund to be known as the  Fund or “Combating Deepfakes or Other 
Advanced Image Manipulation Methods” to which the Central Government and State 
Governments concerned shall contribute every year in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(2) The Fund shall be utilized to fund private sector companies for the purposes of 
combating deepfakes or other advanced image manipulation methods. 
7. (1) No later than one year after the enactment of this Act, the Central Government, 
in coordination with the State government, shall start a public education campaign to raise 
awareness about synthetic content and synthetically-modified content, including deepfakes. 
(2) This campaign under sub-section (1) shall include,—
(a) detection and identification— Informing the public about technologies available 
for identifying synthetic content and the use of digital watermarks; and
(b) content provenance— Educating about the importance of content provenance 
and the role of digital watermarking in verifying the authenticity of digital content.
8. Any person or entity who, using any means or facility of interstate or foreign 
commerce, generates a technologically advanced deceptive impersonation record of audio, 
visual or audio-visual nature, with the intention of disseminating it over the internet or 
knowledge that such record shall be so distributed, shall ensure that—
(a) such record adheres to the requirement of digital watermark; or
(b) prior consent from the rights holder for hosting, or sharing of such record is 
obtained.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments, from time to time, 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Functions of the 
Task Force.
Establishment 
of Combating 
Deepfakes 
or other 
advanced image 
manipulation 
methods Fund.
Public 
Education 
Campaign on 
Deepfake.
Disclosure.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

10. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force.
11. (1) The appropriate Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
.
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
Power to make 
rules.
4
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With advancements in artificial intelligence and deep learning, deepfake technology 
has emerged as a significant tool for media manipulation. While the technology has potential 
applications in education, entertainment, and creative fields, it also poses severe risks when 
misused—threatening individual privacy, national security, and public trust. Misuse of 
deepfakes for harassment, deception, and misinformation has escalated, creating urgent 
need for regulatory safeguards. The proposed Bill seeks to establish a clear legal framework 
to govern the creation, distribution and application of deepfakes in India.
The Bill aims to protect citizens by mandating prior consent from individuals depicted 
in deepfake content and requiring the use of digital watermarks for traceability and 
authenticity. It establishes the Deepfake Task Force, a dedicated body to combat national 
security implications and evaluate the influence of deepfakes on privacy, civic participation, 
and potential election interference. The Task Force will collaborate with the private sector 
and academic institutions to develop technologies that detect and verify manipulated content, 
promoting trustworthiness in digital media.
Furthermore, the Bill proposes the establishment of a fund to support public and private 
sector initiatives in the detection and deterrence of advanced image manipulation. In ensuring 
the use of blockchain and other verification technologies, this fund will enhance, secure and 
tamper-proof validation processes for digital content circulated in the public domain.
In line with its commitment to data protection, transparency, and accountability, 
the bill also provides penalties for offenders creating or disseminating deepfake content 
with malicious intent, ensuring legal deterrence against misuse. This bill seeks to balance 
innovation with responsible use, aiming to safeguard individuals and democratic processes 
in an increasingly digital world.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                             SHRIKANT EKNA TH SHINDE  
November 13, 2024
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of Deepfake Task Force by the Central 
Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Clause 6 provides for the Central 
Government to establish Fund to be known as the Fund for Combating Deepfakes and Other 
Advanced Image Manipulation Methods. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupess 
one hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India .
A non recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to regulate the creation and use of deepfake technology, ensuring legal boundaries for its 
application and for matters connected therewith.
_______ 
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P .) 