5

5

. AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA.

Bill No. 193 of 2000.
—<———

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES,
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS AND FULL PARTICIPATION)
[AMENDMENT] BILL, 2000
By
Sui Priva RANJAN DASMUNSI, M.P.
A
BILL

10 amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Amendment Act, 2000,

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2, After section 68 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection
of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995, hereinafter, referred to as the Principal Act the

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.

Insertion of
new section
684.


Setting up of
permanent
residential
centres/homes
for children
with severe
disabilities.

Amendment of
section 73.

2

following section shall be inserted, namely:-—

“68A. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up permanent residential
centres/tomes to ensure proper care and protection of children with disabilities
and save them from exploitation by unscrupulous persons by forcing the children
for begging against their will after the demise of their parents or guardians.

(2) The parents or relative of a child born with severe disability shall make an
application to the authority set up by the appropriate Government for admission in the
permanent residential centres/homes for children with severe disabilities.

(0) On receipt of the application, the authority, appointed by the appropriate
Government shall examine the child by a panel of experts consisting of doctors,
representatives or Organisations of disabled persons and District. Administration
who shall give report on the status of disability of the child and give a specific
recommendation that the child need to be looked after permanently by the State by
way of admission in the permanent residential centres/homes for children with severe
disabilities.

(4) There shall be constituted a Fund for the welfare of children admitted in the
permanent residential centres/homes and the Fund shall be credited with all moneys
received from Central Government, moneys received by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions or bequests and moneys received from any other sources,

(5) The Fund shall be utilised for the administrative and other expenses relating to
the welfare and care of the disabled children,

(6) The work of the permanent residential centres/homes shall be reviewed by
an authority set up by the appropriate Government.'',

(7) the authority shall redress all complaints and deficiencies, if any, observed in
the permanent residential centres by taking proper corrective measures,

3. In section 73 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (zh), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

"(zh) the procedure for admission and utilisation of fund under section 68A;

(i) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.".

10

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Although much is stated to have been achieved for addressing problems of disabled
children with the passage of legislations 1995 and 1999, more still remains to be
accomplished. We still have miles to tread to achieve the desired objective,

‘There is no mention in the Acts as to care of the destitute children, particularly the
severely handicapped children, after the passing away of their parents or guardians.
Whenever a disabled child is born in a family, the lives of the parents get disrupted while
attending to the child because disability is not confined to one person but affects the entire
family. Therefore, the Society which includes the Government should accept that disabled
children need different life-style. They should not be allowed to live in isolation. The
Government should set up family support system where parents could pass on their disabled
children and be relieved of mental tension of bringing up the disabled child after their
death. To achieve this objective, the Central Government and each of the State Governments
should/Set‘up permanent residential centres/homes to look after the severely disabled
children 3nd thereby protect them from being exploited by unscrupulous persons by forcing
them to begging against their will.

Hence this Bill.

New Deva; PRIYA RANJAN DASMUNSI
November 11, 2000



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of permanent residential centres/homes
for persons with severe disabilities. It further provides for appointment of the authority to
examine children for admission in the permanent residential centres for children with
severe disabilities, There is also a provision for constitution of a Fund for the welfare of
persons admitted in the permanent residential centres/homes. It also provides that working
of the centres/homes shall be reviewed by the authority to be set up by the appropriate
Government. The Central Goverment shall have to incur some expenditure for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As far as the implementation of the provisions of the Bill in
the States is concerned, the expenditure shall be borne by the Consolidated Fund of the
respective States. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
two hundred crore.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of about rupees one hundred crore also is
likely to be involved.



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE PERSONS WrrH DisaBiLttes (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES, PROTECTION OF
Ricuts AND Fut Particiration) Act, 1995

(1 oF 1996)
CHAPTER XIII
SOCIAL SECURITY

* * * * * * *

68. The appropriate Governments shall within the limits of their economic capacity
and development shall by notification frame a scheme for payment of an unemployment
allowance to persons with disabilities registered with the Special Employment Exchange
for more than two years and who could not be placed in any gainful occupation.

* * * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995.

(Shri Priya Ranjan Dasmunsi, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—S043LS—30.1 1.2000.