1
THE INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
(REGULARISATION) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHW AL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation and universalisation of Integrated Child Development
Services in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called the Integrated Child Development Services
(Regularisation) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 193  of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "anganwadi centre" means a centre which shall be used for providing
integrated child development services by the appropriate Government and includes
all the existing centres being used for providing integrated child development services
in the country;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. On and from such date as the Central Government may,  by notification in the
Official Gazette appoint, the existing Integrated Child Development Services for overall
development of children shall be deemed to be regularised and institutionalized under this
Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of anganwadi
centres in every settlement or village throughout the country.
(2) The appropriate Government shall make available land, building infrastructure
and all basic facilities including nutritious meal, educational games, toys, stationery items,
learning and writing material, television sets, computers and such material as required for
the overall development of children and facility of pre-natal and post-natal care to infants
and mothers at every anganwadi centre.
(3) The appropriate Government shall regulate the functioning of anganwadi centres,
in such manner and through such bodies of local self government, as may be prescribed.
5. The 'anganwadi workers' and 'helpers' working in the existing anganwadi centres
shall hereinafter be known as 'anganwadi teachers' and 'anganwadi assistants', respectively.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to be known as the
National Committee for the welfare of persons working in anganwadi centres in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The National Committee shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i)  suggest measures to streamline the functioning of existing anganwadi centres;
(ii) identify areas where cases of malnutrition of children are reported and
recommend opening up of anganwadi centres in such areas;
(iii) monitor the functioning of anganwadi centres;
(iv) conduct foundation training course for anganwadi teachers and assistants;
(v) fix working hours for anganwadi teachers and assistants;
(vi) prescribe the educational qualification and other criteria for recruiting the
persons as anganwadi teachers and assistants;
(vii) recommend salary, allowances, over-time, honorarium, leave, provident
fund and other benefits, including maternity benefits, for employees of anganwadi
centres from time to time;
(viii) provide free health care to anganwadi teachers and assistants and their
minor children;
(ix) provide insurance cover to anganwadi teachers and assistants; and
(x) suggest other measures for overall development of children and efficient
functioning of anganwadi centres.
Regularisation
and
institutionalisa-
tion  of
Integrated
Child
Development
Services.
Definitions.
Establishment
of adequate
number of
anganwadi
centres.
Redesignation
of anganwadi
workers and
helpers.
Setting up of
National
Committee.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40

3
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, release the necessary funds to the National Committee for effective
implementation of the Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order publish in the Official Gazette, make such provision, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing
such difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Release of
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The rights of women and children and their aspirations are of paramount importance in
our march towards an inclusive and equitable society. Keeping in view the constitutional
provisions and in order to give greater focus to issues relating to women and children, it is
necessary to invest more in the programmes meant for eradication of malnutrition and
expansion of anganwadis. It is a fact that the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
has grown by leaps and bounds with a wide range of activities being brought within its ambit
and consequent expansion of the area of work of anganwadi workers and helpers and increase
in their working hours. There is no justification for their being treated as social and honorary
workers with the paltry amount doled out to them as honorarium, especially when they have
put in long years of service and the success of the scheme, which has been lauded by
various agencies, is due to the hard work of the anganwadi workers and helpers. These
anganwadi workers are working in close relationship with the people and their services are
being utilized by the respective State Governments for a whole range of activities-be it
survey, promotion of small saving schemes, group insurance or non-formal education. Despite
this, their demand for seeking regularisation and institutionalisation of services is being
brushed aside. Therefore, in recognition of their services, they need a better lot and
improvement in their service conditions and remunerations. There is also need of an effective
system of supervision of anganwadi centres.
In view of the above, the Bill seeks to provide for universalisation, regularisation and
institutionalisation of Integrated Child Development Services for all-round development of
children and expansion of anganwadi centres for effective implementation of the scheme.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
July 7, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularisation and institutionalisation of the Integrated
Child Development Services by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides for setting up of
adequate number of anganwadi centres with basic facilities in every settlement. Clause 6
provides for setting up of a National Committee for the welfare of persons working in
anganwadi centres. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall release necessary
funds to the National Committee for effective implementation of this Bill. The State
Governments will incur expenditure in respect of their States out of their respective
Consolidated Funds for implementing the provisions of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a
recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation and universalisation of Integrated Child Development
Services in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1451LS(S3)—17-07-2015.