1
THE NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2017
By
ADV. JOICE GEORGE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Green Tribunal (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In Section 5 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words, " or has been, a Judge of the Supreme
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 194 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
section 5.
19 of 2010.
5

2
Court of India or Chief Justice of a High Court", the words "qualified to be appointed
as a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court" shall be substituted; and
(b) in the proviso to sub-section (1), for the words " or has been a Judge of the
High Court", the words" qualified to be appointed as a Judge of the High Court" shall
be substituted.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words "five years", the words "three years" shall be substituted;
and
(b) for the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that the Chairperson or, Judicial Member or Expert Member of the
Tribunal shall not hold office after he has attained the age of sixty five years.".
4. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2) for the words "Judge of the Supreme Court", the words
"Committee consisting of a Judge of the Supreme Court, two independent Members
nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India
and the Leader of the Opposition or the leader of the largest opposition party in the
House of the People, "shall be substituted; and
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "Judge of the Supreme Court" occurring at
both the places, the word "Committee" shall be substituted.
5. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:-
"22. Any person aggrieved by any award, decision or order of the Tribunal,
may, file an appeal to the High Court having local jurisdiction, within ninety days from
the date of communication of the award, decision or order of Tribunal to him:
Provided that the High Court may entertain any appeal after the expiry of ninety
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from
preferring the appeal.".
Substitution of
new section
for section 22.
Amendment to
section 7.
Amendment to
section 10.
Appeal.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 has been enacted with the objectives of providing
effective access to judicial and administrative proceedings including, redress and remedy,
and to develop national laws regarding liability and compensation for the victims of pollution
and other environmental damages. The Act has been brought on the basis of the
recommendation of the Law Commission of India for the setting up of environmental courts
having original and appeal jurisdiction relating to environmental law. But as per the provision
of the Act, the post of Chairperson and Judicial Members are only reserved for the retired
Judges of the Supreme Court and the Chief Justices of the High Courts. Now the National
Green Tribunal (NGT) has become a rehabilitation centre for the retired Judges of the Supreme
Court and High Courts which is affecting the efficacy of the NGT. Therefore, it is necessary
to amend the law to bring persons having competency and impeccable integrity with sound
knowledge in law as the Chairperson and Judicial Members of the NGT. Though the stated
objective is to provide effective access to judicial remedies, by section 22 of the Act, the
appeal remedy against the award, decision or order of the Tribunal is confined to the Supreme
Court. It is well known that the Supreme Court is not accessible to the people at large
especially the victims of environmental issues and the activities of certain groups having
vested interests trying to implement environmental colonialism in our land to the disadvantage
of the poor farmers, marginalized farm labours, tribals and other vulnerable group. Further
the civil courts are barred from entertaining any appeal or application in respect of any
matter, which the Tribunal is empowered to determine under its appeal jurisdiction and the
Tribunal having jurisdiction to settle disputes or entertain any question relating to any claim
for granting any relief or compensation, etc., respectively. Therefore, in effect the appeal
remedy is almost denied to the affected parties against the order of NGT.
The Bill, therefore seeks to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 with a view
to—
(a) restrict the appointment of retired Judges of Supreme Court or the Chief
Justice of a High Court as Chairperson and Judicial Member, respectively of the
National Green Tribunal;
(b) limit the age of retirement of Chairperson and other Judicial Member of the
National Green Tribunal to sixty-five years; and
(c) provide the right to appeal against the award, decision or order of the
National Green Tribunal to the High Court having local Jurisdiction.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JOICE  GEORGE
August 4, 2017.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE  NATIONAL  GREEN  TRIBUNAL  ACT , 2010
(19 OF 2010)
* * * * *
5. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or Judicial
Member of the Tribunal unless he is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court of India or
Chief Justice of a High Court;
Provided that a person who is or has been a Judge of the High Court shall also be
qualified to be appointed as a Judicial Member.
* * * * *
7. The Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member of the Tribunal shall hold
office as such for a term of five years from the date on which they enter upon their office, but
shall not be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that in case a person, who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, has
been appointed as Chairperson or Judicial Member of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office
after he has attained the age of seventy years:
Provided further that in case a person, who is or has been the Chief Justice of a High
Court, has been appointed as Chairperson or Judicial Member of the Tribunal, he shall not
hold office after he has attained the age of sixty-seven years:
Provided also that in case a person, who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, has
been appointed as Judicial Member of the Tribunal, he shall not hold office after he has
attained the age of sixty-seven years:
Provided also that no Expert Member shall hold office after he has attained the age of
sixty-five years.
10. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Member shall not be removed from his office except by
an order made by the Central Government after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme
Court in which such Chairperson or Judicial Member has been informed of the charges
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
(3) The Cenntral Government may suspend from office the Chairperson or Judicial
Member in respect of whom a reference of conducting an inquiry has been made to the Judge
of the Supreme Court under sub-section (2) until the Central Government passes an order on
receipt of the report of inquiry made by the Judge of the Supreme Court on such reference.
* * * * *
22. Any person aggrieved by any award, decision or oder of the Tribunal, may, file an
appeal to the Supreme Court, within ninety days from the date of communication of the
award, decision or order of the Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the grounds specified
in section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908):
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain any appeal after the expiry of ninety
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the
appeal.
* * * * *
Qualifications
for appoint-
ment of
Chairperson,
Judicial Member
and Expert
Member.
Term of office
and other
conditions of
service of
Chairperson,
Judicial Member
and Expert
Member.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson,
Judicial member
and Expert
Member.
Appeal to
Supreme Court.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.
————
(Adv. Joice George, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2423LS(S3)—03-11-2017.