1
THE BAN ON PLASTIC ITEMS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for ban on manufacture and use of plastic items and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Plastic Items Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 194 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "plastic" means material which contains as an essential ingredient a high
polymer such as polyethylene terephthalate, high density polyethylene, Vinyl, low
density polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene resins or multi-materials like
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, polyphenylene oxide, polycarbonate, Polybutylene
terephthalate;
(b) "plastic item" means any item or product which is made of plastic and used
for storing food, liquid or any consumable or such other product as the Central
Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, specify; and
(c) "prescribe" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall use, manufacture, sell or trade in any plastic item.
4. Whoever violates the provision of this Act shall be punished with a fine which shall
not be less than rupees one lakh.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Prohibition on
Plastic items.
Penalty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Use of plastic items is harmful not only to the environment but also to the mankind as
a whole. Plastic items are being used in large quantities. This is affecting the global
environemnt which results in depletion of our natural resources, and destruction of the
whole eco-system.
Hence, it is high time to ban the manufacture and use of plastic items.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG  APPA  BARNE
July 5, 2016.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for ban on manufacture and use of plastic items and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1486LS(S3)—25.07.2016.