1
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 5,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (f), for the words "has been residing in India for one year",
the words "is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months" shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (g), for the words "has been residing in India for one year",
the words "is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months" shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
 "(1A) The Central Government, if it is satisfied that special circumstances
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 5.
57 of 1955.
Bill No. 194 of  2014
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
exist, may after recording the circumstances in writing, relax the period of twelve
months specified in clauses (f) and (g) and clause (i) of Explanation 1 of sub-
section (1), up to a maximum of  thirty days which may be in different breaks.".
3.    In the principal Act, for sections 7A, 7B, 7C and section 7D, the following sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
"7A. (1) The Central Government may, subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed, on an application made in this behalf, register as Overseas
Citizen of India cardholder—
(a)  any person of full age and capacity,—
(i) who is a citizen of another country, but was a citizen of India at
the time of, or at any time after, the commencement of the Constitution;
or
(ii)  who is a citizen of another country, but was eligible to become
a citizen of India at the time of the commencement of the Constitution; or
(iii)  who is a citizen of another country, but belonged to a territory
that became part of India after the 15th day of August,1947; or
(iv)  who is a child or a grand-child or a great grand-child of such a
citizen; or
(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in clause (a); or
(c) a person, who is a minor child, and whose both parents are citizens of
India or one of the parents is a citizen of India; or
(d) such spouse of a citizen of India or spouse of  Overseas Citizen of
India cardholder registered under clause ( a) or spouse of a person of Indian
origin who is a citizen of another country and whose marriage has been registered
and subsisted for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately
preceding the presentation of the application under this section:
 Provided that for the eligibility for registration as Overseas Citizen of
India cardholder, such spouse shall be subjected to prior security clearance
from a competent authority in India:
Provided further that no person, who is or had been a citizen of Pakistan,
Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for registration as Overseas
Citizen of India cardholder.
 (2)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
the date from which the existing Persons of Indian Origin cardholders shall be deemed
to be Overseas Citizens of India cardholders.
Explanation.— For the purposes of sub-section ( 2), Persons of Indian Origin
cardholders mean the persons registered as such under notification number 26011/4/
98 F.I., dated the 19th August, 2002, issued by the Central Government in this regard.
7B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder shall be entitled to such rights, other
than the rights specified under sub-section ( 2), as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
(2)  An Overseas Citizen of India cardholder shall not be entitled   to the rights
conferred on a citizen of India—
(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of
opportunity in matters  of public employment;
Substitution
of sections
7A, 7B, 7C
and 7D.
Registration
of Overseas
Citizen of
India
cardholder.
Confirment
of rights on
Overseas
Citizen of
India
cardholder.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election of President;
(c)  under article 66 of the Constitution for election of Vice- President;
(d)  under article 124 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
Supreme Court;
(e)  under article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
High Court;
(f)  under section 16 of the Representation of the People Act,1950 in
regard to registration as a voter;
(g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the House of People or of the
Council of States, as the case may be;
(h) under sections 5, 5A and 6 of the Representation of People Act, 1951
with regard to eligibility for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or a
Legislative Council, as the case may be, of a State;
(i) for appointment to public services and posts in  connection with
affairs of the Union or of any State except for appointment in such services and
posts as the Central Government may, by special order in that behalf, specify.
 (3)  Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
7C.  ( 1) If any Overseas Citizen of India cardholder of full age and capacity
makes in the prescribed manner a declaration renouncing the card registering him as
an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder, the declaration shall be registered by the
Central Government, and upon such registration, that person shall cease to be an
Overseas Citizen of India cardholder.
 (2) Where a person ceases to be an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder under
sub-section (1), the spouse and every minor child of that person registered as an
Overseas Citizen of India cardholder shall thereupon cease to be an Overseas Citizen
of India cardholder.
7D.  The Central Government may, by order, cancel the registration granted
under sub-section  (1) of section 7A, if it is satisfied that—
(a) the registration as an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder was obtained
by means of fraud, false representation or the concealment of any material fact;
or
(b) the Overseas Citizen of India cardholder has shown disaffection
towards the Constitution of India, as by law established; or
(c)  the Overseas Citizen of India cardholder has, during any war in which
India may be engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy or
been engaged in, or associated with, any business or commercial activity that
was to his knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an enemy in that
war; or
(d) the Overseas Citizen of India cardholder has, within five years after
registration under sub-section ( 1) of section 7A has been sentenced to
imprisonment for a term of not less than two years; or
(e) it is necessary so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country,
or in the interests of the general public; or
43 of 1951.
Renunciation
of Overseas
Citizen of
India card.
Cancellation
of
registration
as Overseas
Citizen of
India card.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(f)  the marriage of an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder, who has
obtained such card under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 7A,—
(i) has been dissolved by a competent court of law or otherwise; or
(ii) has not been dissolved but, during the subsistence of such
marriage, he has solemnised marriage with any other person.".
4.  In the principal Act, in section 18, in sub-section (2), after clause (ee), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(eea) conditions and restrictions subject to which a person may be registered
as Overseas Citizen of India cardholder under sub-section ( 1) of section 7A;
(eeb) manner of declaractions for renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India
card under sub-section (1) of section 7C;”.
5.  In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in clause (c), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied that special circumstances
exist, it may, after recording the circumstances in writing, relax the period of twelve
months up to a maximum of thirty days  which may be in different breaks.".
Amendment
of Third
Schedule.
Amendment
of section 18.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Citizenship Act,1955 (the Citizenship Act) provides for the acquisition and
determination of Indian citizenship, after the commencement of the Constitution by birth,
descent, registration, naturalisation and citizenship by incorporation of territory and for
renunciation, termination and deprivation of citizenship under certain circumstances.
2. The Citizenship Act has been amended, from time to time, inter alia, making enabling
provisions for registration of Overseas Citizen of India cardholder, conferment of certain
rights on such citizens, renunciation of overseas citizenship and cancellation of registration
as Overseas Citizen of India cardholder.
3. The proposed amendments to the Citizenship Act are required due to certain lacunae
that were noticed during its implementation and review of provisions relating to overseas
citizens of India. The proposed amendments, inter alia, provide for —
(a) amendment of section 5 of the Citizenship Act, so as to,—
(i) substitute the words "has been residing in India for one year" with the
words" is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months" in clauses (f) and (g) of
sub-section ( 1);
(ii) insert new sub-section (1A) to enable the Central Government  to relax
the period of twelve months specified in clauses ( f) and ( g) and clause ( i) of
Explanation 1 of sub-section (1), up to a maximum of thirty days which may be
in different breaks;
(b) substitution of sections 7A, 7B, 7C and 7D of the Citizenship Act to provide
for—
(i)  registration of Overseas Citizen of India cardholder;
(ii) confirmation of rights on Overseas Citizen of India cardholder;
(iii) renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India card;
(iv) cancellation of registration as Overseas Citizen of India card;
(c) insertion of a proviso to clause (c) of the Third Schedule to the Citizenship
Act to empower the Central Government to relax the period of twelve months as
resident in India or in the service of a Government in India specified as one of the
qualification for grant of certificate of naturalisation by a period up to a maximum of
thirty days which may be in different breaks.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI;    HARIBHAI PARTHIBHAI CHAUDHARY .
The 19th December,  2014.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for—
(a) conditions and restrictions subject to which a person may be registered as
Overseas Citizen of India cardholder;
(b) manner of declaration for renunciation of the Overseas Citizen of India
card.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made for matters of procedure or
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
(57 OF 1955)
* * * * *
5. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other conditions and
restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on an application made in
this behalf, register as a  citizen of India any person not being an illegal migrant who is not
already such citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of any other provision of this Act if he
belongs to any of the following categories, namely:—
(a)* * * * *
(f) a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his parents, was earlier
citizen of independent India, and has been residing in India for one year immediately
before making an application for registration;
(g) a person of full age and capacity who has been registered as an overseas
citizen of India for five years, and who has been residing in India for one year before
making an application for registration.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of clauses (a) and (c), an applicant shall be
deemed to be ordinarily resident in India if—
(i) he has resident in India throughout the period of twelve months
immediately before making an application for registration; and
(ii) he has resided in India during the eight years immediately preceding
the said period of twelve months for a period of not less than six years.
* * * * *
OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIPS
7A. The Central Government may, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may
be prescribed, on an application made in this behalf, register as an overseas citizens of
India—
(a) any person of full age and capacity,—
(i) who is citizen of another country, but was a citizen of India as the time
of, or at any time after, the commencement of the Constitution; or
(ii) who is citizen of another country, but was eligible to become a citizen
of India at the time of the commencement of the Constitution; or
(iii) who is citizen of another country, but belonged to a territory that
became part of India after the 15th day of August, 1947; or
(iv) who is a child or a grand-child of such a citizen; or
(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in clause (a):
Provided that no person, who is or had been citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh or such
other country as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify,
shall be eligible for registration as an overseas citizen of India.
7B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, an overseas citizen of India shall be entitled to such rights other than the rights
specified under sub-section ( 2) as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
Citizenship by
registration.
Registration
of overseas
citizens of
India.
Conference
of rights on
overseas
citizens of
India.
7

8
(2) An overseas citizen of India shall not be entitled to the rights conferred on
a citizen of India—
(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of
opportunity in matters of public employment;
(b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election as President;
(c) under article 66 of the Constitution for election of Vice-President;
(d) under article 124 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
Supreme Court;
(e) under article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
High Court;
(f) under section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 with
regard to registration as a voter;
(g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the House of the People or of
the Council of States, as the case may be;
(h) under sections 5, 5A and 6 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the Legislative
Assembly or a Legislative Council, as the case may be, of a State;
(i) for appointment to public services and posts in connection with the
affairs of the Union or of any State except for appointment in such services and
posts as the Central Government may, by special order in that behalf, specify.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
7C. (1) If any overseas citizen of India of full age and capacity makes in the prescribed
manner a declaration renouncing his overseas citizenship of India, the declaration shall be
registered by the Central Government, and; upon such registration, that person shall cease
to be an overseas citizen of India.
(2) Where a person ceases to be an overseas citizen of India under sub-
section (1), every minor child of that person registered as an overseas citizen of India,
shall thereupon cease to be an overseas citizen of India.
7D. The Central Government may, by order, cancel the registration granted
under sub-section (1) of section 7A if it is satisfied that—
(a) the registration as an overseas citizen of India was obtained by means
of fraud, false representation or the concealment of any material fact; or
(b) the overseas citizen of India has shown disaffection towards the
Constitution of India as by law established; or
(c) the overseas citizen of India has, during any war in which India may be
engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy or been engaged
in, or associated with, any business or commercial activity that was to his
knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an enemy in that war; or
(d) the overseas citizen of India has, within five years after registration
under sub-section (1) of section 7A has been sentenced to imprisonment for a
term of not less than two years; or
(e) it is necessary so to do in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country,
or in the interests of the general public.
* * * * *
Renunciation
of overseas
citizenship.
Cancellation
of
registration
as overseas
citizen of
India.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
43 of 1951.

9
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 6 (1)]
QUALIFICATIONS FOR NATURALISATION
* * * * *
The qualifications for naturalisation of a person are—
* * * * *
(c) that he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in
India or partly the one and partly the other, through out the period of twelve months
immediately preceding the date of the application;
* * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
————
(Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary, Minister of State for Home Affairs)
GMGIPMRND—3834LS—19.12.2014.