1
THE RIGHT TO PLAY SPORTS BILL, 2019
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
 to confer right to play sports on every child as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Play Sports Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 194 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) "child" means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(b) "local authority" means the body which is vested with general executive
powers under any law for the time being in force; or any authority at district level or
local level including Municipal Corporation, a Municipal Council, an improvement
Board, a Sanitary Board or a Notified Area Committee or a Town Board or a Resident
Welfare Association constituted under any law for the time being in force and such
other authority as may be specified by the Central Government;
(c) "play" means any freely chosen recreational activity with or without predefined
rules; and
(d) "school" means any public or private school under the jurisdiction of local
authority.
3. Every child shall have the right to—
(a) participate in sports at a level commensurate with his ability;
(b) play freely in local areas, parks, green spaces, sport clubs, community centers
and Government owned spaces;
(c) get coaching by individuals who are well trained in sport-specific safety and
monitored by athletic health care team members; and
(d) participate in sporting activities in safe and healthy environment, both indoor
and outdoor.
4. The Central Government shall—
(a) ensure that the institutions, services and facilities necessary for the care
and protection of children conforms with the standards established by the competent
authority in the area of playing sports activities and other recreational activities;
(b) promote and develop sports at the regional level as part of the decentralization
process;
(c) provide adequate financial, material and administrative support to regional
sports organizations; and
(d) encourage the development of indigenous and traditional sports such as
wrestling country-wide.
5. It shall be the responsibility of every school to,—
(a) make sports as an intrinsic part of the fundamental Right to Education;
(b) undertake 'Play-led' Learning Approach to deliver early years learning in
schools from a play perspective;
(c) ensure children are provided with an interesting playing environment for
breaks during the school day;
(d) provide playing opportunities for specified duration during school hours,
weekends and holiday periods with open access to school grounds and use of premises
for activities;
(e) provide morning, lunch time and afternoon play breaks;
(f) include sports compulsory in educational curriculum from elementary to higher
education;
(g) provide for well trained physical education and sports teachers; and
(h) provide adequate sporting facilities including sports equipment.
Right of child
to play sports.
Central
Government
to ensure
right of child
to play
sports.
Right to play
in schools.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. (1) The local authority shall assess the sufficiency of playing opportunities under
its jurisdiction for children in accordance with provisions of this Act.
(2) In performing its duties under sub-section (1), the local authority shall—
(a) consider the needs of children who are disabled persons (within the meaning
of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016);
(b) consider needs of children of different ages;
(c) take steps to provide opportunities to children to play within its jurisdiction;
(d) provide safe environment to play; and
(e) consult the children, their parents and the local community for ensuring
sports activities.
7. (1) The local authority shall develop an action plan and a sports agenda enumerating
associated costs, targets, priorities and milestones to achieve play sufficiency under its
jurisdiction.
(2) While formulating an action plan under sub-section ( 1), the local authority shall
taken into account:—
(a) national environment and geography of the area;
(b) built environment and characteristics of the communities;
(c) demography of the area;
(d) existing play opportunities and provision; and
(e) existing organizational structures.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall make rules and regulations for the purpose of providing equitable
access to children to open space, both on public or private land, to play and practice
recreational activities free of charge.
(2)The open play fields and playgrounds inside the premises of private sports clubs
and sports complexes shall be made accessible free of charge for two hours every day.
(3) No child shall be evicted from an open space where he is indulging in playful
activity.
9. If any private entity fails to abide by the provisions of section 8, such entity shall be
liable to a fine which may extend upto rupees twenty-five thousand.
10. The Central Government shall ensure that a National Play Day is celebrated to
create public awareness about the benefits of playing sports.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Responsibilities
of local
authority.
Action Plan.
Accessibility
to open
space.
Penalty.
National
Play Day.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
49 of 2016.

4
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree
that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 24 of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights confer the right to rest
and leisure and article 31 of the Convention on Rights of Child recognizes the right of the
child to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities. Right to play sports is
an inseparable and intrinsic part of the fundamental right to education.
The need is to realize the provision of quality spaces and time for play to children and
young adults for their physical, social and mental development. The need is also to make the
Government responsible to make available a conducive environment where children can
grow up in conditions where they can exercise their right to play.
With the rise of urbanization, mechanization and dwindling of public spaces, accessibility
to public outer spaces has been made a priority through which children from different social
backgrounds have open, free and equitable access to the playground. To bring inclusivity of
all children, no child shall remain excluded because of issues such as different levels of
ability, language, caste or gender. Playing sports may reduce inequalities among children
living in families with different background.
One should be able to indulge in play. It is also required to make physical education
and sports accessible and guaranteed within the educational system and in holistically
making play part of the social life. Sports may not necessarily be an end in itself but a means
by which other end such as gender equality, racial equality, health promotion, education
development and social cohesion can be achieved and may eventually help in realization of
human rights and development goals. Right to Play Sports will elevate the status of physical
education, games and sports to a dignified height.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
June 27, 2019.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to ensure availability of
adequate financial, material and administrative support for ensuring right of every child to
play sports. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non- recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

MGIPMRND—2679LS—22.10.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to confer right to play sports on every child as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)