     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
       
Bill No. 194 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, MP
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
   (2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

       2.  In article 348 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1), for sub-clause (a), the following sub-clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
      “(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court
shall be in English or Hindi language;”
(ii) in clause (2), the words “the Hindi language, or”  shall be omitted.
5
2
Amendment
of article 348.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the Indian legal system, many provisions have been made under the
Constitution of India, so that everyone can get justice equitably. After independence
our constitutional experts had made the Constitution bilingual which was written
both in Hindi and English languages.
According to the 2011 census, Hindi is the mother tongue of 43.63 per cent.
people of India, which is 52 crore and 83 lakh approximately  in number and 57.05 per
cent. people have knowledge of Hindi language. In the 50th report of the Commissioner
for Linguistic Minorities in India, 11 States and Union Territories (Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and Union territories of Chandigarh and Delhi) have been identified as
having majority of Hindi speaking people. The official language of these States is
Hindi. Provisions have also been made in both the Houses of Parliament so that
honourable Members may express their views in the languages specified in the Eighth
Schedule to the Constitution.
However, all the verdicts of our Supreme Court are in English language only. The
justice that a common citizen expects from the court is not understand by almost half
of the population due to verdicts being in the English language only.
Hindi in Devanagari script has been recognised as official language of the Union
under article 343(1) of the Constitution. But in the judicial process, the official language
Hindi is used only in the district courts of some States and to some extent in the High
Court of some States, namely, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar.
There is no provision in the Constitution regarding use of official language Hindi in
the Supreme Court which proves to be a kind of linguistic barrier in the journey from
the District Courts to the Supreme Court.
Under section 363 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a copy of the judgment
is provided to the accused free of cost but the majority of the population of India is
unable to understand the judgment as it is given in English language only. According
to the official data, only about 10 per cent. of the people have knowledge of English
language.
Under some special provisions mentioned in the Indian legal system, a person
can arrange his or her case without a lawyer. However, due to the fact that the language
of the High Courts and the Supreme Court as per article 348(1) is English only, people
have to face linguistic barriers during their legal journey from district Courts to High
Courts and the Supreme Court.
According to the recommendations made in V olume 5, 6 and 7 of the Report of the
Parliamentary Committee on Official Languages,—
(1) The Office of the Registrar General of the Supreme Court is also an office of
the Central Government under rule 2(a) of the Official Languages Rules, 1976. Therefore,
the Office of the Registrar General of the Supreme Court should also comply  with the
rules made under the Official Languages Act, 1963.
(2) The use of Hindi alongwith English should be authorized in the Supreme
Court as there is the practice of publishing judgments in English and French languages
in the International Court of Justice.
(3)  Article 348 of the Constitution should be amended so that the legislative
department can do the drafting work in Hindi.
The use of Hindi language in the Supreme Court is a step like giving proper
justice to all, which is in line with the basic spirit of the Government’s philosophy of
governance—“Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas.”.
3

Adoption of Hindi as a second optional language in the High Courts and the
Supreme Court shall be a meaningful step towards making the judicial process easier
for the general public.
Through this amendment, there will be an option to work in Hindi along with
English in the High Courts and the Supreme Court so that the resolution of giving
equal and fair justice to all, as enshrined in the Preamble to the Constitution, which
the Parliament of India, the Government and the Judiciary are trying to realize, may be
fulfilled.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                                                           JAGDAMBIKA PAL
   9 March, 2022.
4

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA]
 * * * * *
CHAPTER III
LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS, ETC.
348. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part,
until Parliament by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every  High Court,
(b) the authoritative texts—
                             (i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved
in either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the
Legislature of a State,
      (ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and
of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a
State, and
                            (iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of
a State.
shall be in the English language.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the Governor
of a State may, with the previous consent of the President, authorise the use of the
Hindi language, or any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in
proceedings in the High Court having its principal seat in that State:
                Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgment, decree or
order passed or made by such High Court.
* * * * *
Language to be
used in the
Supreme Court
and in the High
Courts and for
Acts, Bills, etc.
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend  the  Constitution  of  India.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)