1
THE GENDER SENSITIZATION (TRAINING AND EDUCATION)
BILL,  2018
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide compulsory gender sensitization education in curriculum of schools as a part
of personality development and for matter connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Gender Sensitization (Training and Education) Act,
2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "schools" means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a senior secondary
level school imparting education to children, recognized by the Government or
established under an Act of the Central Government or a State Government; and
Bill  No. 195 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up
training centers in each State and Union territory to impart gender sensitization lessons
and workshops in schools, in association with the School Management Committees in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4. Every training centre set up under section 3 shall create and ensure,—
(a) a custom developed program on gender sensitization involving
methodologies like storytelling and experiential learning as a compulsory part of the
study curriculum;
(b) teachers' training program with a minimum of two psyschologists and child-
counselors per school on relevant issues relating to gender sensitivity; and
(c) availability of resources required by teachers in order to provide for such
workshops and lessons in their respective schools.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
6.The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Compulsory
teaching of
Gender
Sensitization
lessons.
Functions of
Gender
Sensitization
centres.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Overriding
effct of the
Act.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
We have been working on enrolling girl child for education in schools for decades
now. In our constant efforts to ensure their social independence and welfare, another step
can be to provide a more Gender sensitive and Gender equitable environment in elementary
schools.
As part of personality building and skill development, since a child's first outdoor
experience is at his/her school, Gender sensitization lessons and workshops must be made
an essential part of the study-curriculum. Storytelling and Experiential learning are two
interesting ways to make young minds learn effectively and involving young adolescents
meaningfully to achieve desired result. If, in furtherance of the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act, 2012, a custom developed program about Gender sensitivity is created
in the simplest and most understandable mediums, Gender sensitive issues and related
identity complexities that children face in early years can be addressed more effectively.
If unbiased participation of teachers and guardians is ensured by local authorities, on
direction from the Central Government, this endeavour will take a reformative shape in the
India Education system, which the future of  our country long awaits.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
November 27, 2018.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of training centers in each State to equip
teachers to provide Gender Sensitization lessons to children and adolescents in schools.
Clause 5 provides for adequate funding by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of  rupees one hundred crores will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crores is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide compulsory gender sensitization education in curriculum of schools as a part of
personality development and for matter connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2315LS(S3)—14-12-2018.