1
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 195 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES (FOR CHILDREN OF
PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE) BILL, 2017
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special educational facilities to the children of parents living below
poverty line and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Educational Facilities (For Children of Parents
Living Below Poverty Line) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) “parents living below poverty line” means such parents whose income from
all sources is less than rupees twenty thousand per mensem.
Definitions.
5
10

2
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide to every child born of
parents living below poverty line, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) free education from school level to the post-graduate level including higher
medical and technical education;
(b) free hostel facilities, uniform, means and such other assistance and facilities
as are required for the proper education of children; and
(c) gainful employment to the child after he completes his education.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide scholarships upto a maximum of rupees
one thousand per mensem, in deserving cases, to the children of parents living below
poverty line while they are pursuing their education.
5. The appropriate Government shall reserve ten per cent of the total number of seats
in all medical and technical colleges and institutions of higher studies for children born of
parents living below poverty line.
6. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Facilities to
children born
of parents
living below
poverty line.
Scholarships.
Reservation of
seats in
medical and
technical
college for
children born
of parents
living below
poverty line.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the State
Government.
Power to
make Rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nearly forty-five per cent. of the total population of our country lives below the
poverty line. Their income is meager and they fight for their subsistence throughout their
lives. They live hand to mouth existence and cannot even think of providing elementary
education to their children. Since promotion of universal education and establishment of
classless and creedless society is one of the basic aims of our Constitution, the Government
at the national level as well at the State level should make provisions for free educational
facilities and provide books, uniform, writing materials, transportation and hostel facilities
free of cost to the children of persons living below poverty line, that is to say, whose total
family income is below twenty thousand rupees per month, so that they could get proper
education and better job opportunities to raise their standard of living. It will be a major step
in eradicating illiteracy from the country. It will also help such children to grow and compete
with children of higher class.
The cost of education and the cost of living has gone up and a ceiling of rupees twenty
thousand per month seems to be reasonable. Keeping this in view, a provision has been
made in the Bill to provide bright students belonging to very poor families a scholarship of
rupees one thousand per mensem.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT RAJ
July 17, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free education including medical and technical education,
etc. by the appropriate Government to children born of parents living below poverty line. It
also seeks to provide for facilities such as free hostel, uniform, means etc. to such children.
Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide scholarship upto a maximum
of rupees one thousand per mensem in deserving cases, to such children. Clause 6 provides
for providing of adequate funds to the State Governments for effective implementation of the
provisions of the Act. The Central Government has to bear the expenditure in respect of
Union territories in implementing the provisions of the Bill. The respective State Government
shall bear the expenditure in respect of their State. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
to the tune of rupees ten thousand crore is likely to be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to be
incurred.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special educational facilities to the children of parents living below
poverty line and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2424LS(S3)—03.11.2017.