 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 195 of 2022
THE VICTIMS OF ACCIDENT (EQUAL COMPENSATION)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, MP
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to victims of accidents by the Government and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation)
Act, 2022.
Short title,
extent and
commencement

   (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)   It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “accident” means an unexpected and undesirable incident resulting ininjury or death of a person during travel by road, railway or  air or due to naturaldisasters, or terrorist or extremists activities or stampede;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Governmentof that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(c) “compensation” means financial assistance provided by the CentralGovernment to the victim or his dependent;
(d) “dependent” means the parents, spouse, children or siblings of the victim;
(e) “Fund” means the Victims of Accident Compensation Fund constitutedunder section 4;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “qualified medical practitioner” means any person declared by theappropriate Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a qualified medicalpractitioner for the purposes of this Act; and
(h) “victim’’ means a person killed or injured in any accident.
3.(1) The Central Government shall after taking into consideration  the loss orinjury sustained, pay equal amount of compensation to every victim in such manneras may be prescribed.
(2) The amount of compensation shall be as follows:–
(i) where death results from the accident, the dependents of the victim shallbe paid rupees twenty lakhs;
(ii) where permanent disability results from the accident, the victim shallbe paid rupees ten lakh;
(iii) where temporary disability results from the accident, the victim shallbe paid rupees four lakh; and
(iv) where ordinary injury results from the accident, the victim shall bepaid rupees one lakh.
(3) The nature of injury suffered by a victim shall be examined and reported bya qualified medical practitioner, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The compensation amount shall be disbursed to the victim or to his dependentwithin one week from the date of receipt of report of the qualified medical practitionerunder sub-section (3).
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Victimsof Accident Compensation Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in such proportion asmay be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation or  contributionboth from domestic and international institutions shall also be credited to the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board to be known as the Victims ofAccident Compensation Board, consisting of:—
(i) the Prime Minister — ex-officio Chairperson;
(ii) the Chief Ministers of every State and Lieutenant Governor or ChiefAdministrators of Union territories – ex-officio; and
5
2
10
25
15
35
20
30
45
40
Definitions.
Equal
compensation
to victims
of accidents.
Constitution of
Victims of
Accident
Compensation
Fund.

(iii) ten retired judges of High Court to be appointed by the CentralGovernment in such manner as may be prescribed as members.
5. The Central Government may require a State Government to furnish suchstatistical and other information as may be necessary for implementation of theprovisions of this Act, in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Special Team to effectivelyimplement the provisions of this Act within their jurisdiction.
(2) The Special Team shall consist of ten members of which five shall beappointed by the Central Government and five by the State Government in suchmanner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Special Team shall—
(i) visit the accident site and collect information relating to the victims;
(ii) submit the accident related information to the Victims of AccidentCompensation Board;
(iii) ensure that the victims receive the compensation within the time limitprescribed under this Act; and
(iv) undertake any other work that may be assigned by the Board.
(v) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions ofservice of members of the special Team appointed under sub-section (2)shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliamentby law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments  for carryingout the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of anyother law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt within this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, makerules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)   Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it ismade, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period ofthirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successivesessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session orthe successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification inthe rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shallthereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case maybe; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudiceto the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
10
15
25
20
30
35
5
State Government
to furnish
statistical information.
Constitution of
a special team by
the appropriate
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution provides right to equality to every citizen as a Fundamental
Right. There is a provision for equality and non-discrimination before law under
articles 14 to 16 and for social equality under articles 17 and 18 of the Constitution.
The right to equality provided by the Constitution provides that all persons within
the territories of India should get equal protection under the law and should be
treated equally in similar situations. In case of accident financial assistance is
provided as compensation to affected persons. However in case of death of the
accident affected person the relatives of the deceased have to go to court for
justice which is unfortunate. Thousands of suits are filed in courts for similar
compensation in similar situations. In many cases, courts have also given decisions
to provide for equal amounts. Despite this, there is no clear policy of the
Government. Everything depends on the administrative decision. Now, the time has
come to formulate a law providing for payment of fixed amounts as compensation
to the next kin of deceased and to the injured in accidents.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                                                      SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
   7 March, 2022
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for equal compensation to accident affected
persons. Clause 4 provides for constitution of a Victims of Accident Compensation
Fund. Clause 6 provides for the appropriate Government to constitute Special Team
to implement the provisions of this Act. It also provides for appointment of five
members to each special Team by the Central Government. Clause 7 provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to carry out provisions of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees twenty five thousand
crore per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore  is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to victims of accidents by the Government and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)