1
Bill No. 195 of  2016
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJENDRA AGRAWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after clause (q), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
(r) "uniform education system" means education system having a common
syllabus and school curriculum for all stages of elementary education across the
country.'.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words "neighbourhood
school", the words, "with the value based uniform education system," shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment of
section 3.
5
35 of 2009.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Consequent upon the enactment of the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment)
Act, 2002, the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 was enacted to
provide for free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years.
The right of a child should not be restricted only to free and compulsory education.
Article 21A of Constitution read with articles 14 and 15 explains that there must be no
discrimination in quality education irrespective of economic, social and cultural background.
It is true that disparities and inequalities of various kinds like inequalities based on
caste, creed, region or religion or economic inequalities are prevalent in the society. Such
inequalities will be rooted out if the coming generation and children in their formative years
have uniform resources and opportunity to understand and learn about each aspect of this
country and events of the world at large.
Currently the National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 sets the guidelines and
directions for syllabus and textbooks for all stages of school education. Schools affiliated to
the Central Board of Secondary Education follow the National Council for Education Research
and Training syllabus and textbooks. However, States through their State Councils of
Education Research and Training (SCERTs) or State Board develop and adopt their own
textbooks.
To build a code of common culture, removal of disparity of all kind and discriminatory
values in human relations and assuring dignity of individuals is required. There is a need to
have the common curriculum and syllabus at all stages of school education for all schools
across the whole territory of India. It will not only enhance the virtues and improve the
quality of human life but also elevate the thought leading to the advancement of our
constitutional philosophy of equal society.
It will help to achieve social and economic equality goals along with promoting fraternity,
it would be a baby step towards the basic preparation of Uniform Civil Code.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJENDRA  AGRAWAL
July 07, 2016

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION ACT, 2009
(35 OF 2009)
* * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires,—
* * * * * *
(q) "State Commission for protection of Child Rights" means the State Commission for
protection of Child Rights constituted under section 3 of the Commission for Protection for
Child Rights Act, 2005.
* * * * * *
CHAPTER II
R
IGHT TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION
3. (1) Every Child of the age of six to fourteen years shall have a right to free and
compulsory education in a neighbourhood school till completion of elementary education.
* * * * * *
Definitions.
Right of child
to free and
compulsory
education.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education  Act, 2009.
————
(Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1427LS(S3)—26-07-2016.