10K SABHA. 
CO RRI GEN DA 
t'J 
, 
TH~ TUTE COMP A.NIES (N A.I.'IONALISATION) bILL, 1980 
)~To bel As introduced in Lok Sabha 7 
1. . Page 8, line' 6, -
fQl: "en sure " ~ "enure" 
2. Page 8, line 4o~-
m "cover" ~ "over" 
3. Page 10, line 11,-
after "relation to" insert "a" 
l!t-. Page 10, line 49,-
for. "Manufacture" n.a.d "Manufactures" 
5. Page,16, line 27',-
, 
fQ..t. "Rs.6.6 lakhs" .t.e.a,d "Rs.6.60 lakhs" 
AgrahaYaTla , 1902 (Saka) 

As DrraoDl1CBD IN Lo.It SA8BA Olf - ftft 
, OE C ,qnu 
Bill No. IN of 1JR 
~f'IW' liiiCI t&9 !OI 
THE JUTE COMPANIES (NATIONALISATIO~j~ 1180 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSQt: 
CLAUSES 
...: -0 
1. Short title. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTBR I 
PRELIMINARY 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUIsmON AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE 
JUTE COMPa\ND:S 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undt!r· 
takings of· the jute companies. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Jute companies to be !iabl£' for certain ppor liabill~ie~. 
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the und~JiI,II 
of the jute companies in Jute Manufactures Corporation . 
CHA.PTER.IU 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
S. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE JU'l'E COMPANI18 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the jute companies. 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings to 
deliver all assets, etc. 
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIoNs RELATING 1'0 EMPLOYEES OF THE JUTE COMPANIES 
12. Continuance of employees. 
13. Provident fund and other funds. 
CHAPrER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 

· .{ii) 
CuUSIB 
16. Certain powers of Central Government or Jute Manufacturel 
Corporation. 
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
18. Priority of claims. 
19. Examination of c1aima. 
20. Admission or rejection of claims. 
21. Disbursement of money by the CoIIllllissioner. 
22. Disbursement of amounts tc the jute companies. 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited with the 
general revenue account. 
CHAPI'ER VII 
MIscELLANEOUS 
24. Act to have overriding effect. 
25. Assumption of liability. 
26. Management to continue to vest in certain persons until alter-
native arrangements have been made. 
27. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central 
Government or Jute Manufactures Corporation. 
28. Penalties. 
28. 01fencea by companies. 
30. Protection of action taken in pd 1Aith. 
31. Delegation of powers. 
32. Power to make rule8. 
33. Power to remove difficultiel. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

a of 1.51. 
Bm No. 196 of 1980 
THE JUTE COMPANIES (NATIONALISATION) BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the tlcquisition and transfer oJ the undertaking, of tIN 
jute companies specified in the First Schedule with II t1ie1.D to 
securing the proper management of such undertakings 80 as -eo 
subserve the interests of the general public by ensuring the continued 
'manufacture, production and distribution of articles made of ;ute, 
which are 'essential to the needs of the economy of the country cmd 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS the said jute companies had been engaged in the manufac-
ture and production of articles mentioned in the First Schedule to the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, namely, textiles 
made wholly or in part of jute; 
S AND WHEREAS the management of the undertakings of each of the 
said jute companies was taken over by the Central Government under 
II of 1.11. the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the said 
jute companies to ensure that the interests of the general public are 
10 served by the continuance, by the undertakings of the said jute companies, 
of the manufacture, production and distribution of the aforesaid articles 
which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRl:LIMm'ARY 
1. 'nUs Act may be called the Jute Companies (Nationalflation) 
Ad, 1980. 
Short 
title. 

Tranater 
to,and 
'Vestin, 
in. the 
Central 
Govern-
mentol 
the 
under-
takinp 
01 the 
jute 
evm-
panies. 
General 
effect ot 
vestini. 
2 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(GI) "appointed day" mean& the date of co~encement of thil 
Act; 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
appointed under section 14:; S 
(c) "jute companieS" means the companies (being companfes 
as defined in the Companies Act, 1956) specified in the First 
Schedule; 
(d) "Jute Manufactures Corporation" means the National Jute 
Manufactures Corporation Limited, a company incorporated and 10 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956; 
(e) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(I> "prescribed" means pre~('ribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) "specified date". in relation to any provision of this Act, IS 
means such date as the Ce'ltral Crt>vernment may, by notification, 
specify for the purposes of thnt provisioll and different dates may be 
specified for different provisions af this Act; 
(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
lot 19K. 
lof 1958. 
'Mned-Jin~ the- CbmJ'lmles.'A.bt,~ts6, shall 'have' 'rfile 'tnbanbip respec- 20 lof INa. 
tively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPI'ER II 
3. On tile apoointed illY, the undertakings of every tote eOftlpany, 
. udl the right, title and intel'elt of every jute company in ~t8t1on to 2S 
. ,tts ~ shall. by virtue of tbis Ad, stand transtertU to, and 
vest in, the Centnl Government. 
•. '(.1) 'The 'unciertaltings· of each jute 'Company shall be deemac:l to 
t:_l'Ctde . all: aSaeta,· dgbts,lel8e boWs" powers, authorities and. pri\tile,.. 
'''d'' all: pr1Ip!er t" movable' aDd; iJlUllo¥Ule, inclu.dililg luds, buikHgga.. 30 
worlcsbcSps;' etores, 'in&tmmeMsI· fllClICbinery an,d, equipment, cash balaIlces, 
,'aah un.1Iand, reserve funds; mvealments, book debt& and all other rights 
and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were, immediately 
before the appointed day, in the ownership, possession, power or control 
of t1!.e jute company, whetlier'tlitl14.n"·or outside India, and all books ol 35 
accO'Wlt, registers and all otBel",lIiraImtnts of whatever nature relating 
......... ~;than.,·aMo· be1ieamedto, induGe the UabilW. ~ In 
sub-section (2) of section 5. 

I 
.(1) All properties as aforesaid which - have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3 shaU, by for.ce of auch vesting, be frad 
and diacharged from uy tmst, .obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and 
all other incumbrances -al'eoting them, and aay attachment, injuncti.oJ)., 
S decree or order of any court or other authority restricting the use -of 
,such-prQ~ies in. any manner .or appointing any receiver in 1"espect of 
the whole or any part of such properties .shall be deem.ed t.o have been 
Mthdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of any c>roperty which has vested under this 
[0 Act in -the:- t!ebtral Government and e.eryperton holding any eharge, 
lien or other interest in, or in relRtion to, any such property shall give, 
-W1tb1n such time and in stich- manner as may be prescribed, an inti-
'rftation to the Com:misSioner Of ~u'eh mortgage, charge; Hen or other 
-blterest. 
15 (4) For the removal of doubts, it is . hereby declared that the 
mortga~e of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any ether 
pers.on holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, 
any such property shall be entitled t.o claim, in accordance with his 
rights aooil:ltereats,payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in 
20. whole or .. m part, out of . .the ·.amounts directed to be given under 
·sectiGElS 7 .. aud 8 to t.b.e ,jute .company concerned but no -Iuch m.ortgage, 
~harffe, lien. or other interest uall be en!oreeable against ~y property 
~~~. whicb-has ",ested in .tile Cenual Gtwemment. 
~ (5)'IUlylicetree or other \in~trument gran1led to a jute '~ny in 
2!jftlat1on to its ,undertaIm1gs" which have vested in' the Central Govern-
ment umier 8e(!tion S at any 'timf" before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before that day shan continue to be in force on and after 
-weh dsy in accordance with its t~nor in relation to arid for the pur-
poses of such l1nd('''rakin~s. and. on :md from the date of vestinJ,'! bf such 
3!)'underfakin~s under section 6. in the Jute Manufactures Corporation. 
that Corporation ~hall be deemeii to be substituted in surh Hcence or 
dther instrument as if such licencp. or other instrument had been granted 
to such Corporation and such Co"poration shall hold it foI' the remainder 
of the period for which the jute company would have held it under the 
35 tel'Tns ·thereof. 
(6) If, on the appointed day. any suit. appeal or other proceedinl': 
of whatever nature, in relation to any matter ~ecified in rub-section (2) 
of section 5, in respect of the undertakin~s of aDv' .ime comDllnv wh'ich 
'., has vested in the Central Government under aection3. instituted or pre-
4~i ferred by or against that comparw. ii pending, the4!8me -shall not a1Date ·.be 
_. discontinued or be, in any way. p"eiudicially affected by reason of ~e 
tran5fer of the undertakings of such jute company or of an ... thinl! con.fJ3ined 
in this Act, but the suit, appeal flf other proceeding lllav be continued. 
prosecuted or enforced hy or agaim;t the CeQtral GOIVernment ~rwbere 
45 the undertakings of such jute i'omp:mv are directed under section 6. to 
vest in the Jute Manufactures Cot1Joration. bv or· again!'t that Corporation . 
. 5 ... (J) .E~ .liabilitv t other than the: liabilitv !llDed-fled' in 'SUlwreMion 
{2).' of, a' jute 08mJl11,t1v: .in. ~t ·of anv- f)e!"i0d TJribr 'to the nmomted 
cUw.c sbaU be.the.·liability.{)f that -eoIIWl8nv' nd -slhallbp. 'eftfntrr!eable 
5'" .~aiDst it,.&Qd not ~ttbe Centntl ~emment. or.w~ 'the ut'rder .. 
.tak:iJtgs'of. th@l jute eompey-vsst in 1lhe Jute'Manufactures Corporatton 
allaillRt that. Corpo.ration. 
Jute 
~­
pantes 
to be 
liable 
for 
certam 
prior 
Uab1l1_ 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
direct 
'Vesting 
of the 
under-
takings 
of the 
jute cam-
paniel 
in 
Jute 
Manufac-
tures 
Corpora· 
tioD. 
.. 
(2) Any liability arising in respect of loans advanced by the Central 
G6vernment or any State Government, or both, to a jute company 
(together with interest due thereon) after the management of the 
undertakings of the said jute company had been taken over by the 
Central Govt>rnment shall, on and from the appointed day, be the liabUity S 
of the Central Government and Ahall be discharged by that Govern-
ment, or by the Jute Manufactures Corporation 88 and when repay· 
ment of such loans becomes due and payable. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that-
(a.) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability, 10 
other than the liability specified in sub-section (2), of any jute 
company in relation to its undertakings in respect of any period 
prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government or where the undprtakings of such company are direct. 
ed under section 6, to vest in the Jute Manufactures Corporation, 15 
againc;t that Corporation; 
(Ib) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority in relation to the undertakings of any jute company, 
passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
disPute, which arose before t"at day, not being a matter, claim or 20 
dispute in relation to any liability sPe~ified in sub-section (2), shall 
be enforceable a~ainst the Cent"8l Government or where the 
undertakings of such company are directed under section 6, to vest 
in the Jute Manufactures Corporation, against that Corporation; 
(c) no 1ia~\i1itv incurred by any jute company before the ap- 25 
pointed day for the contravention of a provision of any law ,for the 
time being in force shall be enforceable a,:!'ainst the Central Gov-
ernment or wl-}ere the undertakinqs of such comnany aTf'> diTf"(!tf'd 
under section 6. to vest in the Jute Manufactures Corporation, against 
that Corporation. 30 
6, (1) Notwit'hstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4. the 
Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the appointed day. 
direk't, by notification, that the undertakin~ of every jute corrt)anv and 
t'he riqht, title ann interest of every jute company in relation to its 
undertakin~, which have vested 'in that Government under section 3, 35 
and such 01 the liabilities of every jute company as are speci-
fied in !'!ub-section (2) of section 5, shall, instead of continuing to vest 
tn the Central Government, vest in the Jute Manufactures Corporation 
either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or 
h·ter date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may 40 
be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where the ri~ht. title and interest, and the liabnttles referred to 
in sub-!'!ection (Z) of section 5, of the lute companies in relation to their 
re5l)E!Ctive llndertakinJls vest. under sub-section (I), in the Jute Mmu-
factures Corporation, that Corporation shall, on and from 'the date o~ 4S 
such vestinJl, be deemed to have become the' owner in relation to such 
undertakin~, and all the riQ'hts and liabilities of the Central Govern-
ment in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting be deemed to hav'" become the rights and liabilities. 
respectively, of the Jute Manufactures Corporatfon. So 

• CHAPTER TIl 
PAno:NT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Every jute company shall be given by the Central Government, 
for the transfer to and vesting in that Government under section 3 of 
5 ttie Undertakings of that company and the right, title and interest of 
that company in relation to its undertakings, in . cash and in the manner 
specified in Chapter VI, such amount as is specified against the name of 
that company in the First Schedule. 
R. (1) Every jute company shall be given by the Central Government, 
10 for the deprivation of the management of its undertakings, an amount 
of rupees ten thousand per annum for the period commencing on the 
date on which the management of the undertakings of that company 
was taken over in pursuance of the order made by the Central Govern-
ment under the provisions of the Industries (Development and Regula-
85 of 1951. IS tion) Act, 1951 and ending on the appointed day. 
(2) Every amount spedfied in the First Schedule or calculatefl in 
accordance with the provisions of SUb-section (1) shall carry simple 
interest ai the rate of four per cent. per annum ,for the period commen-
cing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which the payment 
20 of such amount is made by the Central Go"ernment to the CommiaBioner. 
25 
(3) The amounts determined in relation to any jute company in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the jute company in addition to tbe 
amaunt specified in the First Schedule aiaimlt that company. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE JUTE COMPANIES 
9. The general superintendence, direction, icontrol and management of 
the affairs and business of the undertakings owned by each of the jute 
companies, the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested 
30 in the Central Government under section 3, shall, where a direction has 
been made by the Central Government Wlder sub-selction (1) of section 
6, vest in the Jute Manufactures Corporation and thereupon the Jute 
Manufactures Corporation shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion 
of all other persoDS, all such powers and do all such things in relation 
35 to each suCh undertaking as the jute company which owned it was 
authorised to exercise and !kl immediately before the awointed day. 
10. (1) On the vesting of the management of th~ undertakings of the 
jute companies in the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures 
Corporation, as the case may be, the persons in charge of the manage-
<40 'ment of such undertakings immediately before such vesting shall be 
bound to deliver to the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures 
Corporation, as the case may be, all a5Sets, books of account, registel'8 
and all other documents in their custody relating to such undertaldnp. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may 
<4S deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Jute Manufactures 
Corporation and the said Corporation may also, if it is considered neces-
• ry so to do, apply to the Central Government at any time for fnstnlc-
Payment 
of 
amount, 
Payment 
of 
further 
amount. 
l4aDale-
ment, ... 
of the 
under-
takinp 
of the 
jute com-
panies. 
Duty of 
perlOns 
in char,. 
of 
manaae-
mentof 
the 
under-
takinp 
to deli-
verall 
use1ll, 
ete . 

Dut70f 
per .... to·, 
account 
for assets, 
etc.,ln 
their 
posses. 
aiQa.. 
Continu-
anceof 
eqIIo-
1ee1t: 
.. I 
tiona as to ,he manner in wbic4?~ zqanagement of the una~ 
of the jute companies shall be conducted or in relation to any other 
matter arising in the coune of' such management. 
11. (1). Any person who has, on the appointed 'day, in his ~P9SBe11Blon 
or under his contr,Ql any. assets, books, docume~ts .or , other ~ relat- S 
mg to any undertaking owned bf a jute company. which has vested in 
the. Central Government Or the Jute Manufact~ Corp~atio~ UJ1der 
this Act, shall be liable to acco~t for ~ Q,id ~t.Is ... boQR~ 
documents and o.her papers to the Central Government· or the Jute 
~J1fa('tW"e$ CorPQration and shall del.iver. ~UP. 19" t4. Ce*al 10 
Governmentar the J l&.te ~WaI::tuu& CQ.J;ppratwn ,o~, ~ ~ ~J1IOJl -01; 
pemms 8$ the Central Gov~4tor tae J.w:e MtQ.~. ~ 
ration may specify in tWa beAalf.. 
(Z')' The Central Government or the Jute Manuta.ctures Ct>rporatton 
may take or ca~ to be take~ all necessary ste~s for securing possession IS 
of tne undertakings of the Jute companIes vrhich have vested in the 
Central Government or the Jute Manufactu.res Corporation wWer this 
Att. 
(3) Every jute compaD)' shall within suoa period' as the Oe'Ilwel 
Govemment may aUow in this behMf, fUl'Dis., to. that Govenunent a 20 
complete inventory of all its pnperty. and· a_ta, .. on· tae a"poiflteci 
day, pertaining to its Wldertakings which have vested in the C@tral 
GQV'el"ftSI'lent under seet~ 3, and for this purpose, the Central Govern-
ment or tbe Jute Meufaetures Corporation shall a1f'ord to such 
compaay all reasonable faeiliti.s. 2S 
CHAPTER V 
12. (1) E'YeI-.1 penon who has been, immediately before the appoint-
ed day, employed in any Wlder~ 01 aQ-y 0« thQj\1te~pa.\¥es .ahall 
become,- 30 
(.~ on aDd· frent the appeifl'ed-day, an emp~ of the Central 
GwefMJleflt, aDd: 
(b), where the wWata,k,iD", of_ ~;j)1Ul ~p_ ~ ""~ 
ill the Jute Manufactures Cprpom~ 811 ~yee of tl:Ie, aU 
Corporation, on and from the date 01 such veatm& 35 
8Ild sull hold offtoe or service unAer the estral Govet'1'l!lJeft,t or the 
Jute Maaafaetures Corporation, as the cae may be, with the same 
rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and ~ther mat1ers as would 
hawe been ad.nra:iasible to him if· theft. had bees DO iAICh ves\iBg , .. d'1fhall 
CllDt1D.ue to do so unless and until hie, employment' Uftder tfta oen*nil 4(') 
GoY8l'mRl_t 01" tDe Jute MamafaetmesOorpeHtirlIIl; as the- 0IIIIe ma,be, 
ie daly ttll'tniDated or until· his. rem ..... tt.. and· obr cGftdNoDS of' 
..moe aJ9 duly altend by· the Central 'Oegemment- or the Jute M.IIDu--
fadulw ())rpQratiOll, as iiIe· caee may b&. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 4S 
Act, 1947, or in. any oUler law for the time.bf:iJ)&)Jt.1W:fIle; ~.~ 1.oflMf. 
of the servi~8S of any o1lM!er or oth~ Pt!J."SPD,emploYed~,~ 
at the jute companiasr to the Central.· ~eQ.t ~ tQo ~,.~ 
~ Corpor-atiQJ;l,. abaU, _ enatJ.o . ..m, oIkltel' or· ~8!¥1., ... 

7 
any compensation, J.lD~,r t~ .t\.ct ... orw o9l~rl.aw for ~~ ~me being 
In. fo~~e and no such clairp., sQ.all ~.,,~p~d .Qy ~y col,lft, tribunal 
or other authority. . , 
13.(1) Where a jutf)e<mlPlmY ~$ u~st.tb.U~ ,IL, ~yident fund, 
"~,, 6uper~nuation fund, : welfare, fund ~\ot~u~ for tbebeneftt ot 
persons employed in any l jof ·tbe \Uld~kingII, qwned by it, Uie:lponies 
relatable to its employees whose services have becQme transferred by 
or under this Act to the Central ~v~nunent.~r t~e.J~ Manufactures 
Cprporation shall, out of ijleJDDnie~t~~~g"pn tJ:le 'RPoint~d day, to 
J 0 ·UM credit of such pro,vident fund,., "~PEW~np.l1a~ iflmd, ,w.elfare fund or 
other· fUJlds.· stand transferfeQ.. 'to~ .a~d. v.est in, .tb,e,·CentraJ..GQV(!1;'Ilment 
or the Jute Manuf~ctures CQrpo.r¢.iQn,asthe c~. may be. 
(2) The monies which stan.~ p':apsferr~ yndEtr ~~b-section (1) ~o the 
Central Government or th£> Jute Manufactures CorPoration, as the case 
IS may be, shall be dealt with by that Gov.emment or Corporation in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
. ,COl'.l]\Q;SSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
Provident 
fund and 
other 
funds. 
14. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of diabursing Appoint-
20 the amounts payable under sections 7 and' 8 'to the jute companies, by ment of 
notification, appoint a Commissioner of .Payments:· Commis-sioner ot 
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it Pay-
may think fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Clommissioner ments. 
may authorise one Or more of su'th persons also to' exer.:u.e all or any 
2$ of the powers exerci§able by him. under this A.ct and different persons 
may be authorised to exercise different powers. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exerc'ise any of 
the powers exercisable hy the Commissioner may exerci'5e those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been con-
30 ferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of 
authorisation. 
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other 
persons appointed und~r' t1~fs section shall be defrayed out of the Con-
solfdated Fund of India. . 
35 15. (1) The Central Go,Yernment osh#lll,. Within thirty d~sfrom the Payment 
specified date, pay in cash to the, Commissi~er, .~o:, p'ayment' to every by Ute 
jute company,- Central 
(a) a,n amount equal to tp'~ amou~~ Iipeqitjed agaipst the name 
of that company in the First Schedule; 
(b) a further amount .. equal ,to tbe, ~oupt p~yable to that 
company under section 8. " 
(2) A deposi't account shall be opeaedby the Central'Government 
in favour of the CqlDmis~ioner it?- ~b.e, ruJ:?~Li<;,;~~cqllnt.~ II).qia, and every 
, amount paid un4er this Act,to tl1e.s;,w.:~~ss!on~~.sh~l1 I?e.~eppsited by 
45 him to the credi'tof tile sa~d, ,depo$it ~~CQ,c,pjt ~~ . .tl,1e ~<i de~osit account 
shall be operated by the Commissioner. . 
G<lvern-
ment 
to the 
Commis-
sioner .. 

Certain 
powers 
of Cen-
tral 
Govern-
mentor 
Jute 
Manufac-
tures 
Corpo-
ration. 
Claims 
lobe 
made 
to the 
Commi&-
sioner. 
Priority 
of claims. 
8 
• (3) Separate tecbrdS shall bernatntained 'by the Commisslorter in 
respefit of each 'or 'the jute companies in relatiotl.'to which payment has 
been made to him under this Act. 
(if') Interest accruing 'on the amount in " relation to a jute· 'company 
standing to the' credit of the depoF.'it account referred to in sub-section S 
(2) shall ensure to the benefit tjf such jute company. 
16. (1) The Central Government or the Jute ManufacturesCorpo-
ration, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive, up to the t!pecified 
date, to the "exclusion 01 all other persons, any mOIBey due to any jute 
company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 10 
Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation, and realised 
after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains 
to. a period prior to the appointed day. 
(2) The Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation, 
as the case may be, may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard IS 
to every payment made by that Government or Corporation, after the 
appointed day for discharging any liability of a jute company, not being 
any liability specified in -sub-section (2) of section 5, in relatiQIl to any 
of the undertakings owned by it in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day; and every such cl~im shall have priority, in accordance 20 
with the priorities attaching under this Act to the matter in relation to 
which such lfability has been discharged by the Central Government 
or the Jute Manufactures Corporation. 
(3) ,Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of a jute 
company in relation to any of the undertaki'ngs ownea by it in respect 25 
of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which have not been 
discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the liabiliti(!03,~ that 
company. 
17. Every person having a claim against a jute company with regard 
to any of the matters specified in the Second Schedule, pertaining to 30 
any undertaking owned by it, shall prefer such claim before the Com-
missioner within thirty days from the speci'fied date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was 
prevented by suftici'ent cause from preferring the claim within the said 
period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period 35 
of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
18. The claillli made under section 17 shall have prioritIes in accor-
dance with the follOWing principles, namely:-
(a) Category I ~han have precedence over all other categories 
and Category II ~hall have precedenCe cover Category III, and so on; 40 
(b) the claims speCified in each of the categories shall rank 
equally and be paid in full, but if the amount paid tQ the Commis-
sioner under this Act is in-sufficitmt to meet such claims in full, they 
shall abate in equal proportions and be paid accordingly; and 
(e) the questlonof discharging any liability with regard to a 45 
matter specified ~n a lower category shall arise only ,if a surplus 
is left after meeting an ~A~ liab~li~ies sp~cifi~4 in the immediately 
hiaber catego,ry. 10. ~_ ~ , .1 , 

5 of 1908. 
9 
It. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Com- Examl-
~ssioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specifted nation of 
In the Second Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such claims. 
order. ' 
(2) If on an examination of the claims, against a jute company, the 
Commissioner is of the opinion that the am~t paid to him under this 
Act for payment to such company is not sufficient to meet the liabilities 
specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to examine 
any ·~aim in respect of such lower category. 
Ie 20 .. (1) After ex~m.i~ing~e cl~ims s:gainst a jute company, with ~:~~. 
re.fe~ence to the prlOrItIes set: out In the Second Schedule, the Com-' rejection 
miSSioner shall fix a date on or before which every claimant against of claims. 
the company shall file the proof of his claim. 
(2) No,t less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed. shall be 
IS given by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspa;>er in the 
Eriglish language having circulation in the major pai't of the country 
and one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the 
Commissioner may consider sui'table, and every such notice shall call 
upon the daimant to file the proof of his claim with Hie' Commissioner 
20 within the period specffied in the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
period specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the d~ 
bursements made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
2S opinion. be necessary and after giving the jute company concerned an 
opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving tl1e claimant a reason,. 
able opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the 
claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own 
30 procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions. 
including the place or place~ at which he may hold hi's sitting and shall. 
for the purpose of making any investigation under this Act. have the 
same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters. 
35 namely:-
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of a,ny document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
40 (c) the reception Of evidence on aftidavibs; . 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examfnation 'of 
witnesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed tot 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
0&5 of 1860 .. 45 the Indian Penal Code, and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a 
Civil Court for the purposes of section 195. and Chapter XXVI, of the 
lof 1974. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
, (7) A claiman~ who is dissatisfied. with the decision of ~he Gom-
missioner may prefer an appeal against such decision to the HIgh Court 

Disburse-
mentof 
money 
by the 
Co~ 
sioner .. ' 
Disburse--
mentof 
amounts 
to the 
jute com-
panies. 
Undisbur-
sed or 
unc1aimed 
amounts 
to be 
deposited 
with the 
general 
revenue 
account, 
Act to 
!have 
over-
riding 
effect. 
Assump-
tionof 
liability. 
10 
witqitl the local'Uniits ci'WhOs(jtirisdictibb. 'the registered office 'of the 
jute compariyconcemed 'isl'SitWt~1 ' ' 
Pro~ded that 'where' 'a person who ii;- -a Judge of a High Court . 'is: 
appointed to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall be heard and dis-
posed ofby'nbt Was thall' m Judges of 'that High Court. 5 
21. Mer· adnlittiag' la' claim 'against: a, jute' company under this Act, 
the amaunt due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commis-
sioner to the penon or personl1o whom sttcb amount is due and _ such 
.Dyment, the liability of sudl jute company in .respect of such claim 
shall stand disclWrgec1. '" 10 
22. (1) If out Of thE!' mol1ii!l5 pard to him in relation to jute coMpany,' 
there is a balance left afterlIi~etirlg the 'liabilities'as specified 'I'n the 
Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to such 
jute company. 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other_5 
property possessed by a jute company has vested in the Central 
Government or the Jute MaIrufadures Corporation under this Act but 
such machinery, equipment or other property does not belong to such 
jute company, it shall be la,\\',ful for the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the Jute Manufactures Corporation, to continue to possess lZO 
such machinery' or equipI1lent or other property on the same terms and 
conditions under· which they were possessed by such jute company 
immediately before the appointed day. 
23. Any money paid to the CommiSSioner which remains undisbursed 
or ~laimed on the date immedia~ly preceding the date on which the lZS 
office of the Commissioner is finally Wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner,before his office is finally wound up, to the general 
revenUe account of the Central Government, but a' claim to any money 
so transferred may Le preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and .shall be dealt with as if such 30 
transfer bad not bee.l made, and the order, if an~', for payment of the 
claim bei,p.g treated :...s an order for the refund of revenue. 
cHAPTER VII 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
24:. The provisions of this ~ct shall have effect notwithstanding any- 35 
thing inconsistent therewith 't!Ontarned in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having'eflect by virtue of any law. 
other fhan this Act, or ~in any deeree ot 'order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 
25. (l1) Where any IfeWfitY"' of" a' 'jute 'ttml~ t'MIisiDg out of any 40 
item in any eatelO1"1' ep«ified in Part I of the Seeond Schedule is not 
discharged fully by the Commissioner out of the amounts paid to him 
under this Act, the Commissioner shall intimate in writin, to the Cen-
tral GOvefnnlelnt t~i ~t W'theliabUitfWlaich remains undiselultr~ 
and that "iabmt~ 'afiMtbe ruibui~ct'''y:lthe Cekitrai GcWemmeut," 4S 
(2) The Central Govenunent'may; by order, direct the Jute Manu-" '" 
factures Corporation to take over the liability assumed by the C~tral 
Government under sub-section (1), and on receipt of such direction, 
it shall be the 'duty ;6f the jut~ M-anit!&etUre Corpotadont6 diicharke 
such Uabmty. ',I t· ' 
So 

II 
26. NOtwithstanding'the vesting undet"tbis''1ACt Of' the ('Under-
takmgs' df' any jute company in the Central GOvernrneM: or theJ'ute 
ManUfaCtUreS Corporation~ : 
(a) any person' who has been man~ the a1f8irS 'of such 
5 undertakings before the date on which the undertakings' had so 
vested shall, until alternative arrangements have been made by 
the Central Government, or, GS the case. may be, the Jute Manu-
factures Corporation, for the management' of such. undertBltings, 
continue to manage the affairs of the undertakiQgs,' as if such 
10 person had been authorised by the CentraiGovemment, or; as the 
case may be, the Jute Manufactures. Corporation, to manage S'Ueb 
undertakings; 
(b) suchpersmI shall, until alternattw mangernllltl'\\ have 
been made by" the Central' Government, 01';' as th! case may' be, the 
• 
IS Jute Manufactures Corporation,'contthtte t~, be a'lithoi1sed'to 
operate, in relation to the undertakings of such 'jute company, any 
account of such undertakings in any bank as if he had been autho-
rised by the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Cor--
poration to operate such account. 
Manage-
mentto 
continue 
to vest in 
certain 
persons 
until 
alter-
native 
arrange-
ments 
ha've 
been 
made. 
20 27. Every contract entered into by any jute company in relation to Contracts 
any: Of the undertakings owned bY it; whidf' has v~ted:': in th,e Centzti to cease 
Government under section, 3, for any Service, ,sale ' or, supplt'~'ahd in :~tve 
force immediately'before the appointed6ay,'shall,6ftrmd. fi'om the Jinless 
expirf of a period of one hundred arid eighty dBys'ftiom!th!apt,omted'!'t'atifled 
25 day,eease to' have effect unless such cOntract is, befotethe expiry <if by the 
that period, ratified in writing by the Central G'Ova'nmel'ff' or~ihe JUte :Central 
Manufact'Ures Corporation, and in, ratifyini. sl1ch contract, the Ce~tral ::~r:; 
Government or the Jute ManufacttiresCorpo:rdtort"rt1ay'''l'nake'i'lich Jute 
alterations or modifications tHerein as it may think fit: Manufac-
tures 30 Provided that the Central Government or the Jute Manufaotul'elt" Corpora-
35 
4S 
Corporation shall not omit to ratify a contract and shall not make any tion, 
alteration or modification in a contract-
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is, undulr onerous 
or has been entered into in bad' faith or is de~riiaJ. to the inter-
ests of the Central Governme!lt or the Jute ManUfactUres Corpora-
tion; and 
(b) except after giVing the parties to"the edntrael"ll'i-easdiHI6le ' ,\ 
opport'Unity of being heard and except after recording in writing 
its reasons for refusal to ratify the 'contract' o'r formaktng 
any alteration or modification therein. 
28, Any person who,-
(a) Jlaving' irt his pOssession, custody or control any property 
forming part of the undertakings. owned by any jute company, 
wrongtulIrlWithhc11as:~siieh'properlyl~ hbri{''Oie'Cen\nW'GO~ermnei1t' 
or the J ute Mmu!'8~t'iU'es' :c'drpOraticnl'; iJr: : 
Penal. 
ties. 
(b) wrongM:fy'iobtafns'lpds8eS$i~qe:;f; 'cill' . mal~""i!iY''"Pti~~1l1l 
forming part of, the undertakings owned by'rtfiy Me·'~p8ii.Y~ or 

Offences 
by C'Om-
panles. 
Protee-
tlonot 
action 
taken 
in ,004 
talth. 
r 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Govern:-
ment or the Jute Manufactures Corporation or any person or body 
of persons specified by that Government or Corporation. as the case 
may be. any document or inventory relating to the undertakings 
owned by any jute company, which may be in his possession, custody 5 
or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Jute Manu-
factures Corporation or any person or body of persons specified by 
that Government or Corporation, any assets, books of account, regis-
ters or other documents in his possession, custody or control relating 10 
to the undertakings owned by any jute company; or 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of the undertakings owned by any jute company OIl' prefers any claim 
under this Act which be k.I'lows or has reason to believe to be false 
or grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with im;Jrisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees. 
29, (1) Where an offence punishsble under this Ad has been commit-
ted by a company, every person who. at the time the offence was com-
mitted, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the :ow 
conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 25 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been 1C0mmitted by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni- 30 
vance of, or ia attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director. 
manager, secretary or other officer of ,the company, such director, mana-
ger. secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Erp14n4tion.-For the purposes of this settion-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(Ib) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
3S 
30. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Jute 40 
Manufactures Corporation or other person authorised by that Govern-
ment or Corporation for anything which ia in good faith. done or intended 
to be done under this Act. 

13 
(2) )(0 suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any of its oftlcers or other employees or the Jute Manu-
factures Corporation or any oftlcer OIl'other person authorised by that 
Corporation for any damage cau~d or likely to be caused for anything 
,S which is in good faith done or irtended to be done under this Act. 
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notifICation, 'direct that all Delega-
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the tion of 
powers conferred by this section and sections 32 and 33, may also be powers. 
exercised by such person or persons as may be speclfled in the notiftcatiolL 
10 (2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section 
(1), the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act' under 
the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
32. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for Powel'to 
carrying out the provisions of this Alct. make-
rules, 
IS (2) In particular, and without f;lrejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
'(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intima-
tion referred to in sub-section (3) of section. 4 shall be given; 
20 (b) the manner j,n which the monies in any provident fund or 
other fund, referred to :in sub-section (2) of section 13, shall be dealt 
with; 
(c) any other matter which is required tQ be, or may be, pres-
cribed. I 
25 (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty, days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following . the session 
30 or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both H'lllSeS agree that the rule sh(1Uld not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modiftca-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
35 previously done under that rule. 
33. If any difficulty arises in giving e1f~ct to the provisions of this Power to 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not jnccmsistent with the remove 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: difftcul-ties. 
Provided that illO such order shall be made after the elO;liry of a 
40 period of tW() rea~ from th~ ~~pointed day: .. , 

'.' jl~~,l~f"~c~ULE 
' •• '"j,~ •• CtioDl\ 2(c), 7,J~, 15(1) .(e)l 
----~'.~.----~--- ----'- ...... - .. ,---.-~--
SI. 
No 
, :,' Na~c; of the jute ,~mpany Amount 
(Ru~ in lakhs) 
,J~ ~~draJI~~Ws Umit~ .. Qh~\rtfr.~,~,~~, B.).!~dings, 
4",NetaJl. Slibhai load, Calcutta-7 0000I • r; . 
Q. Union Jute ~ .. :=.. y Limite~ Chartered Bank Buildings, 
ri~i;Nouaj ..... ~ Calcu~:"70000J. . . 
3· Khardah Company Limited, 7, Red Cross Place, 
Calcutta-7oooJ I. .. '" 
4r . The ~n J~e~, COp1~nyJ.imited. 9hartered Bank 
~\J~d~gs~ 4>, N~.ll ~&bhai Road, Calcutta-7ooooI . 
5. R. B. H. M.Jute Mills Private Limited, P.O. Katihar Mills, 
~Kat~ (Bihar) 
TOTAL 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See sections 17, 19(1-),20(1),22(1) and 25(1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES 
PART I 
Category 1-
353.60 
4fiI.32 
486.68 
6+4·70 
17.0 4 
S 
10 
20 
. "'1!~pJ~y~'.dues pn .,account qf unpaid !Salaries. wages, provident 
fLUl(l. EmplQyees' Sta~e Insurance contribution or pr~mium relating 
to the' Ufe Insurance Corporation of India and any other amounts 
due to employees in respect of any period whether before or after 
the management of the undertakings of any jute company had been 2S 
taken over by the Central Government. 
Category 11-
,Secured loans obtained by any jute company from nationalised 
banks and public financial inBtitutiotls during any period whether be-
l.-" .. • •. '_ .._" , 
fore or a~er th,e t;na.nagement of the undertakings of that company 30 
had b~~ taken over by the Central Government. 
"i,·, Category. III-
Any credit availed of for trade or manufacturing purpose during 
,the post take-over management period. 
PART II 
Category IV-
3S 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rate~ or other dues to the Central Gov-
ernment, State Governments and local a'Uthorities or State Elec-
:tricjty. ~9ard f?r ~,':lYc,l?eriod whether before qf . after ~h~ .. !l1anage-
"" m~nt ;of the tl:'~derta~gs of any jute company had been taken 40 
over by the Central, GQverntrient. .. , 
~ • . ~ I 
CategO'Ty V-
Anr credit availAA, of ~r, trad~ or~anut~ctu\'tp.~ purpose. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The management of MIs. Alexandra Jute Mills Limited., MIs. Union 
Jute Company Limited, MIs. Khardah Company Limited, MIs. Kinri1son 
Jute Mills Company Limited and Mis. RBliM Jute Mills Private Limited, 
was taken over, after proper investigations, by the Central Government 
under the provisions of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951 during 1977 and 19'78. 
2. These companies together have an installed productive capacity of 
over 88,000 metric tonnes to produlce jute goods which are essential to. 
the needs of the economy of the country. A labour complement of over 
17,000 is also involved. 
3. The investigation reports, feasibility rElQorts, viability studies, etc., 
undertaken before the take-over of the management of these mills clearly 
brought out the possibility of reopening of these mills, which were dosed 
at the time of take-over, and of making their operations viable with in-
jection of adequate funds and reorganisation of adequate funds and re-
organisation of the management structure. Each of these mills had a 
negative net worth on the date of take-over. The performance of these 
mills after take-over has not been satisfactory. The reports, drawn UQ 
mostly by the financial institutions and Iconsidered at inter-departmental 
meetings, had clearly stated that the operations of these mills are bound 
to remain unsatisfactory unless immediate steps are taken for modernisa-
tion of the plant and machinery. This icalled for further heavy 'invest-
ment of public funds. It was felt that further investment of public 
funds should be preceded by some arrangement which ensured continuity 
of the management of the mills with the Government. Taking all the 
factors into 3Jccount, it was felt that the process of nationalisation ap-
peared to be the most appropriate solution to the problems of the mills 
taken over. 
4. The Bill provides for the nationalisation of these mills and for other 
incidental matters. 
Nr:w'DELm; PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
The 17th Novembe-r, 1980. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 2517 /79-Jute, dated the 20th November, 1980 
from Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, Minister of Commerce and Steel 
and Mines to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of 
Messrs. Alexandra Jute Mills Ltd., Mis. Union Jute Company Ltd., 
Mis. Khardah Co. Ltd., Ws. Kin~ison Jute Mills Company Ltd., and 
Mis. RBHM Jute Mills (P) Ltd., with a view to securing the proper 
management of such undertakings so as to subserve the interests of 
the general public by ensuring the continued manufacture, production 
and distribution of articles madE" of jute, which are essential to the 
needs of the economy of the country and for matters connected there-
with or incidental thereto, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution, the introduction of the said Bill in and 
its consideration by Lok Sabha. 
T5 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the acquisition of the undertakings of 
M/s. Alex.andra Jute Mills Limited, Mis. Union Jute Company Limited, 
MIs. Khardah Company Limited, M/s. Kinnison Jute Mills Company 
Limited and Mis. RBHM Jute Mills Private Limited, by the Central 
Goverrunent. 
2. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the payment, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI of the Bill, of an amount of Rs. 1963.34 
lakhs (Rupees nineteen hundred sixty-three lakhs and thirty-four 
thMlSand only) for vesting in the Central Government, the right, title 
and interest of the companies in relation to the undertakings owned by 
them. 
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill Qrovides for payment of a 
further amount in Icash, in conside!'ation for the deprivation of the com-
panies of the management of their undertakings, calculated at the rate of 
Rs. 10,000 (Rupees ten thousand only) per annum, for the period com-
mencing on the date on which the management of the undertakings of 
the companies was tak,en over by the Central Government and ending on 
the date of nat:onalisation. It is estimated that this amount will be of the 
order of Rs. 1.50 lakhs (Rupees one lakh and fifty thousand only). 
4. Sub-clause (2) of Clause 8 of the Bill provides for payment of 
simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum in respect of the 
amounts payable under clause 7 v.nd sub-clause (1) of clause 8 for the 
period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which 
the payment of the amounts is made by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner of Payments. It is estimated that this amount i6 likely to 
be of the order of Rs. 6.fi lakhs (Rupees six lakhs and sixty thousand 
only) every month. 
5. Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the aQpointment of a Commissioner 
of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff to assist 
him for the purpose of 'disbursing the amounts payable to the companies. 
The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments and his 
staff and expenditure on office and establishment will be defrayed out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated eXQenditure on this ac-
count i'5 likely to be of the order of Rs. 10,000 (Rupees ten thousand only) 
per month. 
6. In terms of sul:rclause (1) of clause 25 of the Bill, where any liability 
arising out of any item specified in any category in Part I of the S~hedule 
to the Bill is not discharged tully by the Commissioner out of the amounts 
paid to him under the Bill, the Commissioner will intimate the Central 
Government the extent of the liability which remains 'So undischarged 
and the liability shall be assumed by the Central Government. The extent 
of liability on this account will be known only subsequently after the 
Commissioner of Payments has made available his reports. 
7. Funds will also have to be provided for a loan of Rs. 363.00 lakhs to 
the National Jute Manufactures COl'f?Oration to which the undertakings 
of the mills are proposed to be transferred, as mm:gin money for obtain-
ing financial assistance from public institutions and banks formodernisa-
tion/renovation. 
8. The Bill, if enacted, rs not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
16 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in reaped of which 
rules may be made, inte'r aLirl, relate to the time within which, and the 
manner in which, an intimation regarding any mortgage, charge, lien, 
etc., on the property which has vested in the Central Government may be 
given to the Commissioner of Payments, the manner in which monies 
standing to the credit of any provident fund. superannuation fund or 
other funds established for the benefit of persons employed in the under-
takings acquired and transferred to the Central Government shall be 
dealt with and such other matters as are re<juired to be specified by rules. 
2, The matters in respect of which rules may be ma.de are matters of 
I?rocedure or administrative detail. The delegation of legislative power 
is, thus, normal in character. 

", 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
jute companies specified in the First Schedule with a view to 
securing the proper management of such undertakings so as to 
subserve the interests of the general public by ensuring the conti-
nued manufacture, production ?nd distribution of articles made of 
jute, which are essential to the needs of the economy of the coun-
try and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Pranab Kumar Mukher;ee, 
Min.ister of Commerce and 
Steel and Mines.) 