1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 196 of  2017
5

2
2. In article 102 of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause (1),
(i) for the words "being chosen as, and for being", the words "being
chosen as or for being" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:—
"Explanation — For the purposes of this clause
(A) "the expression office of profit" means any office—
(i) under the control of the Government of India, or the
Government of a State, as the case may be, where the salary or
remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue of the
Government of India or the Government of any State and the holder
of such office is capable of exercising legislative, judicial or quasi-
judicial power; or
(ii) under a body, which is wholly or partially owned by the
Government of India or the Government of any State and the salary
or remuneration is paid by such body and the holder of such office
is capable of exercising powers by means of disbursement of funds,
allotment of lands, issuing of licenses and permits or making of
public appointments or granting of such other favours of substantial
nature;
(B) A person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State by reason only that
he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State.
(C) "office" means the permanent substantive position which exists
independently of the holder of the office and being—
(i) directly under the Government; or
(ii) under statutory authorities or corporations in which
Government has the power either to appoint or remove or both; or
(iii) under public sector undertakings owned wholly or partly
by the Government where the Government has the power to appoint
or remove; or
(iv) under local authorities or other authorities within the
meaning of the Constitution; or
(v) under institutions of Self Government as defined under
clause (d) of article 243 and clause (e) of article 243P of the
Constitution; or
(vi) under other authorities, significantly funded by the
Government where the Government has pervasive control;
(D) "remuneration" means any pecuniary gain commensurate with
the status and responsibilities attached to the office and any remuneration
payable but not drawn or forfeited shall also be considered as remuneration
earned; and
(E) "salary" means salary or pay scale attached to the office whether
or not the holder of such an office draws such salary."; and
Amendment of
article 102.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), if a member
of either House of Parliament has become subject to any disqualification
mentioned in that sub-clause, he shall not be so disqualified,—
(i) unless he has not resigned from such office which is the subject
to disqualification with respect to the following:—
(a) offices that must be given up before an election— such
persons (civil servant under articles 310 and 311 and members of the
Judiciary), shall seek unconditional leave from their office before
becoming a candidate in an election and shall be relieved from such
office before being allowed to take the oath of office to the office so
elected to;
(b) offices (under article 12), institutions or bodies and
legislators or some other legislative body or Panchayat that must be
given up after an election but before taking oath as a member of the
legislature;
(ii) if the appointment has been made only in the public interest for
a specific purpose with defined terms of reference and approved by the
Union Cabinet and the Cabinet Committee on Appointment, if any,
concurrently and—
(a) a public statement has been made that such an appointment
is in the public interest with an explanation—
(i) giving the reasons for such an appointment;
(ii) full disclosure of the perks and emoluments;
(iii) the public statement must be simultaneously placed
before the House concerned;
(iv) the appointment be made for the term of that
Legislature; and
(v) all efforts be made for the appointment on a voluntary
and pro bono basis and for a limited period of time only.".
3
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The term "Office of Profit" is used with reference to executive appointments. A number
of countries forbid members of the legislatures from accepting an office of profit under the
executive as a means to secure the independence of the legislature and preserve the separation
of powers. In all democracies including the United States of America and the United Kingdom,
the holders of offices under the Government, as a rule are disqualified for being members of
Legislature. The inherent idea seems to be that the personal and pecuniary interest should
not come in the way of discharging their obligations by the legislators.
In India, this principle is embodied in articles 102(1)(a) and 191(1)(a) of the Constitution.
The principle contained in article 102 is based on the sound public policy of ensuring
impartiality and neutrality in the public duty and avoidance of conflict between duty and
interest of an elected member, enabling him to carry on his duties freely and fearlessly
without being subjected to any Governmental pressure thereby maintaining purity of the
legislature. The provision is undoubtedly designed to protect the independence of the
members of Parliament. The object of article 102(1)(a) is to disqualify a person from the
membership of Parliament if he is obliged by the Government for an office of profit which
carries profit or benefit and thus compromising his independence.
The expression "Office of Profit" has not been defined in the Constitution or any other
statute. It has, therefore, been open to the courts to explain the significance and meaning of
this concept. Most of the cases which have arisen under article 191(1)(a) of the Constitution
are also relevant to article 102(1)(a) of the Constitution.
In pursuance of above articles, the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act,
1959 was enacted by Parliament. The said Act has been amended from time-to-time to include
office exempted from disqualification from the purview of office of profit. In pursuance of
article 191(1)(a) of the Constitution, the State Legislatures have enacted their own laws
relating to removal of disqualification.
If any question arises as to whether a member of Parliament has become subject to any
of the disqualification laid down in the Constitution including the one whether he is holding
an Office of Profit or not, the question is referred to the Joint Parliamentary Committee on
Office of Profit. The Joint Committee on Office of Profit makes its recommendation in the
report which is presented to the House. The decision of the President shall be final on this
question. However, before giving any decision on any such question, article 103(2) of the
Constitution requires the President to consult the Election Commission and the Commission
may make such enquiry as it deems fit. It is important to note that in this matter the President
does not act on the advice of Council of Ministers.
Substantial questions of law have arisen with regards to the tests for an office of profit
which have been laid down and used by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Offices of
Profit as follows:—
(a) Whether Government makes the appointment?
(b) Whether Government has a right to remove or dismiss the holder of office?
(c) Whether the Government pays the remuneration?
(d) What are the functions of the holder of office? and
(e) Does the Government exercise any control over the performance of those func-
tions?
However, this is a matter of parliamentary and legal convention and have not been
provided with constitutional or legal backing.

5
Being an extremely important topic in the realm of the application of the principle of
separation of powers, followed by the Constitution of India, though not written explicitly
into it, it is important to place them and define "an office of profit" within the Constitution
itself and not in any other legal statute. This is to ensure that democracy in the nation and the
constitutional scheme is strengthened in itself, allowing for its greater and unambiguous
progress, while freeing the courts as legal direction will be established for the same through
this constitutional amendment.
The law with regards to "Offices of Profit" as per status quo does not allow for an
elected member of Parliament to retain his position until the time of his election. He has to
necessarily vacate it or face disqualification. The process of elections is variable and the
ultimate will of the people is only determined after the counting of votes and not before it.
Hence, it is imperative to allow the individual to have a surety of his employment by taking
leave from it during the time of elections and returning to it if unsuccessful in election. The
individual should, however, vacate it before being allowed to take the oath of office if so
successful in an election.
Numerous times it is also felt that if the appointment has been made only in the public
interest for a specific purpose with defined terms of reference and subject to certain limitations
as prescribed in the amendment so proposed above, it should be allowed and not attract
disqualification for being chosen as or for being a member of Parliament.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI LEKHI
November 23,  2016.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
102. (1) A person shall be qualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
either House of Parliament—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State, other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to
disqualify its holder;
(b) * * * * * * *
(c) * * * * * * *
(d) * * * * * * *
(e) * * * * * * *
Explanation — For the purposes of this clause a person shall not be deemed to
hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State
by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State.
* * * * * * *
Disqualification
for
membership.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2444LS(S3)—06-11-2017.