5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 196 of 2024
THE DAIRY FARMERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2024
By
Dr. K. Sudhakar, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of dairy farmers in the country and for  
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1.  (1) This Act may be called the Dairy Farmers (Welfare) Act, 2024.
 ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
 ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires:– 
 ( a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
Short title, 
extent and  
commencement.
Definitions.

 ( b) “Committee” means the Dairy Farmers Welfare Committee constituted under 
section 3;
 ( c) “dairy farmer” means the farmer engaged in production of milk and milk products;
 ( d) “Fund” means the Dairy Farmers Welfare Fund constituted under section 5; and
 ( e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 3. ( 1) The Central Government, shall by notification in the official Gazette, 
constitute a Committee to be known as the Dairy Farmers Welfare Committee for 
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
 ( 2) The Committee shall consist of,–
 ( a) the Union Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, ex-officio 
Chairperson;
 ( b) the Secretary of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare - Member;
 ( c) five members of Parliament from the House of the People from major milk 
producing States to be nominated by the Central Government, as Member;
 ( d) ten dairy farmers - Members; and
 ( e) five agriculture experts - Members.
 ( 3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of 
Members of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
 4.  The Committee shall,-
 ( a) recommend periodically the welfare measures required to be provided to dairy 
farmers across the country;
 ( b) make necessary studies on the dairy farmers of the country;
 ( c) recommend to the Government the quantum of subsidy to be given to dairy 
farmers so that the cost of production for individual dairy farmers comes significantly 
down;
 ( d) recommend to the appropriate Government for registration of milch animals; and
 ( e) recommend to the Government other appropriate measures for the welfare of 
dairy farmers.
 5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, 
constitute a Fund to be known as the Dairy Farmers Welfare Fund for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act.
 ( 2) The Fund shall be utilised for,-
 ( a) providing for personal accident insurance cover of rupees fifty lakhs per 
dairy farmer;
 ( b) providing for health insurance cover of rupees ten lakhs per dairy farmer;
 ( c) providing for insurance for cattle purchased through schemes of the 
appropriate Government; and
 ( d) providing monthly pension from time to time, as may be fixed upon by the 
Committee.
 6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide, from time to time, requisite and adequate funds to the 
committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5
10
15
20
Constitution 
of Dairy 
Farmers Welfare 
Committee.
2
Functions of the 
Committee. 
Constitution of 
Dairy Farmers 
Welfare Fund.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
25
35
30
40

 7.  (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
 ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
3

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India leads the world in milk production, with an annual output of more than 230.6 
million tonnes with per capita availability of 459 gms/day. This surpasses crop production 
and serves as a crucial source of income for farmers. Milk production has been instrumental 
in providing financial security to farmers impacted by adverse weather and crop damage. 
Approximately seven crore rural families are involved in milk production, with around 
seventy percent of cattle owned by small, medium, and marginal farmers who derive a 
significant portion of their family income from milk sales. The majority of milk production 
is carried out by small and landless farmers, with women playing a vital role in the process.
The rising temperatures and humidity are causing heat stress in cattle and buffaloes, 
impacting their health, well-being, and production capacity. As we are in the midst of 
summer, dairy companies are noticing a decrease in milk supply, leading to significant 
losses for farmers. The market is also flooded with numerous milk powder brands, further 
adding to the challenges faced by farmers. In India, cattle rearing is deeply rooted in our 
civilization and heritage, playing a crucial role in the lives of ordinary Indians. It is essential 
to provide dairy farmers with social security measures such as health and personal accident 
insurance. Additionally, free cattle insurance should be made available to farmers to prevent 
financial losses in the event of cattle deaths. In order to improve the lives of dairy farmers 
and to reduce the financial burden being incurred upon their families there is an urgent need 
for this bill.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                               K. SUDHAKAR 
November 7, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of Dairy Farmers Welfare Committee. 
Clause 5 provides for Constitution of  Dairy Farmers Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides 
that Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the committee for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees 
ten thousand crore per annum.
 No non recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for the welfare of dairy farmers in the country and for matters  
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Dr. K. Sudhakar, M.P .) 