Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 197 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), sub-section (2), shall be omitted.
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"5. (1) Every person, who is not a minor, shall have a right to make an advance
directive in writing.".
Amendment of
the Section 3.
Amendment
of section 5.
10 of 2017
5
10

2
4. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"29A. (1) The appropriate Government shall conduct a survey to identify sections
of the population vulnerable to mental illnesses, particularly persons from the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Persons with Disabilities.
(2) The appropriate Government shall have a duty to plan, design and implement
programmes and schemes for the promotion of mental health awareness, prevention of
mental illness and provision of counselling and psychiatric services amongst vulnerable
sections of the population, particularly persons from the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and the Persons with Disabilities.
5. In section 34 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that out of the members referred to in clauses ( i) to (p) at least one
member shall be from the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Persons
with Disabilities."
6. In section 46 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that out of the members referred to in clauses ( h) to (n) at least one
member shall from the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Persons with
Disabilities."
7. In section 74 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for clause (c), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(c) three members of whom two shall be psychiatrists and the other shall be a
medical practitioner.".
8. After section 108 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'108A. If any public servant, charged with duty of providing mental healthcare
services to mentally ill persons under this Act, fails to perform his duty, he shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term of one year or with fine of rupees ten thousand,
in addition to departmental disciplinary action for dereliction of duty.' by the
Government, he shall be punished for not providing the mental healthcare services
offered to mentally ill persons under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.".
Insertion of
new section
29A.
Special
provisions for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes and
Persons with
Disabilities.
Amendment of
section 34.
Amendment of
section 46.
Amendment of
section 74.
Insertion of
new section
108A.
Punishment to
public servant
for failure to
perform duty.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India being the signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of persons
with disabilities in 2007, which made it incumbent on the State to provide shield against the
rights of persons with mental illness and promote their access to mental healthcare.
The word competency originates from the word 'competent' which indicates the concept
involved in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 wherein section 11 connotes eligibility to make a
contract. However, the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 has altered the doctor-patient relationship.
Being on treatment by a psychiatrist will not take away a person's 'competence'.
Also, the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 should not be contrary to any existing law of the
India. A mentally-ill person shall have the right to make an advance directive that states how
he wants to be treated for the illness during a mental health situation and who shall be his
nominated representative. Even it would be quite inappropriate to give such a right selectively
to those with mental illnesses, while victims of all other illnesses are not given the same. It
would be a case of equals being treated unequally and that way discriminatory and unlawful.
Moreover, the Bill seeks to provide for mental healthcare and services for persons with
mental illness and to protect, promote and fulfil the rights of such persons during delivery of
mental healthcare and services.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
July 3, 2017
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE ACT, 2017
(10 OF 2017)
* * * * * * * *
3. (1) * * * * *
(2)  No person or authority shall classify a person as a person with mental illness,
except for purposes directly relating to the treatment of the mental illness or in other
matters as covered under this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
 * * * * * * *
5. (1) Every person, who is not a minor, shall have a right to make an advance directive
in writing, specifying any or all of the following, namely:—
* * * * * * * *
74.  (1) Each Board shall consist of—
(a)* * * *
(b)* * * *
(c) two members of whom one shall be a psychiatrist and the other shall be a medical
practitioner.
* * * * * * * *
4
Determination
of mental
illness.
Advance
directive.
Composition
of Board.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2439LS(S3)—03.11.2017.