Insertion of
new article
30A.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRIMA TI RITI PATHAK,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. After article 30 of the Constitution, the following heading and article thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
"Right to water and sanitation
30A. (1) Every citizen shall have access to adequate potable water and sanitation.
(2) The State shall, within two years of the coming into force of the Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 2019, by law, ensure proper implementation and monitoring of the right to
potable water and sanitation.
Bill No.  197 of 2019
Short title.
Right to clean
drinking
water and
sanitation.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(3) For the purposes of implementation and monitoring of the right to potable water
and sanitation,—
(i) the Central Government shall ensure that,—
(a) sufficient funds are provided to the State Governments;
(b) Sanitation and Water Service Authority be constituted at the national
level to oversee the implementation and monitoring of the right to potable water
and sanitation;
(c) a permanent River Authority is constituted at the national level to
ensure proper cleaning and maintenance of inter-State rivers and to decide on
the distribution of water of such rivers among the riparian States;
(ii) every State Government shall ensure that,—
(a) the funds provided by the Central Government are distributed to the
Panchayats in an equitable manner for  providing water and sanitation
facilities in each district;
(b) local bodies within the State constitute special Sanitation and Water
Service Authorities at the district level with the following functions:—
(i) to arrange adequate number of piped water connections;
(ii) to remove refuse from premises;
(iii) to sweep and water streets;
(iv) to provide and maintain at suitable places facilities for deposit,
disposal or destruction of refuse;
(v) to provide and maintain public drinking water facilities and
public sanitary conveniences; and
(vi) every person or authority responsible for providing or
maintaining or monitoring water and sanitation facilities under the law is
held liable in the event of failure to perform his functions under the law.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression "State Government", in the case of a
Union territory means the ‘‘Union territory administration.’’.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Access to clean drinking water and sanitation is essential for dignified living of human
beings on the earth. Lack of water and sanitation facilities lead to various health hazards and
make people vulnerable to diseases particularly water borne diseases. In our country water
resources are adequate. However, due to ineffective implementation of water and sanitation
management policies, the water resources have remained untapped for human use. Therefore,
there is an acute shortage of drinking water in almost every part of the country.
The right to clean drinking water and sanitation does not find any explicit mention in
our national law and is also not enshrined as a fundamental right in our Constitution. However,
the courts in India including the Supreme Court have interpreted article 21 of the Constitution
as encompassing the right to safe water and sanitation.
While citizens have the right to access to safe and clean drinking water, the right to
sanitation is equally important. The people should also have facilities and services like
collection, transport, treatment and disposal of human excreta, domestic waste water and
solid waste and associated hygiene promotion. Water must also be available for good personal
hygiene. Toilets must be within or in the immediate vicinity of each household or workplace.
Above all, access to clean drinking water and sanitation facilities must be affordable.
It is true that several social and economic rights take years to be realized fully. There is
no dispute that the Union Government as well as the State Governments are making continued
efforts to provide clean drinking water and sanitation facilities to citizens. However, these
basic rights are still not available to the citizens in absolute terms. It is, therefore, necessary
that some time limit be imposed on the State within which the citizens must start enjoying
these rights as fundamental rights. Such an amendment of the Constitution would ensure
better services by the authorities responsible for implementing and monitoring the water and
sanitation schemes as there would be a fear of being dragged to the courts for violation of
fundamental rights of citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RITI  PATHAK
July 19, 2019.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall provide sufficient funds to
the State Governments. It also provides for constitution of Sanitation and Water Service
Authority and River Authority at National level by the Central Government. It further provides
that Sanitation and Water Service Authorities are constituted within the State by the local
bodies at the district level to arrange adequate number of piped water connection, provide
and maintain public drinking water facilities, etc. The expenditure relating to States shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the States concerned. However, the expenditure
relating to Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore would be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Riti Pathak, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2671LS(S3)—22-10-2019.