‘As mvtropucep un Lox 54884

1.8 DEC 192)

Bill

(9. 198 of 1991

‘THE MONOPOLIES AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES,
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991

A
BILL

further to amend the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1959
and the Companies Att, 1956.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—

1, 0) This Act may be called the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices (Amendment) Act, 1991.

5. (2) ‘The provisions of section 7 of this Act sha'l come into force at
once and the remaining provisions shall be deemed to have come into
force on the 27th day of September, 1991-

Short
title

and com-
mence-
ment.


2
PART I

AMENDMENTS 70 THE Monoro.ies anp Restrictive TRADE PRACTICES
Act, 1969

\

* Amend- 2. In section 2 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
ment of Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) —
section 2.

(a) the words “or any description” and “of that description”,
wherever they occur. shall be omitted;

(b)-in clause (d)— | {
() sub-clauses (i) and (ii) shall be omitted;

(i) for sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall be
substituted, namely:——

“(iii) an underizking which, by itself or along with
inter-connected undertakings produces, supplies, distributes
or otherwise controls not Jess than one-fourth of the total —
goods that are produced, supplied or distributed in India or 1
any substantial part thereof; or”;

(ii) the proviso and Explanation I shall be omitted;

(iv) in Explanation iV, for the words, brackets and figures
“in sub-clause (ii), (iii) or (0) ", the words, brackets and figures
“in sub-clause (iii) or sub-clause (iv)” shall be substituted;
(0) in clause (e), for sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause

shall be substituted, namely: —

“(#) shares and stocks including issue of shares before
allotment;”;

(@) clauses (ee), (fff), (gg) and (q) shall Ge omitted:
(e) in clause (r),— { |

(0) after the word “insurance”, the words “chit fund,” real
estate,” shall be inserted;

(ii) the following Fxplantion shall be inserted at the end,

namely: — 3

‘Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that any dealings in real estate shall be included
and shall be deemed always to have been included within
the definition of “service”;';

(f) clauses (vv) and (w) shall be omitted.

Amend- 3. In section 10 of the principal Act, in clause (b), after the word
ment of | “‘the Central Government”, the words “or upon an application mad
sation 10. ‘9 it by the Director General” shall be inserted,

Amend- 4. In section 11 of the principal Act— 1

ment of

section 11, (०) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall

substituted, namely:—

“() The Commission may, before issuing any process
quiring the attendance of the person against whom an


1898.
2 01 1974,
[0 of 1971.

15

20

30

35

3

(other than an inquiry uporr an application by the Director
General) may be made under section 10, by an order, require
the Director General to make, or cause to be made, a prelimi-
nary investigation in such manner as it may direct and submit a
report to the Commission to enable it to satisfy itself as to
whether or not the matter requires to be inquired into.”;

(b) in sub-section (2), the words, brackets, figures and ‘etter
“sub-clause (iti) of clause (a) of” shall be omitted.

5. In section 12 of the principal Act,— \ }

(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (e), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(f) the appearance of parties and consequence of non-
appearance.”;,

(0) in sub-section (2), for the words and figures “and Chapter
XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898”, the words and
figures “‘and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973” shall be substituted,

6 In section 128 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the
following Explanations shall be inserted, namely: —

“peplanation I.—For the purposes of this section, an — inquiry
shall be deemed to have commenced upon the receipt by the Com-
mission of any complaint, reference or, as the case may be, appli-
cation or upon its own knowledge or information reduced to writing
by the Commission. \ i

Explanation I1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby dec-
lared that the power of the Commission with respect to temporary
injunction includes power to grant a temporary injunction without
giving notice to the opposite party.”. | |

7. After section 188 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:— f

“13B, The Commission shall have, and exercise, the same juris-
diction, powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a
High Court has and may exercise and, for this purpose, the pro-
visions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 shall have effect sub-
ject to the modifications that—

(a) the reference therein to a High Court shall be cons-
trued as including a reference to the Commission;

(७) the references to the Advocate-General in section 15
of the said Act shall be construed as a reference to such Law
Officer as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.”.

Amend-
ment of
section 12.

Amend-
ment of
section
12A,

Inser-
tion of
new
section
138.

Power
to
punish:
for
con-
tempt.


Amend-
ment of
‘Chapter वा,

Amend-
ment of
section 27.

Amend-
ment of
tection
27A,

. 4

8. In Chapter III of the principal Act,—
(a) Part A shall be omitted;

(०) the word and letter “Part B” occurring before | Py
shall be omitted. के

9. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the por-
tion beginning with the words “Notwithstanding anything” and ending
with the words “for an inquiry”, the following shall be substituted,
namely;—

“Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other

law for the time being in force, the Commission may,—

6) upon receiving a complaint of facts from any trade
association or from any consumer or a registered consumers’
association, whether such consumer is a member of that consu-
mers’ association or not, or

(४) upon a reference made to it by the Central Govern- 1:
ment or a State Government, or

(iii) upon its own knowledge or information,

if it is of opinion that the working of an undertaking is prejudicial
to the public interest, or has led, or is leading, or is likely to

lead, to the adoption of any monopolistic or restrictive trade prac-
tices, inquire”.

10. In section 27A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the
Portion beginning with the words “Notwithstanding anything” and

ending with the words “for an inquiry”, the following shall be substitu-
ted, namely:—

“Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other
Jaw for the time being in force, the Commission may,—

(i) upon receiving a complaint of facts from any trade
association or from any consumer or a registered consumers’
association, whether such consumer is a member of that consu-
mers’ association or not, or

(i) upon a reference made to it by the Central Government
or a State Government, or

(४) upon its own Imowledge or information,

if it is of opinion that the continuance of inter-connection of an
undertaking (hereafter in this section referred to as the principal
undertaking) with any other undertaking is detrimental to—

(a) the interests of the principal undertaking; or
(b) the future development of the principal undertaking; or

(c) the steady growth or the industry to which the princi
undertaking pertains; or

(d) the public interest, 1
inquire”,


5

11. Part C of Chapter III of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omis-
sion of
Part-C.

12. Chapter III-A of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omis-
sion of
Chapter

HLA.

13. In sction 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the Amend-
proviso, after the words “Commission receives”, the words “any appli- ment of
5 cation from the Director General or” and after the words “it may”, the oe a

words “on such application or” shail respectively be inserted.

14. In séction 36A of the principal Act— ! | Amend-

'
5 wee ri ment of
(a) for the portion beginning with the words “adopts one ०: hued

more” and ending with the words “or otherwise”, the following shall ३6५.
be substituted, namely: —
“adopts any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice in-
cluding any of the following practices”;
(0) in clause (1), in sub-clause (), after the word “quality,”,
the word “quantity,” shall be inserted.

15 145. For section 360 of the principal Act, the following section shall  substi-

be substituted, namely: — tution of
new

section

for see-
tion 360.
“g6C. The Commission may, before issuing any process requiring Investiga

the attendance of the person against whom an inguiry (other than thn by

‘an inquiry upon an application by the Director General) may be Director

20. age under section 36B, by an order, require the Director General गे
to make, or cause to be made, a preliminary investigation in such pathy
manner as it may direct and submit a report to the Commission, for process in
the purpose of satisfying itself that the matter requires to be certain
inquired into.”. cases,

25.16. Im section 36D of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), — Amend-

ent of
(a) in clause (a), the word “and” occurring at the end shall sda
be omitted; : 36D.
(0) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
30 “(ले any information, statement or advertisement relating
to such unfair trade practice shall be disclosed, issued or pub-
lished, as the case may be, in such manner as may be specified
in the order”.
17. Section 45 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission
of section
45.
35. 18. Im section 46 of the principal Act, the words and figures “section Amend,
22 or section 23 or section 24 or” shall be omitted. मा 6
section
46.
19. Section 47 of the principal Act shall be omitted. कहता

“7.


Aneel: 20. In section 48 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) |
ment of omitted. i
section

48.

Substitu- 21. For section 48B of the principal Act, the following section shall
aie be substituted, nemely:—

section

for sec-

tion 48B,

Penalty “48B. (1) Every person who exercises any voting right, in

for con- respect of any share in contravention of any order of the Central

ae Government referred to in sub-section (1) of section 27B shall be

tion 278. punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
five years, and shall also be liable to fine,

(2) If any company gives effect to any voting or other right
exercised in relation to any share held in contravention of an order
of the Central Government referred to in sub-section (1) of section
27B, the company shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to five thousend rupees, and every officer of the company who is
in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both,”.

Amend- 22. In section 48C of the principal Act, for the words “which may

ment of extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand

ag Tupees, or with both”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to
three years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees:

Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in

writing, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term lesser than
the minimum term specified in this section.”,

Abend 23, In section 50 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1) and (2),

pens the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—

234 “(1) A person, who is deemed under section 13 to be guilty of

. an cffence under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may 3
extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both, and where the offence
is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five

thousand rupees for every day, after the first, during which such
contravention continues.

(2) If any person contravenes, without any. reasonable excuse, 3

any order made by the Central Government under section 31 or any

order made by the Commission under section 37, he shall be punish- |
able with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than, —

(a) in the case of the first offence, six months but not more
than three years, and |


९

(b) in the case of any second or subsequent offence in rela-
tion to the goods or services in respect of which the first offence
was committed, two years but not more than seven years,

and, in either case, where tle contravention is a continuing one, also
5 with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every
day, after the first, during which such contravention continues:

Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term lesser than
the minimum term specified in this sub-section.”.

10 24. In section 54 of the principal Act— |

(a) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;

(b) in sub-section (3), the words, brackets and figure “or any
term of a scheme of finance, as modified under sub-section (2),”
shall be omitted.

15 25. In section 55 of the principal Act, after the words “the Com-
mission under”, the words, figures and letter “section 12A or” shall be
inserted.

26. In section 67 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clauses
(ac), (ba) and (g) shall be omitted.

20. श. The Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted.

PART II
AMENDMENTS To THE Compantes Act, 1956

28. In the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the Com-
panies Act), after section 108, the following sections shall be inserted,
25 namely:—

408A. (1) Except with the previous approval of the Central
Government, no individual, firm, group, constituent of a group,
body corporate or bodies corporate under the same management,
shall jointly or severally acquire or agree to acquire, whether in his
30 or its own name or in the name of any other person, any equity
shares in a public company, or a private company which is a <ubsi-
diary of a public company, if the total nominal value of the equity
shares intended to be so acquired exceeds, or would, together with
the total nominal value of any equity shares already held in the
35 company by such individual, firm, group, constituent of a group,
body corporate or bodies corporate under the same management,
exceed twenty-five per cent. of the paid-up equity share capital of

such company.

(2) Where any individual, firm, group, constituent of a group,
40 body corporate or bodies corporate under the same management

Amend-
ment of
section
54.

Amend-

ment of

section
55.

Amend-
ment of
section 67.

Omission
of the
Schedule,

Tnsertion
of new
sections
108A to
108-1.

Restric-
tion on
acquisi-
tion of
certain
shares.


Restric~
tion on
transfer
of shares,

(hereinafter in this Act referred to as the acquirer), is |
by sub-section (1), from acquiring or agreeing to acquire exes
with the previous approval of the Central Government, any shat
of a public company or a private company which is a subsidiary of
a public company, no—

(6) company in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of
the share capital is held by the Central Government; or

(b) corporation (not being a company) established by or
under any Central Act; or

(c) financial institution, 1

shall transfer or agree to transfer any share to such acquirer unless
such acquirer has obtained the previous approval of the Central
Government for the acquisition, or agreement for the acquisition,
of such share.

1088. (1) Every body corpcrate or bodies corporate under the 15
same management, holding, whether singly or in the aggregate, ten
per cent, or more of the nominal value of the subscribed equity
share capital of any other company shall, before transferring one
or more of such shares, give to the Central Government an intima-
tion of its or their proposal to transfer such share, and every such 20
intimation shall include a statement as to the particulars of the share
proposed to be transferred, the name and address of the person (०
whom the share is proposed to be transferred, the share holding, if
any, of the proposed transferee in the concerned company and
such other particulars as may be prescribed. 25

(2) Where, on receipt of an intimation given under sub-section
(1) or otherwise, the Central Government is satisfied that as a
result of such transfer, a change in the composition of the Board of
directors of the company is likely to take place and that such
change would be prejudicial to the interests of the company or to

the public interest, it may, by order, direct that— 30

(a) no such share shall be transferred to the proposed
transferee: ‘

Provided that no such order shall preclude the body
corporate or bodies corporate from intimating, in accordance 35
with the provisions of sub-section (1), to the Central Govern-
ment its or their proposal to transfer the share to any other

person, or

(b) where such share is held in a company engaged in any
industry specified in Schedule XV, such share shall be trans- 49
ferred to the Central Government or to such corporation owned
or controlled by that Government as may be specified in the
direction.

(3) Where a direction is made by the Central Government
under clause (b) of sub-section (2), the share referred to in such
direction shall stand transferred to the Central Governmnet or to
the corporation specified therein, and the Central Government or the


20

25

30

45

specified corporation, as the case may be, shall pay, in cash, to the
body corporate or bodies corporate from which such share stands
transferred, an amount equal to the market value of such share,
within the time specified in sub-section (4).

Explanation—In this sub-section, “market value” means, in the
case of a share which is quoted on any recognised stock exchange,
the value quoted at such stock exchange on the date immediately
preceding the date on which the direction is made, and, in any
other case, such value as may be mutually agreed upon between
the holder of the share and the Central Government or the specified
corporation, as the case may be, or in the absence of such agreement,
as may be determined by the court.

(4) The market value referred to in sub-section (3) shall be
given forthwith, where there is no dispute as to such value or
where such value has been mutually agreed upon, but where there
is a dispute as to the market value, such value as is estimated by
the Central Government or the corporation, as the case may be,
shall be given forthwith and the balance, if any, shall be given
within thirty days from the date when the market value is deter-
mined by the court.

(5) If the Central Government does not make any direction
under sub-section (2) within sixty days from the date of receipt
by it of the intimation given under sub-section (1), the provisions
contained in sub-section (2) with regard to the transfer of such
share shall not apply.

1080, No body corporate or bodies corporate under the same
management, which holds, or hold in the aggregate, ten per cent.
or more of the nominal value of the equity share capital of a
foreign company, having an established place of business in India,
shall transfer any share in such foreign company to any citizen
of India or any body corporate incorporated in India except with
the previous approval of the Central Government and such pre-
vious approval shall not be refused unless the Central Government
is of opinion that such transfer would be prejudicial to the public
interest.

1080. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that as a
result of the iransfer of any share or block of shares of a company,
a change in the controlling interest of the company is likely to take
place and that such change would be prejudicial to the interests
of the company or to the public interest, that Government may
direct the company not to give effect to the transfer of any such
share or block of shares and—

(a) where the transfer of such share or block of shares has
already been registered, not to permit the transferee or any
nominee or proxy of the transferee, to exercise any voting or
other rights attaching to such share or block of shares; and

(b) where the transfer of such share or block of shares
has not been registered, not to permit any nominee or proxy

Restrics
tion on
the
transfer

of shares
of foreign
companies.

Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
direct
companies
not to
give
effect

to the
transfer.


Time
within
which
refusal to
be commu.
nicated,

Nothing
in sections
108A to
1080 to
apply to
Govern-
ment
companies,
etc,

Applies-
bility of
the pro-
visions of
sections
108A to
108F,

10

of the transferor to exercise any voting or other rights attaching
to such share or block of shares,

(2) Where any direction is given by the Central Government
under sub-section (1), the share or the block of shares referred to
therein shall stand retransferred to the person from whom it was 5
acquired, and thereupin the amount paid by the transferce for the
acquisition of such share or block of shares shall be refunded to

him by the person to whom such share or block of shares stands
or stand retransferred.

(2) If the refund referred to in sub-section (2) is not made 10
within the period of thirty days from the date of the direction
referred to in sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, on the
application of the person entitled to get the refund, direct, by order,
the refund of such amount and such order may be enforced as if it
were a decree made by a civil court. 15

(4) The persen to whom any share or block of shares stands
or stand retransferred under sub-section (2) shall, on making
refund under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), be eligible to
exercise voting or other rights attaching to such share or block of
shares. 20

108E. Every request made to the Central Government for
according its approval to the Proposal for the acquisition of any
share referred to in section 108A or the transfer of any share
referred to in section 1080 shall be presumed to have been granted
unless, within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of 25
such request, the Central Government communicates to the person
by whom the request was made, that the approval prayed for
cannot be granted.

1087, Nothing contained in section 108A [except sub-section (2)
thereof] shall apply to the transfer of any share to, and nothing in 30
section 108B or section 108C or section 108D shall apply to the
transfer of any share by—

(a) any company in which not less than. fifty-one per cent.
of the share capital is held by the Central Government;

(b) any corporation (not being a company) established by 35
or under any Central Act;

(c) any financial institution.

108G. The provisions of sections 108A to 108F (both inclusive)
shall apply to the acquisition or transfer of shares or share capital
by, or to, an individual, firm, group, constituent of a group, body 40

corporate or bodies corporate under the same management, who or
which—

(a) is, in case of acquisition of shares or share capital, the
owner in relation to a dominant undertaking and there would
‘be, as a result of such acquisition, any increase—

(i) in the production, supply, distribution or control of
any goods that are produced, supplied, distributed or con-
trolled in India or any substantial part thereof by that domi-
nant undertaking, or

45


25

30

35

45

n

(ii) in the provision or control of any services that are
rendered in India or any substantial part thereof by that
dominant undertaking, or

(b) would be, as a result of such acquisition or transfer of
shares or share capital, the owner of a dominant undertaking; or

(c) is, in case of iransfer of shares or share capital, the
owner in relation to a dominant undertaking,

108H, ‘The expressions “group”, “same management”, “financial
institution”, “dominant undertaking” and “owner” used in sections
108A to 108G (both inclusive), shall haye the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969.

108-1. (1) Any person who acquires any share in contravention
of the provisions of section 108A. shall be punishable with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both:

(2) (a) Every body corporate which makes any transfer of
shares without giving any intimation as required by section 108B,
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.

(b) Where any contravention of the provisions of section 1०४8
has been made by a company, every officer of the company who is
in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with, fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both.

(8) (a) Every body corporate which makes any transfer of shares
in contravention of the provisions of section 1080, shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

(b) Where any contravention of the provisions of section 108C
has been made by a company, every officer of the company who is
in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five

_ thousand rupees. or with both.

(4) (@) Every person who transfers any share in contravention
of any order made by the Central Government under section 108B,
or gives effect to any transfer of shares made in contravention of any
direction made by the Central Government under section 108D, or
who exercises any voting right in respect of any share in contraven-
tion of any direction made by the Central Government under section
108D, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.

(b) If any company gives effect to any voting or other right
exercised in relation to any share acquired in contravention of the
provisions of section 108B, or which gives effect to any voting right in
contravention of any direction made by the Central Government

Construc+
tion of
certain
expres-
sions
used in
sections
108A to
1089.

Penalty
Tor acqui-
sition or
transfer
of share
in con-
trayen-
tion of
sections
108A to
1980.


insertion
of new
Schedule,

Repeal
and
saving.

29. After Schedule XIV to the Companies Act, the following Sche-
dule shall be inserted, Namely: —

“SCHEDULE xy
{See section 1088 (2) (6)]

1. Arms and ammunition and allied items of defence equipment, |
defence aircrafts and warships.

2. Atomic energy.

3. Coal and lignite.

4. Mineral oils,

5. Mining of iron ore, manganese ore, chrome ore, gypsum, sul- 15
Phur, gold and diamond,

8. Mining of copper, lead, zinc, tin, molybdenum and wolfram.

7. Minerals specified in the Schedule to the Atomic Energy (Con-
trol of Production and Use) Order, 1953.

8. Railway transport.”, 20
30. (1) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (Amend-

ment) Ordinance, 1991, is hereby repealed. Oia:

(2) Notwithstanding sueh repeat, anything done or any action taken 8 1991.
under the Monopolies and Restrictive Trost Tactices Act, 1969 and the 54 or 1999
Companies Act, 1956, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed 25 | of 1956,
to have been done or taken under the said Acts, as amended by this Act,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (in short,
MRTF Act) came into force w.ej. Ist June, 1970. The basic philosophy
behind the MRTP Act was never to inhibit industrial growth in any
manner but to ensure that such growth is channelised for the public good
and is not instrumental in perpetuating concentration of economic power
to the common detriment. With the growing complexity of industrial
structure and the need for achieving economies of scale for ensuring
higher productivity and competitive advantage in the international mar-
ket, the thrust of the industrial policy has shifted to controlling and re-
gulating the monopolistic, restrictive and unfair trade practices rather
than making it necessary for certain undertakings to obtain prior approval
of the Central Government for expansion, establisliment of new under-
takings, merger, amalgamation, take over and appointment of Directors.
It has been the experience of the Government that pre-entry restriction
under the MRTP Act on the investment decision of the corporate sector
has outlived its utility and has become a hindrance to the speedy imple-
mentation of industrial projects. By eliminating the requirement of
time-consuming procedures and prior approval of the Government, it
would be possible for all productive sections of the society to participate
in efforts for maximisation of production. It is, therefore, proposed to
re-structure the MRTP Act by omitting the provisions of sections 20 to 26
and transfer the provisions contained in Chapter III-A regarding res-
trictions on acquisition and transfer of shares to the Companies Act, 1956.
The Schedule to the MRTP Act is also consequently to be transferred
with modification to the Companies Act, 1956.

2. It is also proposed to enlarge the scope of inquiry by the MRTP
Commission with a view to taking effective steps to curb and regulate
monopolistic, restrictive and unfair trade practices which are prejudicial
to public interest. It is also proposed to provide for deterrent punish-
ment for contravention of the orders passed by the MRTP Commission
and the Central Government and empower the Commission to punish
for its contempt. Certain other consequential changes are also found
necessary in the MRTP Act.

3. The criteria for determining dominance, applicable to acquisition
and transfer of shares under newly inserted sections 108A, 108B and
108C of the Companies Act, 1956, is proposed to be determined only on
the basis of market share of 25 per cent. of the total goods produced,
supplied, distributed or services rendered in India or substantial part
thereof.

4, The Bill seeks to replace the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices (Amendment) Ordinance, 1991 (Ord. 8 of 1991) with modifi-
cations and to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New Denn; K. VIJAYA BHASKARA REDDY.
The 6th December, 1991.


Notes on clauses

Clause 2 seeks to enlarge the definition of ‘goods’ by including issue of
shares before allotment. The scope of the definition of ‘service’ is alio being
enlarged by including chit-fund. An Explanation has also been added that any
dealings in real estate shall be deemed to be included in ‘service’,

Clause 3 seeks to amend clause (b) of section 10 for the purpose of
empowering the Director General of Investigation and Registration to make an
application to the MRTP Commission to inquire into any monopolistic trade
practice.

Clause 4 seeks to amend section 11 in order to empower the MRTP Com-
mission to require preliminary investigation by the Director General in respect
of any allegation relating to restrictive and monopolistic trade practices.

Clause 5 seeks to amend section 12 empowering the MRTP Commission
to exercise powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 revarding appear-
ance of parties and consequence of non-appearance,

Clause 6 seeks to amend section 12A clarifying the time of commence-
ment of inquiry before the MRTP Commission and empowering it to grant
temporary injunction ex-parte.

Clause 7 seeks to insert a new section 13B empowering the MRTP Com-
mission to punish for contempt under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.

Clahse 8 seeks to omit sections 20 to 26 contained in Part A of Chapter
III, thereby semoving pre-entry restrictions as to ptior approval of the Central
Government for expansion, establishment of new undertaking, merger, amalga-
mation, take over and appointment of directors and also for registration of

certain undertakings,

Clauses 9 and 10 seek to amend sections 27 and 27A respectively by pro-
viding that the said provisions will be applicable to any undertaking and that,
besides on a reference received from the Central Government or a State Govern-
ment, the Commission may inquire into any matter also upon a complaint
from any trade association or consumers’ association, etc., or upon its own
knowledge or information.

Clause 11 seeks to omit Part C of Chapter III containing sections 28 to
30 as 9 consequence of the omission of Part A of the said Chapter,

Clause 12 seeks to omit Chapter III-A containing sections 30A to 30G
which relate to restrictions on the acquisition and transfer of shares. The pro~
visions of sections 30A to 309 were incorporated in the MRTP Act, 1969
by the MRTP (Amendment) Act, 1984 by transferring them from the Com-
panies Act, 1956. These provisions, after being brought back to the Companies
Act, 1956, will apply to domimant undertakings only,

14

sas icicle


15

Clause 13 secks to amend section 31 empowering the MRTP Commission to
make inquiry into monopolistic trade practices upon an application from the
Director General also.

Clause 14 seeks to amend section 36A enlarging the definition of unfair
trade practice under that section and also provides for including false repre-
sentation in respect of quantity of goods. It is now not necessary 10 establish
loss or injury to the consumers,

Clause 15 seeks to substitute section 36C empowering the MRTP Com-
mission to direct preliminary investigation by Director General in any matter.

Clause 16 seeks to amend section 36D empowering the MRTP Commission
to direct publication of corrective advertisement and disclosure of additional
information while passing orders relating to unfair \rade practices under that
section,

Clauses 17, 18, 19 and 20 contain consequential umendments, by omitting
provisions relating to punishments which are prescribed for contrayention of
the provision of Part A of Chapter III, after Part A has been omitted by
clause 8.

Clause 21 seeks to amend section 48B in order to omit those provisions
therefrom which prescribe punishments for contravention of the provision of
sections 30B to 308 after these sections have been transferred to the Companies
Act, 1956,

Clauses 22 and 23 seek to amend sections 48C and 50 respectively in
order to provide for deterrent punishment for contrayention of the orders
passed by the MRTP Commission under sections 13, 36D and 37 and by the
Central Government under section 31.

Clause 24 seeks to make a consequential amendment in section 54,

Clause 25 seeks to amend section 55 to provide for appeal against tem-
porary injunction granted by the MRTP Commission under section 12A.

Clause 26 seeks to make consequential amendments in section 67 by
omitting certain clauses.

Clause 27 seeks to omit the Schedule to the MRTP Act.

Clauses 28 and 29 seek to amend the Companies Act, 1956 for the purpose
of transferring provisions of sections 30A to 30G of the MRTP Act, 1969 as
sections 108A to 1081 in the Companies Act, 1956. The Schedule
to the MRTP Act has now been transferred to the Companies Act, 1956 as

Schedule XV.
Clause 30 seeks to repeal and save action taken under the said Ordinance,


7 |
‘MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 28 of the Bill has inserted the new sections 108A to 108- i
the Companies Act, 1956, section 108B of the Act empowers th
Central Government to prescribe the particulars to give intimation
transfer shares.

2, The matter in respect of which the Central Government have
een empowered to make rules relate to matters of procedure and detail.
‘The delegation of legislative powers js, therefore, of a normal character.

16


Memorandum explaining the modifications contained in the Bill to
replace the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (Amendment)

Ordinance, 1991.

The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (Amendment) Bill,

1991, which seeks to repeal and replace the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices (Amendment) Ordinance, 1991, proposes to make the
following modifications in the provisions contained in the said Ordi-
nance: —

(a) By section 2 of the Ordinance, certain clauses of section 2
of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (here-
inafter referred to as the MRTP Act) have been amended or omitted.
Some more clauses are sought to be amended or omitted for carry-
ing out the objects of the Bill.

(७) A new clause 6 is being added for amending section 1A of
the MRTP Act to clarify the time of commencement of — inquiry
before the Commission and empowering it to grant temporary in-
junction ex-parte, ‘

(c) A new clause 7 is being added to insert a new section 13B
in the MRTP Act empowering the Commission to punish for con-
tempt under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.

(d) Section 22 of the Ordinance empowering the Commission
to compound offences is sought to be omitted.

(e) By section 27 of the Ordinance, section 108G was inserted
in the Companies Act, 1956. This section is sought to be amended
to provide that approval of the Central Government is required in
case the acquisition of shares or share capital by the dominant
undertaking has the effect of increase in its dominance,

१४


Extracts FRoM THE Monopoiies anp RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES Act, 1969

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

ANNEXURE

(54 or 1969)

* * * * *

* * * * *

(d) “dominant undertaking” means—

(0) an undertaking which has all the following three ।
that is to 589,--
(ai) it is an undertaking within the purview of the
Industries Act;

(bi) it has a licensed capacity for the production of
goods of any description; and

(ci) its licensed capacity for the production of such
goods or the aggregate of its licenseq capacity and of the
licensed capacity of inter-connected undertakings for the
production of such goods is not less than one-fourth of the
total installed capacity in India for the production of such
goods; or - ‘

(मर) an undertaking which has all the following three
features, that is to say,— ‘ |

(aii) it is an undertaking within the purview of the
Industries Act; eat feet

(bit) it, by itself or along with inter-connected under-
takings produces, supplies, distributes or otherwise controls
not less than one-fourth of the total goods of any descrip-
tion that are produced, supplied or distributed in India or
any substantial part thereof; and

(०४) it has no licensed capacity for the production of
such goods; or
(iit) an undertaking which has both the following features,

that is to say,—

(aiii) it is not an undertaking within the purview of
the Industries Act; and

(biti) it, by itself or along with inter-connected under-
takings produces, supplies, distributes or otherwise cont
not less than one-fourth of the total goods of any des

tion that are produced, supplied or distributed in India or
any substantial part thereof; or

* * * * *

18


| 1930.

19

Provided that for the purposes of sub-clauses (ii) and (iti)
of this clause, the goods produced by an undertaking which does
not employ—

(a) more than fifty workers on any day of the relevant
period, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is
being carried on with the aid of power or is ordinarily so carried
on, or |

(b) more than one hundred workers on any day of the rele-
vant period, and in any part of which a manufacturing process
is being carried on without the aid of power or is ordinarily so
carried on,

shall not be taken into account.

Explanation I.—Where the licensed capacity of inter-connected
undertakings for the production of any goods is not less than one-
fourth of the installed capacity for the production of such goods or
not less than one-fourth of the production, supply, distribution or
control of any goods or the provision or control of any service, as the
case may be, is shared by inter-connected undertakings, each such
undertaking shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to be a
dominent undertaking.

* * * * *

Explanation TV.— In determining, with reference to the fea-
tures specified in sub-clause (ii), (iii) or (iv), as the case may be,
the question as to whether an undertaking is or is not a dominant
undertaking, regard shall be had to—

(i) the average annual production of the goods, or the
average annual value of the services provided, by the under-
taking during the relevant period; and

(ii) the figures published by such authority as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify, with regard to the
total production of such goods made, or the total value of such
services provided, in India or any substantial part thereof
during the relevant period.

* * * * *

(e) “goods” means goods as defined in the Sale of Goods Act,
1930, and includes,—

* * « कर .
(ii) shares and stocks;

* * * * *


st

20

(ee) “goods of any description” in relation to an undertaking
within the purview of the Industries Act, means any article |
falls under an item in the First Schedule to that Act;

* * * कक * !

(ff) “Industries Act” means the Industries (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1951, and includes any rules, notifications or orders
thereunder;

(fff) “installed capacity” means installed capacity as recognised
under the Industries Act or any returns thereunder;

* * * * *

(q) “scheme of finance” means a scheme indicating the sources
from which, and the terms and conditions on which, finances are

proposed to be obtained by an undertaking: ‘

Provided that, after the commencement of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices (Amendment) Act, 1984, there shall be
included in every scheme of finance, the estimated capital outlay
which would be needed to give effect to the scheme;

(0) “service” means service of any description which is made
available to potential users and includes the provision of facilities in
connection with banking, financing, insurance, transport, processing,
supply of electrical or other energy, board or lodging or both, enter-
tainment, amusement or the purveying of news or other information,
but does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or
under a contract of personal service;

* * * * *
(vv) “undertaking within the purview of the Industries Act”

means an undertaking pertaining to a scheduled industry as defined
in that Act; \

(w) “value of assets”, in relation to an undertaking, means the
value of its assets as shown in its books of account after making
provision for depreciation;

* * * * *

JURISDICTION, POWERS AND PROCEDURE OF THE COMMISSION

10. The Commission may inquire into—
* * के * *

(b) any monopolistic trade practice, upon a reference made to it
by the Central Government or upon its own knowledge or information.



5 of 1908.

45 of 1860.

5 of 1898.

| of 1908,

aL a =e

11. (1) Where any complaint is received by the Commission from any
association under sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of section 10, it may, before
issuing any process requiring the attendance of the person complained
against, by an order, require the Director General to make, or cause to
be made, a preliminary investigation in such manner as it may direct and
submit a report to the Commission to enable it to satisfy itself as to
whether or not the complaint requires to be inquired into,

(2) The Director General may, upon his own knowledge or informa-
tion or on a complaint made to him, make, or cause to be made, a pre-
liminary investigation in such manner as he may think fit to enable him
to satisfy himself as to whether or not an application should be made
by him to the Commission under sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of section 10.

* * * * *
12. (1) The Commission shall, for the purposes of any inquiry under
this Act have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code

of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following
matters, namely: — ‘

* * * * 2

(2) Any proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian
Penal Code, and the Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for
the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898.

* * * % * i

2) * * * * *

(2) The provisions of rules 2A to 5 (both inclusive) of Order XXXIX
of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall, as far
as may be, apply to a temporary injunction issued by the Commision
under this section, as they apply to a temporary injunction issued by
a civil court, and any reference in any such rule to a suit shall be con-
strued as a reference to an inquiry before the Commission.

* * * * *

CHAPTER IIT
CONCENTRATION OF ECONOMIC POWER
Part A *
20. This Part shall apply to—
(०) an undertaking if the total value of—

(i) the assets of such undertaking, or

Investiga-
tion by
Director)
General
before
issue of
process in.
certain
cases.

Powers of
the Com-
mission,

Power of
the Com-
mission
to grant
tempo-
rary in-
junctions,

Under-
takings to
which


22, - is फैत i ¥

(ié) the assets of such undertaking togetlier with the assets
of its inter-connected undertakings,

is not less than’ one hundred crores of Tupees;

|! (b) a dominant undertaking— iy

(i) where it is a single undertaking, the value of the assets
of such undertaking, or

(४) where it consists of more than one undertaking, the sum
total of the value of the assets of all the inter-connected under-
takings constituting the dominant undertaking,

is not less than one crore of rupees,

Explanation—The yalue referred to in this section shall be, -

(i) in the case of an undertaking referred to in clause (a) or
clause (0), as the case may be, the value of the assets of such under-
taking, on the last day of its financial year which closes during the
calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year in which the
question arises as to whether this Part does or does not apply to such
undertaking; and

(i) in the case of an inter-connected undertaking, the value of
the assets of such undertaking, on the last day of its financial year
which closes during the calendar year immediately preceding the
ealendar year in which the question arises as to whether this Part
does or does not apply to the undertaking referred to in clause (a) or
clause (8).

Expansion 21. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 23, where the owner of an

of under- undertaking to which this Part applies proposes to substantially expand

a the activities of such undertaking by the issue of fresh capital or by the
installation of new machinery or other equipment or in any other manner,
such owner shall, before taking any action to give effect to the proposal
for such expansion, give to the Central Government notice, in the pres-
cribed form, of his intention to make such expansion, stating therein the
scheme of finance with regard to the proposed expansion, whether it is
connected with any other undertaking or undertakings and if so, giving
particulars to all the inter-connected undertakings and such other infor-
mation as may be prescribed,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force no owner of an undertaking shall give effect to any
Proposal for the substantial expansion of such undertaking unless such
Proposal has been approved by the Central Government.

Explanation,—For the Purposes of this section, an ‘undertaking shall be
deemed. to expand substantially in any manner if, as a result of such
expansion,—

(a) in the case of an undertaking within the purview of the
J Industries Act and having a licensed capacity for the production of


~ 23 wt

|

(b) in the case of an undertaking to which clause (b) of section
20 applies but to which clause (a) of this Explanation does not apply,
the production, marketing, supply, distribution or control of any goods
or the provision of any services would increase by not less than
twenty-five per cent. of the goods produced, marketed, supplied,
distributed or controlled, or services provided, by it immediately
before such expansion;

(c) in the case of any other undertaking,—

. (i) it would have additional assets of a value of not less than
twenty-five per cent. of the value of its assets immediately before
such expansion; or

(ii) the production, marketing, supply, distribution or control
of any goods or the provision of any services would increase by
not less twenty-five per cent. of the goods produced, marketed,
supplied, distributed or controlled, or services provided, by it
immediately before such expansion.

(3) (०) The Central Government may call upon the owner of the
undertaking concerned to satisfy it that the proposed expansion or the
scheme of finance with regard to such expansion is not likely to lead to
the concentration of economic power to the common detriment or is not
likely to be prejudicial to the public interest in any other manner and
thereupon the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is
expedient in the public interest so to do, by order accord approval to the
proposal for such expansion.

(b) If the Central Government is of opinion that no such order as is
referred to in clause (a) can be made without a further inquiry, it may
refer the application to the Commission for an inquiry and the Commis-
sion may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the Central Govern-

ment its opinion thereon, |

(c) Upon receipt of the report of the Commission, the Central Govern-
ment may pass such orders with regard to the proposal for the expansion
of the undertaking as it may think fit. |

(7) No scheme of any expansion approved by the Central Govern-
ment and no scheme of finance with regard to such expansion shall be
modified except with the previous approval of the Central Government.

(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any undertaking in so far as
the expansion is effected by the replacement, renovation or modernisation
of the whole or any part of the machinery or other equipment of the
undertaking or by the installation of any balancing equipment, and if as
a result of the expansion so effected, the increase in the licensed capacity
of the undertaking does not exceed, in the aggregate, twenty-five per cent.
of its licensed capacity before any expansion thereof.

Explanation I—For the purposes of this sub-section “balancing equip-
ment” means any equipment or device needed for removing any produc-
tion bottleneck, and includes the installation of any equipment or device
in the tool room, ancillary services or inspection department where such
installation has a bearing on the quantum and quality of production to
be achieved. | |


Estabtish-
ment of
new under-

takings.

os os -e ae we Sh * 9 ,७ ॥ हे ६ hoe ४+ हूँ

Explanation Il.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the increase
in the licensed capacity shall be deemed to be in addition ‘to, and not
in derogation of, the increase in the licensed capacity which may be
made without the approval of the Central Government under the pro-
visions of sub-section (2), read with the Explanation below that sub-
section, i

Illustration

The owner of undertaking X, having a licensed capacity of 10,000
units, proposes to make an expansion of the undertaking by the replace-
ment, renovation or modernisaiton of the whole or any part of the machi-
nery or other equipment of such undertaking or by the installation of any
balancing equipment, and thereby to increase the licensed capacity of
such undertaking to 14,999 units. The increase in the licensed capacity
of undertaking X, being below 5,000 units, the proposal for the expan-
sion of undertaking X would not, by virtue of the combined operation
of this sub-section and the Explanation below sub-section (2), require
the approval of the Central Government under sub-section (2).

Explmation I1.—References in this sub-section to licensed capacity
shall, in relation to any undertaking which does not have any licensed
capacity, be construed as references to production, storage, marketing,
supply, distribution or control of goods, or provision of services, by, or
the value of the assets of, such undertaking, as the case may be.

22, (1) No person or authority, other than Government, shall, after
the commencement of this Act, establish—

() any new undertaking which, when established, would be-
come an inter-connected undertaking of an undertaking to which
this Part applies; or

(ii) add any new unit or division to an undertaking to which
this Part applies, i

except under, and in accordance with the previous permission of the
Central Government:

Provided that except where as a result of the establishment of new
undertaking, unit or division, an undertaking would come into existence
to which clause (b) of section 20 would apply, no permission shall be
required if the new undertaking, or, as the case may be, the new unit
or division, when established, would not produce the same goods or
provide the same services in relation to which the undertaking—

(व) of which such new undertaking would be an inter-con-
nected undertaking, or

(b) to which such new unit or division is proposed to be ad-

ig a dominant undertaking. 7;


25

(1A) No owner of any undertaking to which clause (a) of section
20 applies, shall establish, except under, and in accordance with, the
previous permission of the Central Government, any new undertaking’
for the production, storage, supply, distribution, marketing or control
of any article, or for the provision of any service, for which there is no
licensed capacity, and no such permission shal] be granted by that Gov-
ernment unless the articles which are proposed to be produced, stored,
supplied, distributed, marketed or controlled, or the services which are
propesed to be provided, by such new undertaking are different from
the articles produced, stored, supplied, distributed. marketed or control-
Jed, or, as the case may be, services provided, by the first mentioned
undertaking and the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply
to the establishment of such new undertaking as they apply to the
establishment of a new undertaking or any new unit or division refer-
red to in sub-section (1).

(2) Any person or authority intending to establish a new under-
taking, unit or division referred to in sub-section (1) shall, before tak-
ing any action for the establishment of such undertaking, unit or
division, make an application to the Central Government in the pres-
cribed form for that Government's approval to the proposal and shall
set out in such application information with regard to the inter-con-
nection, if any, of the new undertaking, unit or division (which is
intended to be established) with every other undertaking, the value or
quantity of goods that may be produced by the new undertaking, unit
or division, the scheme of finance for the establishment of the new
undertaking, unit or division and such other information as may
be prescribed,

(3) (४) The Central Government may call upon the person or
authority to satisfy it.that the proposal to establish a new undertaking,
unit or division or the scheme of finance with regard to such proposal
is not likely to lead to the concentration of economic power to the com-
mon detriment or is not likely to be prejudicial to the public interest
in any other manner and thereupon the Central Government may, if it
is satisfied that it is expedient in the public interest so to do, by order
accord approval to the proposal.

(b) If the Central Government is of opinion that no such approval
as is referred to in clause (a) can be made without further inquiry, it
may refer the application to the Commission for an inquiry and the
Commission may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the Central
Government its opinion thereon.

(c) Upon receipt of the report of the Commission, the Central Gov-
ernment may pass such orders with regard to the proposal for the es-
tablishment of a new undertaking, unit or division as it may think fit.

(d) No scheme of finance on the strength of which the establishment
ef a new undertaking, unit or division has been approved by the Central


Power to
exempt,

Merger,
amalgama-
tion and
take over.

26

Government shall be modified except with the previous approval |
that Government.

22A. (1) The Central Government nay, by notification, direct that

(०) in respect of an industry or service specified in the notifi-
cation:

Provided that no industry or service shall be so specified unless
© Central Government is satisfied having regard to all relevant
factors that it is of high national priority;

(c) which relates to an undertaking established or proposed to
be established in a free trade zone.

Explanation —Imn this sub-section, “free trade zone” has the same

meaning as in clause @ of the Explanation to section 10A of the
Income-tax Act, 1961,

(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall have effect

for such period not exceeding five years at a time as may be specificd
in the notification.

(3) Every notification issued under Sub-section (1) shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more Successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any

fication,

23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act or in
any other law for the time being in force.

(@) no scheme of merger or amalgamation of an undertaking to
which this Part applies with any other undertaking,


27

(b) no scheme of merger or amalgamation of two or more under-
takings which would have the effect of bringing into existence an
undertaking to which clause (a) or clause (b) of section 20 would apply,

shall be sanctioned by any Court or be recognised for any purpose or be
given effect to unless the scheme for such merger or amalgamation has
been approved by the Central Government under this section.

(2) (a) If the owner of any undertaking to which this Part applies
frames a scheme of merger or amalgamation of such undertaking with any 1.
other undertaking to which this Part applies, or

(०) if any scheme of merger or amalgamation is proposed between
two or more undertakings, and, if as a result of such merger or amalga-
mation, an undertaking would come into existence to which clause (a) or
clause (b) of section 20 would apply, the owner of the undertaking ref-
erred to in clause (a), or as the case may be, the framers of the scheme
referred to in clause (b), shall, before taking any action to give effect
to such scheme, make an application to the Central Government in the
prescribed form with a copy of the scheme annexed thereto, for the app-
roval of the scheme.

(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall apply to the
scheme of merger or amalgamation of inter-connected undertakings
which produce the same goods or provide the same services, and none of
which is a dominant undertaking, if as a result of such merger or amalga-
mation, there does not come into existence any undertaking to which
clause (a), or clause (b), of section 20 would apply.

(4) If the owner of an undertaking to which this Part applies, proposes
to take over the whole or part of any other undertaking, such owner shall.
before giving effect to the proposal, make an application in writing to the
Central Government in the prescribed form for approval of the proposal
specifying therein information regarding the interconnection of the such
other undertaking with any other undertaking or undertakings, the scheme
of finance with regard to the proposed take over and such other informa-
tion as may be prescribed:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the take over
by the owner of an undertaking, which is not a dominant undertaking, of
any other undertaking which is also not a dominant undertaking, if both
the undertakings produce the same goods or provide the same services,
unless as a result of such take over, an undertaking would come into exis-
tence to which clause (a), or clause (b), of section 20 would apply.

(5) No proposal referred to in sub-section (4) which has been approv-
ed by the Central Government under sub-section (8) and no scheme of
finance with regard to such proposal shall be modified except with the
previous approval of the Central Government.


Merger,
amalgama-
tion or
take over
in contra-
vention of
section 23.

28
(0) (०) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2) or, asthe
case may be, sub-section (4), the Central Government may, if it thinks fit,
call upon the applicant to satisfy it that the Proposed scheme of merger
or amalgamation, or, as the case may be, the proposed take over, and the

heard, that it is necessary so to do, it may, by order, accord its approval
to the proposal for such merger or amalgamation or, as the case may be,
such take over;

sion may, after such hearing, as it may think fit, report to the Central
Government, its opinion thereon.

(@ On receipt of the Commission’s report the Central Government
may Pass such orders as it may think fit,

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, no proposal to acquire by purchase, take over or otherwise
of an undertaking to which this Part applies shall be given effect to unless

Explanation —For the purposes of this Section “take over”,

means the acquisition of not less than twenty-five per cent. of the
voting power in relation to such body corporate;

(0) in relation to any other undertaking, includes the acquisi-
tion or control of management thereof, whether by the acquisition of
the ownership of the undertaking or under any mortgage, lease or
licence or under any agreement or other arrangement,

24. Where any merger, amalgamation or take over is being, or has
been, effected in contravention of the provisions of section 23, the Cen-
tral Government may, after such consultation with the Commission as
it may consider necessary, direct, without prejudice to any penalty which
may be imposed under this Act for such contravention, the owner of the
undertaking concerned to cease and desist from such contravention, to


30 of 1984,

29

25. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
other law for the time being in force, no person, who is a director of an
undertaking to which this Part applies, shall be appointed, after the
commencement of this Act, as a director of any other undertaking except
with the prior approval of the Central Government and any appointment
contrary to the provisions of this section shall be void:

Provided that the approval of the Central Government shall not be
necessary to the appointment of a person as a director of an undertaking
unless he holds such office in more than ten inter-connected undertakings.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no act
done by a person as a director shall be invalid merely on the ground that
his appointment was void by reason of this section or of any provision
of this Part:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to give validity
to any act done by a director after his appointment has been shown
to the undertaking and the director concerned to be void.

(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other
law for the time being in force, every director holding such directorship
as is not consistent with the provisions of this section shall, unless his
appointment expires earlier, obtained within a period of one year
from the commencement of this Act, the approval of the Central Gov-
ernment to such appointment and if he fails to do so, his appointment
shall, on the expiry of the said period, become void.

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall, as far as
may be, apply to partners of any firm or the members of the managing
or executive committee (by whatever name called) of any other asso-
ciation of individuals, whether incorporated or not, owning an under-
taking within the meaning of this Act, as they apply to directors of
companies.

26. (1) The owner of every undertaking to which this Part applies
at the commencement of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
(Amendment) Act, 1984 or to which the provisions of that Part become
applicable thereafter, shall, within sixty days from such commencement
or the date on which that Part becomes first applicable to it, or within
such further time as the Central Government may, on sufficient cause
being shown, allow, make an application (in such form and containing
such particulars as may be prescribed) to the Central Government for
the registration of such undertaking as an undertaking to which that
Part applies.

(2) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the application
referred to in sub-section (1), forthwith enter the name of the under-
taking in a register to be maintained for the purpose and issue to the
undertaking concerned a certificate of registration containing such par-
ticulars as may be prescribed.

(3) The owner of any undertaking which has ceased to be an under-
taking to which this Part applies may, at any time after such cesser,
apply fo the Central Government for cancéllation of the registration
and the Central Government may, after making such inquiry as it may

Directors
of under
takings
not to be
appointed
directors
of other
under-
takings.

Registra
tion of
under-
takings to
which
Part A
applies.


Division
of under
takings.

Power of
the Cen-
tral Goy-
ernment to
direct
severance
of inter-
connection
between
under-
takings,

30

think fit, cancel the registration of such undertaking and notify such
cancellation in the Offcial Gazette. |

(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing
contained in this section shall apply to an undertaking which was regis-
tered under this section before the commencement of the
and Restrictive Trade Practices (Amendment) Act, 1984 and, accord-
ingly, fresh registration, under this section, of such undertaking shall
not be necessary, | |

Part B

27. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any
other law for the time being in force, the Central Government may, if
it is of opinion that the working of an undertaking to which Part A of
this Chapter applies, is prejudicial to the public interest, or has led, or
is leading, or is likely to lead, to the adoption of any monopolistic or
restrictive trade practices, refer the matter to the Commission for an
inquiry as to whether it is expedient in the public interest to make
an order,—

(a) for the division of any trade of the undertaking by the sale
of any part of the undertaking or assets thereof, or

(b) for the division of any undertaking or inter-connected
undertakings into such number of undertakings as the circumstan-
ces of the case may justify,

and the Commission may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the
Central Government its opinion thereon and shall, where it is of opinion
that a division ought to be made, specify the manner of the division and
compensation, if any, payable for such division.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section all activities carried
on by way of trade by an undertaking or two or more inter-connected
undertakings may be treated as a single trade,

* * * * *

218. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act
or in any other law for the time being in force, the Central Government
may, if it is of opinion that the continuance of inter-connection of an
undertaking (hereafter in this section referred to as the principal
undertaking) with any other undertaking to which Part A of this Chap-
ter applies, is detrimental to— } i

(०) the interests of the principal undertaking; or
(b) the future development of the principal undertaking; or

(०) the steady growth of the industry to which the principal
undertaking pertains; or |

(d) the public interest, ' |

refer the matter to the Commission for an inquiry as to whether it is
expedient in the public interest to make an order for the severance of
such inter-connection on one or more of the grounds aforesaid, and the
Commission may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the Cen-

30 of 1934,


31

ival Government its opinion thereon and shall, where it is of opinion
- that the severance of the inter-connection of the principal undertaking
with any other undertaking ought to be made, include in its report a
scheme with respect to such severance, providing therein for the matters

1

specified in sub-section (2). | |

* + * * .
Part C

28. In exercising its powers under Part A or Part B of this Chapter,
the Central Government, or, as the case may be, the Commission, shall
take into account alll matters which appear in the particular circum-
stances to be relevant and, among other things, regard shall be had to
the need consistently with the general economic position of the country—

(a) to achieve the production, supply and distribution, by most
efficient and economical means, of goods of such types and qualities,
in such volume and at such prices as will best meet the requirements
of the defence of India, and home and overseas markets;

(0) to have the trade organised in such a way that its efficiency
is progressively increased;

(c) to ensure the best use and distribution of men, materials
and industrial capacity in India; | {

। 1
(d) to effect technica] and technological improvements in trade
and expansion of existing markets and the opening up of new

markets; | |

(९) to encourage new enterprises as a countervailing force to
the concentration of economic power to the common detriment;

(0) to regulate the control of the material resources of the
comraunity to subserve the common good; and

(9) to reduce disparities in development between different

regions and more especially in relation to areas which have remained
markedly backward.

29. Before making an order under this Chapter, the Central Govern-
ment shall give a reasonable Opportunity of being heard to any person
who is, or may be, in its opinion, interested in the matter under the con-
sideration of that Government.

30. (1) Where the Central Government is of opinion that no approval
can be accorded under section 21 or section 22, or no order under section
23 can be made, unless a further inquiry has been held into the matter
of the Commission, it shall refer the matter to the Commission within
sixty days from the date of receipt of the notice under section 21, applica-

tion under section 22 or the proposal under section 23, as the case may
be: ‘

Provided that where further particulars in connection with any such
notice, application or proposal are called for by the Central Government,
the said period of sixty days shall be computed from the date on which
such further particulars are furnished to that Government.

Matters to
be con-
sidered
by the
Central
Govern-
ment
before
according
approval.

Opportu-
nity of
being
heard.

Time
within
which
action:
should be
taken.


Applica-
tion of

Chapter,

Restric-
tions on
the acquisi-
tion of
certain
shares,

32

(2) Where any notice, application or proposal under this Chapter is
referred to the Commission for an inquiry, it shall be the duty of the
Commission to make its report on the matter referred to it within ninety
days from the date on which the reference is received by it, except where
the Commission, for special reasons recorded by it in writing, is of opinion
at the report cannot be made by it within the said period of ninety

lays.

(3) Every notice, application or proposal in respect of which a report
has been submitted by the Commission to the Centrai Government shall
be disposed of by that Government within sixty days from the date of
receipt of the report of the Commission. 1

(4) Every notice, application or proposal which has not been referred
to the Commission, shall be disposed of by the Central Government
within ninety days from the date on which such notice, application or
proposal, as the case may be, is received by it, except where the Central
Government, for special reasons recorded by it in writing, is of opinion
that the notice, application or proposal, as the case may be, cannot be
disposed of within the said period of ninety days.

CHAPTER III-A

RESTRICTIONS ON THE ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF SHARES OF, OP
BY, CERTAIN BODIES CORPORATE

30A. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the acquisition or
transfer of shares or share capital by. or to. an individual, firm, group,
constituent of a group, body corporate, or bodies corporate under the same
management, who or which, —

(a) is the owner in relation to an undertaking to which Part A of
Chapter II applies, or

(0) would be, as a result of such acquisition or transfer of shares
or share capital, the owner of an undertaking to which Part A of
Chapter III applies, or would apply.

30B. (1) Except with the previous approval of the Central Government,
no individual, firm, group, constituent of a group, body corporate or bodies
corporate under the same management, shall jointly or severally acquire
or agree to acquire, whether in his or its own name or in the name of any
other person, any equity shares in a public company, or a private company
which is a subsidiary of a public company, if the total nominal value of
the equity shares intended to be so acquired exceeds. or would, together
with the total nominal value of any equity shares already held in the
company by such individual, firm, group, constituent of a group, body
corporate, or bodies corporate under the same management, exceed
twenty-five per cent. of the paid-up equity share capital of such company.

(2). Where any individual, firm, group, constituent of a group, body
corporate, or bodies corporate under the same management (hereafter
in this Chapter referred to as the acquirer), is prohibited, by sub-section
(1), from acquiring or greeing to acquire except with the previous


33

approval of the Central Government, any share of a public company or a
private company which is a subsidiary of a public company, no—

(a) company in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of tha
share capital is held by the Central Government; or

(०) corporation (not being a company) established by or under
any Central Act; or

(० financial institution,

shall transfer or agree to transfer any share to such acquirer unless such
acquirer has obtained the previous approval of the Central Government
for the acquisition, or agreement for the acquisition, of such share.

30C. (1) Every body corporate or bodies corporate under the same
management, holding, whether singly or in the aggregate, ten per cent.
or more of the nominal value of the subscribed equity share capital of any
.other company, shall, before transferring one or more of such shares,
give to the Central Government an intimation of its or their proposal to
transfer such share, and every such intimation shall include a statement
‘as to the particulars of the share proposed to be transferred, the name
and address of the person to whom the share is proposed to be transferred,
the share holding, if any, of the proposed transferee in the concerned
company and such other particulars as may be prescribed,

(2) Where, on receipt of an intimation given under sub-section (7)
or otherwise, the Central Government is satisfied that as q result of such
transfer, a change in the composition of the Board of directors of the
company is likely to take place and that such change would be prejudicial
to the interests of the company or to the public interest, it may by order,
direct that—

(a) no such share shall be transferred to the proposed transferee:

Provided that no such order shall preclude the body corporate or
bodies corporate from jntimating, in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (1), to the Central Government its or their proposal to
transfer the share to any other person, or

(b) where such share is held in a company engaged in any
industry specified in the Schedule, such share shall be transferred to
the Central Government or to such corporation owned or controlled
by that Government as may be specified in the direction.

(3) Where a direction is made by the Central Government under clause
(b) of sub-section (2), the share referred to in such direction shall stand
transferred to the Central Government or to the corporation specified
therein, and the Central Government or the specified corporation, as the
case may be, shall pay, in cash, to the body corporate or podies corporate
from which such share stands transferred, an amount equal to the market
value of such share, within the time specified in sub-section (4).

In this sub-section “market value” means, in the case of
a share which is quoted on any recognised stock exchange, the value
quoted at such stock exchange on the date immediately preceding the
Gite on which the direction is made, and, in any other case, such value

Restric~
tion on
tranwfor
of shares.


Restric-
tion on
the
transfer

of shares.
of foreign
companies

Power of
the Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment
to direct

companies,

not to
give
effect to
the
transfer.

34

as may be mutually agreed upon between the holder of the share and
the Central Government or the specified corporation, as the case may be,
or in the absence of such agreement, as may be determined by the Court.

(4) The market value referred to in sub-section (3) shall be given
forthwith, where there is no dispute as to such value or where such value
has been mutually agreed upon, but where there is a dispute as to the
market value, such value as is estimated by the Centra] Government or
the corporation, as the case may be, shall be given forthwith and the
balance, if any, shall be given within thirty days from the date when the
market value is determined by the Court.

(5) If the Central Government does not make any direction under
Subsection (2) within sixty days from the date of receipt by it of the
intimation, given under sub-section (1), the provisions contained in sub-
section (2) with regard to the transfer of such share shal] not apply.

30D. No body corporate, or bodies corporate under the same manage-
ment, which holds, or hold in the aggregate, ten per cent., or more of the
nominal value of the equity share capital of a foreign company, having
an established place of business in India, shall transfer any share in
such foreign company to any citizen of India or any body corporate in-
porated in India except with the previous approval of the Central
Government and such previous approval shall not be refused unless the
Central Government is of opinion that such transfer would be prejudicial
to the public interest,

308, (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that as a result
of the transfer of any share or block of shares of a company, a change in
the controlling interest of the company is likely to take place and that
such change would be prejudicial to the interests of the company or to
the public interest, that Government may direct the company not to
Sive effect to the transfer of any such share or block of shares and—

(०) where the transfer of such share or block of shares has
already been registered, not to permit the transferee or any nomi.
nee or proxy of the transferee, to exercise any voting or other rights
attaching to such share or block of shares, and

(b) where the transfer of such share or block of shares has not
been registered, not to permit any nominee or proxy of the transferor
to exercise any voting or other rights attaching to such share or
block of shares.

(2) Where any direction is made by the Central Government under
sub-section (1), the share or the block of shares referred to therein
shall stand retransferred to the person from whom it was acquired, and
thereupon the amount paid by the transferee for the acquisition of such
share or block of shares shall be refunded to him by the person to whom
such share or block of shares stands or stand retransferred.

(3) If the refund referred to in sub-section (2) is not made within the
period ‘of thirty days from the date of the direction referred to in sub- मु
section (I), the Central Government shall, on the application of the per.
son entitled to get the refund, direct, by order, the refund of such


35

amount and such order may be enforced as if it were a decree made by a
civil court.

(4) The person to whom any share or block of shares stands or stand
retransferred under sub-section (2) shall, on making refund under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3), be eligible to exercise voting or other
rights attaching to such share or block of shares.

30F. Every request made to the Central Government for according its
approval to the proposal for the acquisition of any share referred to in
section 30B or the transfer of any share referred to in section 30D shall
be presumed to have been granted unless, within a period of sixty days
from the date of receipt of such request, the Central Government com-
municates to the person by whom the request was made, that the
approval prayed for cannot be granted.

30G. Nothing contained in section 30B [except sub-section (2) there-
of] shall apply to the transfer of any share to, and nothing in section 30C,
section 30D or section 308 shall apply to the transfer of any share by,—

(a) any company in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the
share capital is held by the Central Government;

(b) any corporation (not being a company) established by or
under any Central Act; ‘ q

(c) any financial institution.
CHAPTER IV
Monopouistic TRADE PRACTICES

31, (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that the owners
of one or more undertakings are indulging in any practice, which is, or,
may be, a monopolistic trade practice. or that, monopolistic trade practices
prevail in respect of any goods or services, that Government niay refer
the matter to the Commission for an inquiry and the Commission shall,
after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the Central Government its
findings thereon:

Provided that where the Commission receives any information, or
comes to know, that the owner of any undertaking is, or, the owners of
two or more undertakings are, indulging in any trade practice, which is,
or may be, a monopolistic trade practice, or that monopolistic trade prac-
tices prevail in respect of any goods or services, it may on its own mo-
tion, and notwithstanding that no reference has been made to it by the
Central Government under this sub-section, make an inquiry into the

matter.
* * * * *

Part B
Unfair Trade Practices

3643, In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “unfair trade
_ practice” means a trade practice which, for the purpose of promoting
the sale, use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any services,
adopts one or more of the following practices and: thereby causes loss

‘Time
within
which
refusal

to be

commu-
nicated.

Nothing in
sections
30B to
308 to
apply to
Govern-
ment com-
panies, ote.

Investiga-
tion by
Commis.
sion of
mono-
polistic
trade
practices,

Definition

cof unfair

६80७
practice.


Penalty
for con-
travention
Of kee
tion 21,

Penalty
for con
travention
Of sec
tion 22

or section
23 or
section

24 or
section 27.

Penalty
for con-
travention
of sec
tion 25.

Penalty
for failure
to register
agrees
ments.

36

.or injury to the consumers of such goods or services, whether by elimi-
nating or restricting competition or otherwise, namely: —

(1) the practice of making any statement, whether orally or
in writing or by visible representation which,

(@ falsely represents that the goods are of a particular
standard, quality, grade, composition, style or model;

* * * * *

36C. In respect of any unfair trade practice of which complaint is
made by an association under clause (@) of section 36B, the Commission
shall, before issuing any process requiring the attendance of the person
complained against, cause a preliminary investigation to be made by the
Director General, in such manner as it may direct, for the purpose of
satisfying itself that the complaint requires to be inquired into,

36D. (1) The Commission may inquire into any unfair trade practice
which may come before it for inquiry and, if, after such inquiry, it is
of opinion that the practice is prejudicial to the public interest, or to
the interest of any consumer or consumers generally, it may, by order
direct that—

(४) the practice shall be discontinued or shall not be repeated;
and

* * * * *

CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

45. If any person contravenes the provisions of section 21 or any
order made thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend
to rupees one lakh, or with both,

46. If any person contravenes the provisions of section 22 or section
28 or section 24 or section 27, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may ex-
tend to rupees one lakh, or with both and where the offence is a
continuing one, with a further fine which tay extend to one thousand

Tupees for every day, after the first, during which such contravention
continues.

47, If any person contravenes, without any reasonable excuse, the
provisions of section 25 he shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, and where the offence is a continuing one,
with a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every
day, after the first, during which such contravention continues,

48. (7) * * * * के

@) If the owner of any undertaking, to which Part A of Chapter
TI applies, fails without any reasonable excuse, to make an application



oF

under section 26 for the registration of the undertaking as an under-
taking to which that Part applies, then—

‘ (a) where the undertaking is owned by a company,—

(6) the company shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, and where the offence is a con-
tinuing one, with a further fine which may extend to fifty
rupees for every day, after the first, during which such failure
continues, and

(ii) every officer of the company in default shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,
or with both, and where the offence is a continuing one, with
a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day,
after the first, during which such failure continues;

(0) where the undertaking is owned by 8 firm, every partner
of such firm; or where the undertaking is not owned either by 2
company or by a firm, every person who owns or controls the
undertaking, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one
ihousand rupees, or with both, and where the offence is a continuing
one, with a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every
day, after the first, during which such failure continues.

* * * * *

488. (1) Any person who acquires any share in contravention of the
provisions of scction 30B shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, or with both.

(2) (०) Every body corporate which makes any transfer of shares
without giving any intimation as required by section 30C, shall be puni-
shable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

(b) Where any contravention of the provisions of section 30C has
been made by a company, every officer of the company who is in default
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both,

(3) (a) Every body corporate which makes any transfer of shares
in contravention of the provisions of section 30D, shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

(b) Where any contravention of the provisions of section 30D has
been made by a company, every officer of the company who is in default
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, of
with both,

(4) (०) Every person who transfers any share in contravention of
any order made by the Central Government under section 30C, or gives
effect to any transfer of shares made in contravention of any direction
made by the Central Government under section 30E, or who exercises
any voting right in respect of any share in contravention of any order

Penalty

sition or
transfer of
share in
contraven=
tion of

278,
३08, 300,
30D or
308,


Penafty
for contra-
vention of
order
made by
Commis-
tion
relating

to unfair
trade
Practices,

Penalty
for
offences
in relation
to orders
under the
Act.

38

of the Central Government referred to in sub-section (1) of section 27B
or in contravention of any direction made by the Central Government
under section 30E, shall be punishable with imprisonmgnt for a term
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.

(0) If any company gives effect to any voting or other right exer-
cised in relation to any share held in contravention of an order of the
Central Government referred to in sub-section (1) of section 27B or in
relation to any share acquired in contravention of the Provisions of sec-
tion 30C, or which gives effect to any voting right in contravention of
any direction made by the Central Government under section 30E, the
company shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
Punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both,

48९. If any person contravenes any order made by the Commission
under section 36D, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees, or with both,

50. (1) A person who is deemed, under section 13, to be guilty of an
offence under this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to. one year, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both, and where the offence is a continuing
one, with a further fine which May extend to five hundred rupees for
every day, after the first, during which such contravention continues,

(2) If any person contravenes, without any reasonablg excuse, any
order made by the Central Government under section 31, or any order
made by the Commission under section 37, he shall be punishable, with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than,—

(a) in the case of the first offence, six months but not more than
two years, and

(b) in the case of any second or subsequent offence in relation
to the goods or services in respect of which the first offence was
committed, two years but not more than five years,

and, in either case, where the contravention is a continuing one, also with
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day, after the
first, during which such contravention continues:

Provided that the court may, if it is satisfied that the circumstances
of any case so require, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term
Jesser than the minimum term specified in this sub-section.

Fic * ae * *


39

CHAPTER IX
MisceLianrous
54, (1) * * * * * Power of
Central

(2) The Central Government shall have the power to modify any ae
scheme of finance submitted to it under this Act in such manner as it

impose
thinks fit. condi-

tions,
| (3) If any condition, limitation or restriction imposed by the Central beara
Government under sub-section (1) or any term of a scheme of finance, tetrictione
| as modified under sub-section (2), is contravened, the Central Govern- oy appro-
ment may rescind or withdraw the approval, sanction, permission, confir- vals, ete,
tation, recognition, direction, order or exemption made or granted by it. pat
the Act.

55. Any person aggrieved by any decision on any question referred Appeals
to in clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c) of section 2A, or any order made
by the Central Government under Chapter III or Chapter iv, or, as
the case may be, or the Commission under section 13 or section 36D or
section 37, may, within sixty days from the date of the order, prefer an

F i908, appeal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds specified in
*0f1908. ‘section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
* * * * *
62.) * * + * *

Power to
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the मर

foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following

matters, namely: —

* * * * *

(ac) the form in which an application shall be made to the

Central Government under section 23 for the approval of any scheme

of merger or amalgamation of an undertaking with any other under-

| taking; “

* * * * *

(ba) the particulars which may be required to be specified in
any intimation to the Central Government with regard to the
transfer of shares;

* * * * * }

(9) the criterion to be adopted for determining the circumstances
in which conditions or matters enumerated in sections 21, 23 and 25
shal] be considered to exist;

* . * * 3 *

u THE SCHEDULE
(See section 30C)
Parr I

1. Aircraft, =
2. Air transport,


3, Arms and ammunition and allied items of equi
4, Atomic energy. डर
5. Coal and lignite.

6. Generation and distribution of electricity.

7. Heavy castings and forgings of iron and steel.

8, Heavy clectrical plant including large hydraulic and steam
turbines.

9, Heavy plant and machinery required for iron and steel produc-
tion, for mining, for machine tool manufacture and for such
other basic industries as may be specified by the Central
Government.

10. Iron and steel,

11. Mineral oils.

12. Minerals specified in the Schedule to the Atomic Energy (Control
of Production and Use) Order, 1953.

13. Mining and processing of copper, lead, zine, tin, molybdenum and
wolfram,

14. Mining of iron ore, manganese ore, chrome ore, gypsum, sulphur,
gold and diamond.

15. Railway transport.

16, Ship-building.

17. Telephones and telephone cables, telegraph and wireless appara-
tus (excluding radio receiving sets).

Part It

1, Aluminium and other non-ferrous metals not included in Part 1.

2, All other minerals except “minor minerals” as defined in section
3 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development)
Act, 1957,

3. Antibiotics and other essential drugs.

|. Basic and intermediate products required by chemical industries
such as the manufacture of drugs, dyestuffs and plastics.

. Carbonisation of coal.

. Chemical pulp.

. Ferro alloys and tool steels.

Fertilizers.

. Machine tools.

10. Road transport. 2
11, Sea transport.

12. Synthetig rubber. .

>

कक जय की छा


LOK SABHA

Lost oacr

A
BILL

further to amend the Monopolies and Restrictive ‘Trade Practices Act,
1969 and the Companies Act, 1956

(Shri K, Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy, Minister of Law, Justice and
Company Affairs)