 Bill No. 198 of 2022
THE NA TIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI E.T. M OHAMMED B ASHEER, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Green Tribunal
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 15 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act),–
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:
“Provided that in cases of relief and compensation to be paid to a
group of persons, the Tribunal shall quantify the amount of compensation
to be paid to each victim of pollution and other environmental damages
in such manner as may be prescribed.”; and
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:
“(1A) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of providing relief and
compensation and restitution of property and environment under
clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1), establish a permanent panel
of technical accessors on such terms and conditions of service as may
be prescribed.”.
3. In section 22 of the principal Act, after the existing proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–
“Provided further that no appeal shall be made to the Supreme Court
by  a person against  whom the award of compensation or relief is issued
unless he deposits fifty per cent. of the amount of compensation awarded
by the Tribunal to the Environmental Relief Fund constituted under the
Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991.”.
4. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (l), for
the words “manner and the purposes”, the words “manner, purposes and
publication of information” shall be substituted.
5
10
15
20
Amendment of
section 22.
Amendment of
section 35.
19 of 2010.
6 of 1991.
Amendment of
section 15.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Green Tribunal (NGT) was set up in the year 2010 to
provide a speedy and specialised form of adjudication of environment
related cases and to provide compensation to victims of environmental
damage. An expeditious mechanism is very much necessitated to finalise
the process of assessing the compensation and disbursing it to the victims
at the earliest.
As per the present system, the compensation must first be remitted to the
environment relief fund which was set up under the Public Liability Insurance
Act, 1991. When the NGT awards the compensation to victims of
environmental damage, it must be transferred from the fund to the district
collector having local jurisdiction for a disbursement. In practice, when there
are large number of victims, the NGT awards a lump sum, leaving it to the
collector to determine individual claims. This goes against the objective of
the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the National Green Tribunal Act,
2010 with a view to provide process for assessment of environmental damage
and quantifying environmental compensation and recast the process of appeal
and formation of panel of technicians to assist the National Green Tribunal in
surveying damage and quantifying compensation.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                              E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER
10 August, 2022.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Tribunal shall establish
a permanent panel of technical accessors for the purpose of quantifying
relief and compensation and restitution of property and environment. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees one hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
           A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of one hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
regarding the publication of information for which the amount of
compensation or relief credited to the Environment Relief Fund shall be
utilized. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL
ACT, 2010
* * * * * *
15.(1) The Tribunal may, by an order, provide,–
(a)* * * * *
(b)* * * * *
(2) The relief and compensation and restitution of property and
environment referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be
in addition to the relief paid or payable under the Public Liability Insurance
Act, 1991 (6 of 1991).
* * * * * *
22. Any person aggrieved by any award, decision or order of the Tribunal,
may, file an appeal to the Supreme Court, within ninety days from the date of
communication of the award, decision or order of the Tribunal, to him, on
any one or more of the grounds specified in section 100 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908):
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain any appeal after the
expiry of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal.
* * * * * *
35. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
* * * * * *
(l) the manner and the purposes for which the amount of
compensation or relief credited to the Environment Relief Fund shall
be utilised under sub-section (2) of section 24;
* * * * * *
Relief,
compensation
and restitution.
Appeal to
Supreme Court.
Power to
make rules.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.
————
(Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, M.P .)