Bill No.  198 of  2019
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely,—
‘‘21B.(1) The State shall provide protection to life, property and business of
every citizen against the ethnic and social violence and communal and political
disturbances.
(2) In case any citizen is deprived of his life, property or business  due to any
reason mentioned in clause (1), the State shall ensure that adequate compensation,
rehabilitation and proper arrangement of livelihood is provided to the victim as soon
as possible but in any case within thirty days of the date of occurrence of the incident."
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Protection
from ethnic
and social
violence,
communal and
political
disturbances
and provision
of relief.
S 3 \F\BILL 2019\LS\2672LS ENG
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived of his life and
personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law. Of late, it has been
observed that in various parts of the country, incidents of ethnic violence and communal and
political disturbances are on the increase leading to a considerable loss of life, property and
business of the common citizens. It has been observed that sometimes the victims are not
provided with adequate relief in the matter of compensation and rehabilitation measures and
they are deprived of even reasonable livelihood. It is the duty of the State to protect the
citizens from violence and disturbances which result in human loss, loss to property and
business.  The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to mandating on
the State to protect the citizen's from such violent incidents and also to ensure rehabilitation.
measures and compensation to the affected victims within a stipulated time frame.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
July 16, 2019.
2

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill, if enacted, envisages that the State shall ensure that compensation
and rehabilitation measures are provided to the victims of ethnic and social violence and
communal and political disturbances in the country within the stipulated time frame.  As it is
very difficult to anticipate such events and also the extent of damages caused due to such
incidents, no exact estimate of the expenditure can be made at this stage. However, it is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees seven hundred crore per annum may
be required to meet such relief from Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure, however, is likely to be involved.
3

MGIPMRND—2672LS(S3/F)—22.10.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty,  M.P.)