1
UNIFORM INSURANCE FOR AFFECTED PILGRIMS BILL, 2017
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Central Pilgrims Insurance Committee to provide uniform
insurance to all the affected pilgrims in incidents/accidents including but not limited
to terrorist attacks and to their dependent family members and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Uniform Insurance for Affected Pilgrims Act, 2017.
(2) It extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "affected pilgrims" means a  pilgrim who either dies or is severely injured due
to incidents/accidents occurred during pilgrimage;
(b) "committee" means the Central Pilgrims Insurance Committee constituted
under section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  198  of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

(c) "dependent" means the parents, spouse, children or siblings of affected
pilgrims who dies during pilgrimage;
(d) "incidents/accidents" means loss of life or property due to theft, hospitaliza-
tion, illness, stampede, injury, death due to terrorist acts and any other accidental
death, excluding incidents of road accidents and natural deaths like heart attack, wherein
pilgrims either die or are severely injured during the pilgrim visit;
(e) "pilgrim" means a person who journeys, especially a long distance, to some
sacred place as an act of religious devotion;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) "shrine board" means all the existing pilgrim Shrine Boards, including but not
limited to Shri Amarnath Ji Shrine Board, constituted under respective parent Acts for
respective Shrines across India and other shrines for which there is no Shrine Board
constituted as on the date of commencement of this Act;
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a  Committee to be known as the Central Pilgrims Insurance Committee for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of such number of members from the Shrine Boards
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of staff to the Committee as
may be necessary to discharge its functions efficiently.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson, members and staff of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Committee shall—
(a) formulate uniform insurance scheme for affected pilgrims, from time to time;
(b) ensure photometric registration of all the affected pilgrims through their
respective Shrine Boards in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) ensure compensation of rupees ten lakhs for major and rupees six lakhs for
minor affected pilgrims;
(d) ensure that amount of rupees ten lakhs be disbursed to the dependent family
members of the deceased affected pilgrims;
(e) ensure that amount of rupees three lakhs be disbursed to the dependent
family members of the seriously injured affected pilgrims;
(f) review existing policies of the Shrine Boards relating to the coverage of
incidents/accidents under the insurance policies;
(g) coordinate with the insurance companies providing insurance covers and
formulate uniform insurance policies to the affected pilgrims, from time to time;
(h) formulate adequate funding mechanisms for non-Governmental Organisations
who assist in rescuing of the affected pilgrims and providing necessary medical
assistance to the affected pilgrims;
(i) formulate policies for ex-gratia payment to the dependent family members of
the affected pilgrims, from time to time; and
(j) undertake all other functions assigned to it, from time to time, for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
5. Every pilgrim shall pay such amount as premium as may be prescribed to avail the
benefits under this Act.
Constitution
of the Central
Pilgrims
Insurance
Committee.
Functions of
the Central
Pilgrims
Insurance
Committee.
Payment of
premium.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6. (1) Every affected pilgrim or dependant, as the case may be, shall apply to the
Committee for payment of compensation in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Committee shall examine every application filed under sub-section ( 1) and
release the amount of compensation within a stipulated time in such manner as may be
prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide the requisite funds to the State Governments, Union
territories and respective Shrine Boards for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under his Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that they
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under such rule.
Payment of
compensation.
3
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a land of pilgrimages of various faiths wherein devotees travel from different
parts of country to visit these places. Some of the places are overcrowded with devotees
especially during the festivals and many of them are located in difficult geographical terrain
such as Amarnath, which makes journey of pilgrims extremely difficult.
There have been incidents where pilgrims have lost their lives due to road accidents or
other incidents while undertaking the journey to and from the pilgrimages. As of now, the
respective States, Shrine Boards and the Central Government provide insurance to the affected
pilgrims and their dependent family members. However, there is no uniformity in the amount
of insurance that is being awarded.
For instance, Shri Amarnath Ji Shrine Board under the Chairmanship of the Governor
of Jammu and Kashmir provides insurance cover of rupees one lakh to a pilgrim in case of
death due to accident while undertaking the Amarnath Yatra. But rupees one lakh is considered
insufficient to meet the eventualities that arise out of loss of life in such accidents. On the
other hand, the Haj Committee of India, a statutory body of Ministry of Minority Affairs,
Government of India has recently increased the insurance cover to rupees ten lakhs to
account for such a loss.
Compensation for Human life should be awarded regardless of the religion or faith to
which a person belongs to, as the loss of human life is precious in all circumstances. Also not
providing equal insurance cover to all pilgrims belonging to different religions and faiths is
antithetical to the basic spirit imbibed in article 15 of the Constitution of India which emphasizes
no discrimination to be made on the basis of religion, race, caste, sex or birth place.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to constitute a Central Pilgrim Insurance Committee as an
overarching body for all the existing Shrine Boards in India and other pilgrimage centres to
formulate uniform insurance policies for a wide range of incidents/accidents that may take
place during the pilgrimage. It also seeks to provide a uniform insurance policy with
disbursement of maximum rupees ten lakhs in case of death during the pilgrimage and rupees
three lakhs for pilgrims suffering major injuries. Further, it also proposes to encourage
humantarian endeavours by the non-profit organisations who provide medical assistance to
the affected pilgrims by adequately awarding them for such gestures.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH  GIRRI
August 4, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for Constitution of the Central Pilgrims Insurance Committee.
Clause 5 provides for the supply of funds to the State Governments, Union territories and
respective Shrine Boards for carrying out the purposes of this Bill by the Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore  would
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Central Pilgrims Insurance Committee to provide uniform
insurance to all the affected pilgrims in incidents/accidents including but
not limited to terrorist attacks and to their dependent family members and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2239LS(S3)—06-11-2017.