AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 199 of 2000.

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Sut HANNAN MoLian, M.P.
A
BILL
L Further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.)

Be if enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In sub-scetion (1) of section 77 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951,

(i) for Explanation (1) the following Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:—

Explanation (1).—Any expenditure incurred by a political party on its propa-
ganda highlighting its achievements and/or failures of its rival party or parties shall
not form part of the expenditure incurred by a candidate in his election unless it is
exclusively attributable to him and of which he knowingly takes advantage in pro-
motion of his election prospects.”.

(ii) Explanation (3) shall be omitted.

ag FER 2a

Short title.

Amendment of
Section 77.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 77(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 tequiies every Candidate
at an election to the House of the People or a State Assembly to kee: a separate and correct
account of all expenditure incurred or authorized by him or by his election agent between
the date on which he was nominated and the date of declaration of the result of election. If
the total of such expenditure exceeds the amount as prescribed under sub-section (3) of the
said secton 77, itis treated as a corru P\ practice under section 123 of that Act and it results
in his election being declared void. This salutary provision was incorporated into law to

incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities pruvided o- any other act or thing
done for any candidate by a person in the service of the Government in discharge or
Purported discharge of his official duty shall not be deemed to be expenditure incurred or
authorized by the candidate or his election agent. These explanations were inserted in the
wake of the Supreme Court judgment in Kanwar Lal Gupta vs. Amar Nath Chawala
11975 (3) 556 646] declaring such expenses as inclusive.

As observed by the Supreme Court in Gadakh Yashwantrao vs. Balasaheh Vikhe
Patil [1994(1) SCO682] the exceptions provided in the Explanations mentioned above
lead to escape route from the provision of ceiling on election expenditure of a candidate,
“It is a lacuna in the law and it is for the Parliament to fill it lest the impression is rein-
forced that its retention is deliberate for the convenience of every one”, observes the Su-
preme Court. It is therefore necessary to close this escape route so as to lessen, if not
remove altogether, the impact of money power in elections to Parliament and State Legis-
Jatures.

Hence this Bill.

New Daur; HANNAN MOLLAH
October 20, 2000


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
(43 of 1951)

* * * * * +

* * * * * *

77. Account of election expenses and maximum thereof —(1) Every candidate at
an election shall, either by himself er by his election agent, keep a separate and correct
account of all expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by him
or by his election agent between *[the date on which he has been norhinated] and the date
of declaration of the result thereof, both dates inclusive.

*{Explanation 1,—Notwithstanding any judgment, order or decision of any court to
the contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorized in connection with the election of a
candidate by a political party or by any other association or body of persons or by any
individual (other than the candidate or his clection agent) shall not be deemed to be, and
shall not ever be deemed to have been, expenditure in connection with the election in-
curred or authorized by the candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of this sub-
section.

Provided that nothing contained in this Explanation shall affect—

(a) any judgment, order or decision of the Supreme Court whereby the elec-
tion of a candidate to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly of a
State has been declared void or set aside before the commencement of the Repre-
sentation of the People (Amendment) ordinance, 1974 (Ord. 13 of 1974);

(6) any judgment, order or decision of a High Court whereby the election of
any such candidate has been declared void or set aside before the commencement of
the said Ordinance if no appeal has been preferred to the Supreme Court against
such judgment, order or decision of the High Court before such commencement and
the period of limitation for filing such appeal has expired before such cominence-
ment.

sa * * * *

(Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that any expendi-
ture incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities provided or any other act or
thing done by any person in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the
classes mentioned in clause (7) of section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of
his official duty as mentioned in the proviso to that clause shall not be deemed to be
expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorized by a candidate or by
his clection agent for the purposes of this sub-section.}

* * * * * *

* * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

(Shri Hannan Mollah, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND-5256LS—06-12-2000.