1
THE VICTIMS OF NATURAL CALAMITIES (REHABILITATION
AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE) BILL, 2016
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and financial assistance to the
victims of natural calamities and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Natural Calamities (Rehabilitation and
Financial Assistance) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner appointed under section 3;
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No. 199 of  2016
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “natural calamity” includes drought, flood, cyclone, hailstorm, cloud burst,
tsunami, landslide or earthquake or such other conditions as may be notified by the
appropriate Government from time to time;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “victim of natural calamity” means a person who suffers physical bodily
harm or whose property, including livestock, crop, orchard, field, machine or tools, is
lost, destroyed or damaged due to natural calamity and includes, in the case of death
of such victim due to natural calamity, his family members.
3. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Commissioner in such manner as
may be prescribed for providing financial assistance and other benefits to the victims of
natural calamities.
(2) The Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1) shall be provided with such
staff as may be necessary for efficient discharge of his duties under this Act.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Commissioner to ensure provision of food, adequate
shelter and financial assistance to the victims of natural calamity in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(4) The financial assistance to the victims of natural calamity shall be disbursed as
early as possible but not later than three months from the occurrence of the natural
calamity.
4. (1) A claim for receiving financial assistance shall be made in the prescribed form by
the victims of natural calamity to the Commissioner, who shall disburse the financial
assistance to the victims, after making such inquiry and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The victim of natural calamity shall be provided with the following financial
assistance and other benefits:—
(a) in case of loss of life,—
(i) financial assistance in the form of a compensation of not less than five
lakh rupees shall be given to the next of the kin of the deceased; and
(ii) suitable employment shall be provided to one of the dependants of the
deceased;
(b) in case of severe injury,—
(i) medical treatment free of cost; and
(ii) such financial assistance as, in the opinion of the Commissioner, is
necessary for his rehabilitation, subject to the limit of a minimum amount of
rupees fifty thousand and maximum amount of rupees two lakh;
(c) in case of damage to the dwelling unit, victim shall be provided with such
financial assistance as is required for the repair or reconstruction of the damaged
dwelling unit;
(d) in case of irreparable damage to the cultivable land, victim shall be provided
with cultivable land of equal area at a reasonable distance from the place of his
residence;
(e) in case of damage to the standing crops, victim shall be given compensation
in proportion to the losses suffered by him; and
(f) in case of loss of livestock, victim shall be given adequate financial assistance
in proportion to the losses suffered by him.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Appointment
of
Commissioner
for providing
financial
assistance and
other benefits
to victims of
natural
calamity.
Savings.
Financial
assistance and
other benefits
to the victims
of natural
calamity.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our country is prone to various natural calamities such as tsunami, floods, droughts,
storms, hailstorms, cyclones, landslides and earthquakes, which cause extensive damage
to life and property. Floods are frequently occurring in the States of Assam, Bihar,
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Tripura and other parts of the country.
Droughts are also very common and frequent throughout the country. Tsunami and cyclones
cause havoc in the coastal areas whereas storms and hailstorms cause heavy loss of life
and property in hilly areas as well as in the nearby plain areas. Now frequent earthquakes
have also been causing concern among the people of various regions. The havoc caused
by the tsunami in the year 2004 in southern States of the country is still in our memory. We
have also not forgotten the extensive damage caused by earthquakes in the States of Uttar
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Gujarat in the year 1991, 1993 and 2001, respectively. Whenever
a natural calamity happens, the nation has to divest its resources towards rescue and
rehabilitation processes and on repairs and construction of the roads, bridges, fields,
buildings, etc. which put a heavy burden on the exchequer. Fortunately, the entire nation
rises to face such calamities but the loss caused thereby can never be recovered by any
means.
Of course, the occurrence of natural calamities cannot be stopped but certainly with
our combined efforts we can minimise the miseries of the victims of such natural calamities
by providing them with timely financial relief and extending the rehabilitation programmes
to them. The Central Government has to play the main role in this process, as the State
Governments are not well equipped to deal with any natural calamities and to provide relief
to the victims. Sometimes, delay is caused in rushing relief to the victims due to procedural
wrangles. Hence, it is felt that a suitable legislation be enacted to set up a mechanism to help
the victims of natural calamities instantly. The Bill seeks to provide for rehabilitation and
financial assistance to the victims of natural calamities instantly in case of occurrence of
any such calamity in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHOLA SINGH
July 4, 2016

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a commissioner for providing
financial assistance and rehabilitation measures to the victims of natural calamities.
Clause 4 provides for financial assistance of rupees five lakhs to the next of kin of a person
who dies in any natural calamity and medical treatment for injured persons and other welfare
measures for the victims of natural calamities. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give an
exact estimate of the actual expenditure to be involved to meet any unpredictable eventuality.
However, it is estimated that recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore per annum
would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and financial assistance to the
victims of natural calamities and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1423LS(S3)—26-07-2016.