Short title and
commencement.
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM UNNECESSARY
CAESAREAN SECTION DELIVERIES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P .
A
BILL
to protect women from unnecessary and arbitrary caesarean section deliveries through
the regulation and financial disincentivizing of private and public hospitals and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women from Unnecessary Caesarean
Section Deliveries Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) ‘‘abnormally high rate of caesarean section deliveries" refers to a rate, in the
given locality of the public or private hospital, doctor, paramedic, medical practitioner
Bill No. 199 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definition.
5

2
and other institution or persons carrying out deliveries on a regular basis, of more than
fifteen per cent. of the local population;
(b) ‘‘appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) ‘‘Board’’ means the Caesarean Section Deliveries Control Board constituted
under section 6;
(d) "caesarean section deliveries" or "c-section deliveries" refers to a surgical
procedure in which incisions are made through a woman's abdomen and uterus when
vaginal delivery is not possible or wherein the vaginal  delivery is likely to put the
health of the mother or the baby at risk;
(e) "medical practitioner" means any person holding medical qualification
recognized under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and enrolled as such by the
appropriate authority;
(f) "ordinary delivery" refers to the vaginal delivery;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "private hospital" includes hospitals, private nursing homes, medical
institutions and clinics being run by a medical practitioner or a group of medical
practitioners of a trust or society.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, shall
put a cap on the price charged by both private and public hospitals for caesarean section
deliveries.
(2) The cap on the price charged for caesarean section deliveries shall be proportionate
to the price charged for ordinary deliveries, and shall not exceed twenty per cent. of the total
cost of the ordinary delivery in a hospital.
(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every public and private hospital
under their jurisdiction comply with the provisions of this section.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of every public and private hospital, doctor, paramedic,
medical practitioner or person carrying out deliveries on a regular basis to declare the
percentage of caesarean section deliveries being carried out by them on a monthly basis in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every declaration made under sub-section (1), shall be shown to the prospective
women seeking delivery, and shall, at the end of every month, be forwarded to the appropriate
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
5.  Any public or private hospital, doctors, paramedics, medical practitioner and other
institutions or persons carrying out delivery on regular basis, who fails to make declaration
under section 4, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto two
years or with a fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakh or with both.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Board under their jurisdiction to be known as the Caesarean Section Delivery
Control Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The composition of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Board shall—
(a) conduct enquiries against public or private hospitals, doctors, paramedics,
medical practitioner and other institutions or persons carrying out deliveries on a
regular basis, having an abnormally high rate of caesarean section deliveries; and
102 of 1956.
Proportionate
capping of
cost of
Caesarean
Section
Deliveries.
Mandatory
declaration by
doctors and
hospitals.
Punishment
for failure to
make
mandatory
declaration.
Constitution
of Caesarean
Section
Delivery
Control
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it, from time to time, by
the appropriate Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. If any public or private hospital, doctor, paramedic and other institution or person
carrying out deliveries on a regular basis, having an abnormally high rate of caesarean
section deliveries, after an enquiry made under sub-section (1) of section 7, is found to be
performing unnecessary or arbitrary caesarean section deliveries the head of the hospital or
person responsible for carrying such deliveries, shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend upto seven years or with fine which may extend up to rupees twenty
lakh or with both.
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Power to make
rules.
Punishment
for doctors
and hospitals
with
abnormally
high rate of
caesarean
section
deliveries.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has witnessed a steep rise in unnecessary and arbitrary caesarean section
deliveries being carried out across all States over the past few years. According to the World
Health Organization, a figure below five per cent of the total population implies that a
substantial proportion of women do not have access to surgical obstetric care. On the other
hand a rate higher that fifteen per cent of the total population indicates over-utilization of
the procedure for reasons other than life saving reasons. In India, from under ten per cent.
in 2010 as per the District Level Household and Facility Survey (DLHS-3) and the National
Family Health Survey, the rate of Caesarean Section Deliveries has steeply risen in few
States and the country as a whole. Given the presence of a substantial inter-State variation
of caesarean section deliveries, few large States (population of ten million and above) such
as Kerala, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have undergone a significant increase
in the number of caesarean section deliveries. Moreover, certain districts have reported a
rate of caesarean section deliveries of more than eighty per cent. The rising rate of caesarean
section deliveries makes it evident that the rise is unnatural, unnecessary and arbitrary and
is done for financial gains that arise on account of the higher prices in caesarean section
deliveries as opposed to ordinary deliveries. Taking note of the rising rate of caesarean
section deliveries and the harmful effects on mothers and children born out of the same, the
need is to regulate and financially disincentivize the caesarean section deliveries in the
country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for a basic regulatory mechanism to safeguard the
interests of women who are victims of unnecessary and arbitrary caesarean section deliveries
by providing a cap on the price charged for caesarean section deliveries in as much as it will
not be more than twenty per cent of what is charged in case of ordinary deliveries. It also
seeks to provide for mandatory declarations to be made by doctors, hospitals or any person
carrying out deliveries on a regular basis in relation to the rate of caesarean section deliveries,
as well as a mechanism of enquiring into the same. In addition, the Bill also provides for the
punishment for the failure to make mandatory declaration and for unjustified abnormally
high rates of caesarean section deliveries.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
August 4, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of Caesarean Section Delivery Control
Board. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees ten crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to protect women from unnecessary and arbitrary caesarean section deliveries through the
regulation and financial disincentivizing of private and public hospitals and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2232LS(S3)—03.11.2017.