5
Short title and 
commencement.
25 of 1956.
10
Insertion of a 
new Section 3A.
Bill No. 199 of 2024
THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTES OF MEDICAL SCIENCES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Rajeev Rai, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows :— 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences 
(Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 3 of the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“3A. (1) There shall be established an All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
at Mau in the State of Uttar Pradesh which shall be a body corporate, to be 
known as the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences, Mau.
Establishment of 
All India Institute 
of Medical 
Sciences at Mau 
in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh.
As introduced in Lok Sabha

2
(2) The provision of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Mau established under sub-section (1).”

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Health infrastructure in and around Mau district of Uttar Pradesh are in 
precarious condition and there is a long pending demand of the people living in 
the area for high-quality healthcare services for the region and establishment of an  
All India Institute of Medical Sciences at Mau, which would also cater to the needy 
people of adjoining districts like Ballia, Ghazipur and Azamgarh in Uttar Pradesh 
apart from meeting the requirements of border districts of Bihar like Buxar etc. 
It will further ease out the pressure on the only AIIMS in the purvanchal region 
located at Gorakhpur, which is more than 100 km away. Mau is located along key 
transportation corridors and it experiences a high number of road accidents due to 
high density of population and vehicular traffic etc. However, the area does not 
have the specialized trauma care facilities that are essential for treating serious 
injuries from road accidents. Victims are referred to nearby cities like Gorakhpur or 
Varanasi for more advanced trauma care. This results in delays in treatment, which 
worsens outcomes for accident victims. Establishment of AIIMS, Mau will help in 
development of a robust Emergency Medical Services (EMS) infrastructure and will 
help in reduction of mortality and morbidity rates in the region. The establishment 
of AIIMS, Mau would not only provide state-of-the-art healthcare but would also 
generate employment and other opportunities for the people and contribute in the 
economic development of the region. I urge upon the Government to establish an 
AIIMS at Mau in Uttar Pradesh. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; RAJEEV RAI
November 13, 2024

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of an All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences at Mau in the State of Uttar Pradesh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted 
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
an expenditure of about rupees 60 crore would be incurred per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand and one hundred 
crore is also likely to be involved.

5
ANNEXURE
[Extracts from the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956]
(Act No. 25 of 1956)
*  * * * *
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act an institution to be called the All India Institutes of Medical 
Sciences: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on and after the commencement 
of the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, establish 
by notification in the Official Gazette, such other All India Institutes of Medical 
Sciences at such places as it may specify in the said notification in addition to the 
existing Institute and the corresponding Institutes.
(2) Every Institute shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose 
of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said 
name sue and be sued.
*  * * * *
Establishment 
and 
incorporation 
of the 
Institute.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
(Shri Rajeev Rai,  M.P .)