1
THE  AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2015
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Air (Prevention And Control of Pollution) Act, 1981
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 199 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section 17 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"17A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (g) of sub-section (1)
of section 17, the standard of emission for four-wheeler automobiles with regard to
composition of emission of air pollutant into atmosphere shall be same throughout the
country.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the State Board shall, in consultation
with the Central Board, notify adoption of—
(i) Bharat IV emission norms by 31st December, 2015 in areas where such
norms are not in force on the date of commencement of this Act;
(ii) Bharat V emission norms by 31st January, 2017 in areas where Bharat
IV emission norms are in force on the date of commencement of this Act; and
(iii) Bharat IV emission norms for new heavy duty trucks by 31st December,
2015 in areas where such norms are not in force.
(3) The State Board shall, in consultation with the Central Board, notify adoption
of Bharat V emission norms by 31st January, 2017 in their application to two wheeler
and three wheeler automobiles.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in other law for the time being in force,
the State Government shall have all the powers to give effect to the provisions of this
section.".
Insertion of
new section
17A.
Standard of
emission
norms in
respect of
four wheelers
and other
automobiles.
14 of 1981
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Indian Constitution is amongst a select few in the world that contains specific
provisions on protection of environment. The provisions of the Constitution highlight national
consensus on the importance of environmental protection and improvement besides laying
the foundation of jurisprudence of environmental protection. The Supreme Court has impliedly
treated the right to live in a pollution free environment as a part of Fundamental Right to Life
under article 21 of the Constitution.
Despite the recognition of importance of a pollution-free and clean environment in our
Constitution by the founding fathers of an independent India, the reality remains grim at the
moment. India's high air pollution is ranked by World Health Organization (WHO) among the
worst in the world. As per recent study, approximately half of India's population
(660 million people) lives in areas where air pollution is not considered safe for healthy
habitation, and this excess pollution alone reduces life expectancy by 3.2 years (on average).
Technically speaking, 2.1 billion years that India loses due to high air pollution can be put to
use for nation's best interests. Out of 1,622 cities surveyed by WHO last year for suspended
particulate matter (especially for particulate matter 2.5, which stands for Particulate Matter—
2.5 micrometers or less in size), India was home to 13 of the top 20 cities with most polluted
air, with the capital city Delhi topping the charts by registering levels that are 15 times of
levels considered 'safe' by WHO. The human cost is soaring cases of asthma, respiratory
diseases, heart attacks, strokes and even cancer. Indoor and outdoor air pollution is estimated
to claim 1.6 million lives a year. Besides loss of national time, precious lives and increased
risks of health hazards, air pollution has also led to loss in crop yields, which poses threat to
agricultural produce particularly wheat and rice and the status of India being a major rice
exporter.
As India moves ahead on its growth path and prosperity, and if status quo is maintained
with regard to fuel mix for automobiles, air pollution shall continue to increase, exacting toll
from public health, crop yields, rainfall patterns and climatic change. Developed countries
have also faced the same problem at the time of industrialization, but have cleaned up their
environment since then. India also needs to act fast to stem the growth of air pollution.
Though multiple options are present to take a positive step, it is important to focus on
the main reasons. Revision of emission norms by vehicular traffic including heavy duty
trucks is one such step that can be acted upon to make a positive impact. As on date, Bharat
Stage IV emission norms are followed in National Capital Region (NCR) and 13 other cities,
whereas the rest of the country follows Bharat Stage III emission norms. This discrepancy,
besides running the risk of being construed as a violation of fundamental right to healthy life
for all, presents a bigger risk of encouraging use of fuels with higher emissions (in rest of
India), particularly heavy duty trucks which are the one of the largest emitters of PM 2.5
particles.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE VARUN GANDHI
July 2, 2015.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Air (Prevention And Control of Pollution) Act, 1981
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1508LS(S3)—21-07-2015.