5
AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 199 of  2022
THE NURSING SERVICES (REGULARISATION OF 
SERVICE AND WELFARE) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Rංඍൾඌඁ Pൺඇൽൾඒ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation of the services of nursing and conferring 
the status of not less than those of Group ‘C’ employee of the 
Central Government on such nursing services.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nursing Services (Regularisation of Service and
Welfare) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification  in the Office Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) “National Health Mission” means National Rural Health Mission and National 
Urban Health Mission started by the Central Government to implement the health 
system at all levels;
(b) “nursing services” means any person working as a nursing staff including 
Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA), Auxiliary Nursing Midwifery (ANM), 
General Nursing Midwifery (GNM) and others on regular or contract or daily wages 
basis under the National Health Mission; and 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, take 
all such steps as may be necessary to regularize the services of nursing and confer the 
status of not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government on all 
such nursing services.
 ( 2) The Central Government shall also provide such wages and welfare 
facilities as are available to, or not less than, Group ‘C’ employees of the Central 
Government.
4. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out all purposes of this Act ensuring the service status and welfare of the 
nursing services.
 ( 2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions aforesaid both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity or anything previously done under that rule.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
National Health Mission was started by the Central Government to implement the 
decentralized model of health system at all levels in the country. It includes ambitious projects 
to provide equitable, affordable and quality health care for rural areas under the ‘National 
Rural Health Mission’ and for urban areas under the ‘National Urban Health Mission’. The 
contribution of nursing services are remarkable and has become an integral and essential 
part of life for better health ecosystem in rural and urban areas. The nursing services under 
national health mission are first promoters and on ground implement warriors of schemes of 
the Central and State Governments. The duties and service rendered by the nurses are very 
important for the protection of the health and welfare of women, children, poor, disabled, 
old age people and vulnerable sections. The nursing services do not have job security and 
the honorarium given to them are not sufficient to meet their immediate basic requirements. 
This may adversely affect the working and motto of the National Health Mission. 
The nursing services such as ASHA, ANMs, GNMs and others are the main links 
between Government and general public. They are helping the Government for the effective 
implementation of health scheme and due to their dedicated services popularly known as 
‘Corona warriors’ during the pandemic of COVID-19. Considering the importance of their 
duties and service it is highly necessary to protect their service and welfare.
Hence this Bill. 
 Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                 RITESH PANDEY
06 July, 2022.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regularization of the services of nursing and confer the 
status not less than those of Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government on all such 
nursing services. It also provides for such wages and welfare measures as are available to 
or not less than Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government to nursing services. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is likely to be involved per 
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is also likely to be 
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislation powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation of the services of nursing and conferring 
the status of not less than those of Group ‘C’ employee of the 
Central Government on such nursing services.
(Shri Ritesh Pandey, M.P .)