THE SPICF .. S CESS BILL. 1965 
A 
BILL 
Bill No. 199 of 1985 
to provide fOT imposition of cess on a~l spices which are exported fOT the 
purposes of carrying out measures fOT the development of export of 
spices. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of tire Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Spices Cess Act, 1965. 
(2) It shall extend to th~ whole of India. 
5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the ('on text otherwise requires,-
(a) "Board" means the Spices Board constituted under sub-
section (1) of section 3 of the Spices Board Act, 1985; 
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; and 
(c) "spices" means the spices specified in the Schedule to the 
$pice~ ioard Act, 1985. 
Short 
tille. 
extent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 

Levy and 
collec-
tion of 
cess. 
Power 
to call 
reports 
and 
returns. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
2 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected by way of cess for the pur-
pose of the Spices Board Act, 1985, a duty of c .. toms on spices at such 
rate not exceeding five pl'r cellt. ad valorem, as the Central Government 
may, from time to time, specify by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette ... 
(2) The duty of customs levied under sub-section (1) shall be in addi- 5 
tiQ,1l to the duty of customs leviable on spices under the Customs Ad, 52 ot 1962. 
1962, or oily other law for the time being in force. 
(3) The provildollS of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules and regu- 52 of 19112. 
lations made therc~ndel', including those relatable to refund and ex-
emption of duty, shall, fOO far as may be, apply in relation to levy and 10 
collecii"n of the said duty of custollUl as they apply in relation to the levy 
and collection of the duty of customs on spices under that Act. 
(4) The proceeds of tbe duty of eusitoms levied under sub-section (:1) 
of seetion 3 shall ftnt be credited to the ConaoUda'ted Fund of lDdia anel 
the Central Government may, if Parliement, by appropriation made by 15 
law in this behalf 80 provides, pay to the Board from time to time, from 
out of such proceeds (after deduding the cost of collection) sum sums 
of money as it may think fit for being utilised lor the purposes of the 
Spices Board Ad, 1985. 
4. The Board may require any exporter of spices to furnish for the QO 
purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in such form 
and within such period as may be prescribed. 
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the forego- 25 
ing power, such rules may provide for the form in which and the period 
within which statistical and other information may be furnished to the 
Board under section 4. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, wliile it is in session, 30 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the ses-
sion immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any m.odification in tlie rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, . the rule shall thereafter have 35 
effect only in such modified form or be of no e1fect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modiftcation or annulment shall be without 
prejU1iicc to the vaHcUty of anything previously Uolie unCler that rule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill is complementary to the Spices Board Bill. 1985. The Spices 
Board Bill, 1985 seeks to provide for the establishment of a Board to be 
called the Spices Board for the control of the cardamom industry and 
for the promotion of the ell.-port of cardamom and other spices. In order 
to ensure that the said Board has necessary reSOUl'ces to. discharge its 
functions, thi" Bill seeks to provide for the levy by way of a cess of a 
duty of customs on all the spices specified in the Schedule to the Spices 
Board Bill which are exported. The intention is to make over, after 
due appropriation by Parliament. by law, the proceeds of the cess, to the 
said Board. 
2. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; ARJUN SINGH. 
The 25th NovembJer, 1985. 
PRESIDENTS REC014MENDA TION UNDER ARTICL,E 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 111~/84-EP ('Agri. III), dated the 26th November, 
1985 from Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Commerce to the Seeretary-
General, Lot Saeha]. 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Spices Cess Bill, 1985 recommends under clause (1) of article 117 of the 
Constitution of India, the introduction of the BDl In Lok Sabha and 
under clause (3) of article 117, the consideratiaQ of the said Bill in 
Lok Sabha. 

nNAN'CIAL MEMORANDUM 
With a vicw to ensuring that the Spices Board to be established under 
the Spices Board, BilL 1985, has necessary resources to discharge its 
functions, H.e Bill seeks to provide for the levy, by way of cess, of a 
duty of cuo;toms on spices specified in the Schedule to the Spices Board 
Bill, 1985, at such rate not exceeding five per cent. ad valorem as the 
Central Government may, by notification.in the Ofticial Gazette, specify. 
2. The proceeds of the above-mentioned cess will be paid into the Con-
solidated Fund of India. The Central Government may, if Parliament, 
by appropriation Jr.ade by law in this behalf, so provides, pay to the 
Board, from time to time, from out of such proceeds (after deducting 
the cost of collection). such sums of money as it may think fit. 
3. The. collection of the above-mentioned cess will involve some ex-
penditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It has not been possible 
at this stage to estimate the amount of such expenditure as that will 
depend upon varil)us contingencies such as the rate at which the cess 
may be levied, the quality and quantity of spices which may be exported, 
etc. However, it "is tentatively estimated: that the collection of the cess 
would be about Rs. 250 lakhs per annum on an average. The expenses 
of collection would on this basis came to about .Rs. five; lakhs. As 
only the balance of the proceeds, after deducting the cost of the collection, 
may be utilized for making payment to the Board, there will, in effect, 
be no net out-go from. the Consolidated Fund of India. 
4. The expenditure on the collection of cess will be of a recurring 
nature and the Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of 
il recurring or non-r~curring nature. 
, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
The matters with respect to which rules may be made relate to the form 
in which and the period within which statistical and other information 
may be called for and other matters of detail. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for imposition of cess on all spices which are exported for the purposes of carrying out measures for the development of export of spice~ 
(Shri Arj1.tn Singh, 
~nfder of Commerce). 