,'27 FEB l~'~ 
As Df'1'RODUCJ:D IN Lox SABKA ON 
aw NG. 18 of 1979 
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES BILL, 1979 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions and interpretation. 
CHAPTER II 
"'-"'l 
INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA 
3. Incorporation of the Institute. 
4. Entry of names in the Register. 
5. Associates and Fellows. 
6. Certificate of practice. 
7. Members to be kno-wn as Company Secretariel. 
8. Disabilities. 
CHAPTER III 
COUNCIL OF THE INSTITUTE 
9. Constitution of the Council of the Institute. 
10. Mode of election to the Council. 
11. Nomination in default of election. 
12. President and Vice-President. 
13. Resignation of membership and casual vacanciea. 
14. Duration and dissolution of the Council. 
15. Functions of the Council. 
16. Staff, remuneration and allowances. 
17. Committees 01 the Council. 
18. Fillanees of the Council. 
19. Register. 
CHAPTER IV 
REGISTER OF MJ}MBERS 
20. Removal from the Registe~. 
CHAPTER V 
14IscoNDuCT 
./ 
.,." ...... , 
"1 , 
21. Prooedure in iDquiries relating to- misconduct of member~ ot 
the Institute. 
22. Professional miscollduct defined. ." ,; •. " 

CLAUSES 
r 
to. 
~, 
( ii) 
CHAPI'ER VI 
REGIONAL COUNCns 
23. Constitution and functions of Regional Councils. 
CHAPTER VII 
PENAL'l"IES 
24. Penalty for falsely claiming to be a member, etc. 
25. Penalty for using name of. the Council, or awarding degree of 
Company Secretary. 
26. Companies not to engage in Company Secretaryship. 
27. Unqualified persons not to sign documents. 
28. Offences by companies. 
29. Sanction to prosecute. 
CHAPl'ER VIII 
APP~ 
30. Appeals. 
CHAPTER IX 
DISSOLUTION OF THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SEcal:rARIES OF INDIA 
REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES Acr 
31. Dissolution of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India 
registered under the Companies Act. 
32. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the dissolved company to the 
Institute. 
33. Provisions respecting employees of the dissolved company. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
34. Alteration in the Register and cancellation of certificate. 
35. Directions of the Central Government. 
36. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
37. Maintenance of branch offices. 
38. Reciprocity. 
39. Power to make regulations. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE-
PART I.-Professional misconduct in. relation to membe,., of tJve 
In.stitute in. practice. 
PART II.-Projessional misconduJct in relation to members of 
the In.stitute in service. 
PART III.-Profe8sional misconduct in. relation to memberr of 
the Institute generally. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE-
PART I.-Professional misconduct in relation to members of the 
Institute in pTactice requiring action by a High Court. 
PART II.-Professional mi.ronduct in. relaltion to members of 
the Institu.te generally req'Wtri~ ~ by 4 Htgh CQU'rt • 
• 

10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
THE COMP.ANY SECRET .ARIES BILL, 1979 
L-To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha 7 
1.. Page 2, lines 28 and 29,-
for "doucmen ts" read "documents It 
2. Page 19, 11ne 23,-
for "meeting" read "meetings" 
NEW DELHI; 
}february 21, 1979 Phalguna 2, 1900 (saka) 

s 
10 
lof 1958. 
Bill No. 19 of 1979 
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
to make provision for the regulation and development of the professicrn 
Of Com:pa:ny Secretaries. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Company Secretaries Act, 1979. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Associate" means an Associate Member of the Institute: 
(b) "Companies Act" means the Companies Act, 1956; 
(c) "Company Secretary" means a person who is a member of 
the Institute; 
(d) "Council" means the Council of the Institute constituted under 
section 9; 
(e) "dissolved company" means the Institute of Company Secre-
taries of India registered under the Companies Act; 
</> "Fellow" means a Fellow Member of the Institute; 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and com-
mence-
Mento 
Defini-
tions 
and inter-
pretation. 

2 
(g) "Institute" means the Institute of Company Secretaries of 
India constituted under this Act; 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under 
this Act; 
(i) "President" means the President of the COl:lncil; S 
(j) "Register" means the Register of members of the Institute 
maintained under this Act; 
(k) "Vice-President" means the Vice-President of the Council; 
(I) "year" means the period commencing on the 1st day of April 
of any year and ending on the 31st day of March of the succeeding 10 
year; 
(m) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Companies Act shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in that Act. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a member of the Institute IS 
shall be deemed "to be in practice" when, individually or in partnership 
with one or more members of the Institute in practice or in partnership 
with members of such other recognised professions as may be prescribed, 
he, in consideration of remuneration received or to be received,-
(a) engages himself in the practice of the profession of Company 20 
Secretary to, or in relation to, any company; or 
(b) offers to perform or performs services in relation to the 
promotion, ronning. incorporation, amalgamation, reconstruction, 
Ne~tion or winding up of· companies; or 
(c) offers to perfortn or performs such services as may be per- 2S 
formed by-
(i) an authorised representative of a company with respect 
to filing, registering, presenting, attesting or verifying any douc-
ments (iI1cluding forms, applications and returns) by or on behalf 
of the company, 30 
(14) a share tralUfer agent, 
(iii) an issue house, 
(iv) a share and stock broker, 
(v) a secretarial auditol' or consultant, 
(vi) an adviser to any company on management, ~cludiAg 3S 
any legal or procedural matter falling under the Capital Ismes 
(Control) Act, 1947, the Industries (Development and Regulation) 29011947. 
", Act, 1961, the Companies Act, the Securities Conttacts ~Regu- 65 of 1951. 
lation) Act, 1951, and any of the rules or bye-laws made by a 42 of 1956. 
recognised stock exchange, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 40 
Practices Act, 1969, the ForeIgn Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, 54 of 1969. 
0 .. under any oUler law for the time being in force., f6 of 1973. 
l'(Wi) issuing cer«ftcates on bE!hal£ of, or for the purposes of, 
a cempany; or 
(d) holds himself out to the public as a Company Secretary in 4S 
pnctHaj or 
!, (e) renders professional services or assistance with respect to 
matters of princIple or detail relating to the practice of, the profe~ 
sion of Company Secretaries; or 

3 
<f> renders such other services as, in the opinion of the Council, 
are or may be rendered by a Company Secretary in practice; 
and the words "to be in ptactree", with their grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions, shall be construed accordingly. 
S CHAPTER II 
INSTITUTE OF OOMPA.'NY SECRr:rAIlIES OF INDIA 
3. (1) All persons whose names are entered in the Register of the 
dIssolved company immediately before the commencement of this Act 
and all persons who may hereafter have their names entered in the 
10 Register to be maintained under this Act, so long as they continue to 
have their names borne on the Register to be maintained under this 
Act. are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of the Inetitute 
at Company Secretaries of India and all such persons shall be known as 
members of the Institute. 
15 (2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal 
20 
and shall have power to acquire, hold and dispose at propc1:y, xncwabJe· 
or immovable and shall by its name sUe or be sued. 
4. (1) Any of the fonowing persons shall be entitled to have his 
name entered in the Register, namely:-
(a) any person who immediately before the commencement of 
this Act was an Assocjate or a Fellow (including an Honora:ry F"ello'iIV 
Membel'\) of the dissolved company; 
(b) any person who is a holder of the Diploma in Company 
Secretaryship awarded by the Government of India; 
25 (c) any person who has passed the examinations conducted by 
the dissolved company and has completed training either as spec1fted 
by the dissolved company or as prescribed by the Cotm.efl, ex(!ept 
any such person who is not a permanent resident of India; 
(d) any person who has passed such examination and completed 
30 such training, as may be prescribed for membership of the Institute; 
(e) any person who has passed such other examination and 
completed such other training without India as is Tecogntsed by the 
Central Government or the Council as being equivalent to the exam;iM 
nation and training prescribed under this Act for membership o~ the 
35 Insiitute: 
Ptovi~ed that in the case of any person belonging to any of the claases 
~ioned in this sub-section who is not permanently residing ill India, 
the Central Government or the C:ouncil may impose such further aoBdi-
tions as it may deem to be necessary or expedient in the public interest. 
40 (2) Every person belonging to the class mentioned in dause (a) or 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall have his name entered in the Register 
without the payment of any entrante fee. 
(3) Every person belonging to any of the classes mentioned in clauses 
(t), (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) shall have his name entered in the 
4S Register on application being made and granted ill the praJeribed 
manner and on payment of prescribed entrance fee, which sball DOt 
exceed four hundred rupees in any case. 
Incorpo-
ration of 
the Insti-
tute. 
EntryQf 
names in 
theRe_ 
giBter. 

Associates 
and 
Fellows. 
4 
(4) The Central Government may take such steps as may be neces-
sary for the purpose of having the names of all persons belonging to 
the classes mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) entered 
in the Re-gister at the coinmencement of this Act. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Council S 
may confer on any person Honorary Fellow Membership, if the Council 
is of the opinion that such person has made a significant contribution to 
the profession of Company Secretaries and thereupon the Council shall 
enter the name of such person in the Register but such person shall not 
have any voting rights in :my election or meetings of the Institute and 10 
shall not also be required to pay any fee to the Institute. 
5. (1) The members of, the Institute shall be divided into two classes 
designated respectively as Associates and Fellows. 
(2) A:n.y person other than a person to whom the prOvisions of sub-
section (4) apply, shall, on his name being entered in the Register, be J 5 
deemed to have become an Associate and as long as his name remains 
so entered shall be entitled to use the letters "A.C.S." after his name to , 
indicate that he is an Associate. 
(3) A person, being an Associate who has been in continuous 
practice in India as Company Secretary for at least five years and a 20 
person who has been an Associate for a continuous period of not less 
than five years and who possesses such qualifications or practical 
experience as the' Council may prescribe with a view to ensuring that 
he has experience equivalent to the experience normally acquired as a 
result of continuous practice for a period of five years as a 25 
Company Secretary shall, on payment of the. prescribed entrance fee, 
which ~hall not exceed four hundred rupees in any case, and on appli-
cation made and granted in the prescribed manner, be entered in the 
Register as a Fellow. 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall 30 
be deemed to have practised in India for any period for which he has 
held a certifteate of practice under section 6, notwithstanding that he 
did not actually practise during that period. 
Expl'anationIl.-In computing the period during which a person has 
been an Associate of the Institute, there shall be included any conti- 35 
nuous period during which the person has been an Associate of the 
dissolved company immediately before he became an Associate of the 
Institute. 
(4) Any person who was a Fellow of the dissolved company and 
who is entitled to have hiS name entered in the Register under clause (a) 40 
of suh-section (1) of section 4, shall be entered in the Register as a 
Fellow of the Institute. 
(5) .An.y person whose name is entered in the Register as a Fellow 
of the lMtitute shall, so long as his name remains so entered, Joe entitled 
to use the letters "F.C.S." after his Dame to indicate that he is a Fellow. 4S 

6. (1) No member of the Institute shall be entitled to practise, CerWlcate 
whether in India or elsewhere, unless he has obtained from the Council of prae-
a certificate of practice. tice. 
(2) A member who desires ,to be entitled to practice. shall make 
5 application in such form and pay such annual fee, for his certificate as 
may be prescribed which shall not exceed two hundred rupees in any 
case, and such fee shall be payable on or before the 1st day of April in 
each year. 
7, Every member of the Institute in practice shall, and any other 
10 member may, use the designation of a Company Secretary and no 
member using such designation shall use any other description, whether 
in addition thereto or in substitution therefor: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit 
any such member from adding any other description or letters to his 
IS name, if entitled thereto, to indicate membership of such other institute 
whether in India or elsewhere as may be recognised in this behalf by the 
Council, or any other qualification that he may possess, or to prohibit 
a firm, all the partners of which are members of the Institute and in 
practice, from being known by its firm name as Company Secretaries. 
Members 
to be 
known 
as Com.. 
pany Sec-
retaries. 
20 8, NotWithstanding anything contained in section 4, a person shall Diaebili-
not be entitled t:l have his name entered in, or borne on, the Register if ties. 
he-
(a) has not attained the age of twenty-one years at the time of 
his application for the entry of his name in the Register; or 
25 (b) is of unsound mind and stands so adjudged by a competent 
court; or 
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(d) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the 
court a certificate stating that his insolvency was caused by mis-
30 fortune without any misconduct on his part; or 
(e) has been convicted by a competent court, whether within or 
without India, of an offence involving moral turpitude and punish-
able with imprisonment or of an offence, not of a technical nature, 
committed by him in his professional capacity unless in respect of 
35 the offence committed he has either been granted a pardon or, on 
an application made by him in this behalf, the Central Government 
has, by an order in writing, removed the disability; or 
<f) has been removed from membership of the Institute on 
being found on inquiry to have been guilty of professional or other 
40 misconduct: 
Provided that a person who has been removed from membership for 
a specified period shall not be entitled to have his name entered in the 
Register until the expiry of such period, 

Constitu-
tionof 
theCoun-
cilofthe 
Institute. 
Mode of 
election 
to the 
Coun-
cil. 
Nomina-
tion in 
default 
of elec-
tion. 
President 
and Vice-
President. 
• 
CHAPTER III 
CoUNCIL OF THE INSTITUTE 
9. (1) There shall be a Council of the Institute for the management 
of tile affairs of the Institute and for discharging the functions assigned 
tp it py or under this Act. . 5 
(:B~The Council shall be composed of-
(a) not more than twelve persons elected. by members of the 
Institute from amongst the Fellows chosen in such manner and from 
such regional constituencies as may be notified in this behalf by the 
oCentrlll -Government in the Official Gazette; and 
(0' not more than four persons nominated by the Central 
Government. 
19. (1) Elections under clause (a) of SUb-section (2) of secUon9 shall 
be conducted in the prescribed manner. 
10 
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any such election, the matter IS 
shall ,be referred by the Council to a Tribunal which shall consist of one 
or IllQre members of the Board of Company Law Administration consti-
tuted under section WE of the Companies Act whom the Central Govern-
ment may nominate in this behalf and the decision of such Tribunal 
shall be final: 
Provided that no such reference shall be made except on an appli-
cation made to the Council by an aggrieved party within thirty days 
from the date of the declaration of the result of the election. 
(3) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council. 
20 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section and in 25 
Chapter IX, the Council of the dissolved company shall, on the 
commencement of this Act, become the Council of the Institute and shall 
function as such-
(i) for a period of two years from such commencement, or 
(ii) till the Council is constituted in accordance with the provi- 30 
sions of sub-section (2) of section 9, 
whichever is earlier. 
E.trpl.cut.ation..-For the purposes of this sub-section, the Council shall 
be deemed to ·have been ~onstituted in acc:>rdance with the provisions 
of sub-tsection (2) of section 9 with effect from such date [not being 35 
later thaD thirty days from the date on whieh the results af the first 
e1ections,undel' clause (a,) of the said sub-section (2) are announced] 
al the Central Government ~y notify in 'the Official Gazette. 
11. If the members of the Institute fall to elect any member under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 9 from any of the regional 40 
~onstituencies that may be notified under that clause, the Central Govern-
ment may nominate any duly qualified person from such 'constituency 1.0 
fill up the vacancy, and any person so nominated shall be deemed to be 
a duly elected member of the Council. 
. n. (1) The Council at i~s first meeting shall elect two of its members 4S 
to be respectively the President and the Vice-President thereof, and 
so often as the office of the President or the Vice-President falla vacant, 

7 
the Council shall chooae a person to be the Preaident or the Vice-
President, as the case may be: 
Provided that the Prelident of the Council of the dissolv.ed company 
Ihan COIltinue to hold such offiae after the commencement of this Act, 
5 until such time .. a President is elected under the provisions of this 
sub-eecUon. 
(2) The President shall be the Chief Executiv~ Authority of the 
Council. 
(3) The Pnesident or the Vice-President shall hold offiee for a period 
10 of one year from the date on which he is chosen but so as not to extend 
beyond his term of office as a member of the Council, and subject to his 
being a member of the Coumi1 at the relevant t;me, he shall be eligible 
for re-election. 
(4) . On the ~pif'ation of the duration of the Council, or of the term 
15 of office of the President thfteof, the President of the CoUDcil shall 
continue to hold office until such time as a new President is elected and 
takes over charge of his duties. 
(5) In the event of the occurrenCe of any vacancy in the office ot 
the President, the ViCe-President shall act as President until the date on 
20 which a new President elected in accordance with the provisions at this 
section to fill such vacancy enters upon his oftic::e and when the Presi-
dent is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any 
other cause, the Vice-President shall diacharge bis functions until the 
date on which the President resumes his duties. 
25 13. (1) Any member of the Councll may at any time resign his 
membership by writing und.er his baud adciressed to the ~nt, and 
the seat of such member shall become vacant when such resignation is 
notifted in the OffiCial Gazette. 
(2) A member of the Council shall be deemed to have vacated his 
30 seat if he is declared by the Council to have been absent without sum· 
cient excuse from three consecutive meetings of the Council .or of any 
of the Committee which has been constituted by the Council and ot 
which he is • member or if his name is, for any ~, removed. from 
the Register under the provisions of section 20. 
5S (3) A casual vacancy in the office of the elected member of the 
Couw::ilshall be filled by fresh election from the constituency concerned 
or by nomination .by the Central Government on recommendations made 
by the Councll in this behalf, as the case may be, and the peI'SOll elected 
or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office until the dissolution at 
40 tta. Oo1mcil: 
45 
Provided that no election shall be held to fiU a casual vacancy 
occurring within six months prior to the date of the expiration of the 
term of the CounCil, but such a vacancy may be filled by nomination 
by the Central Government after consultation with the President at 
the Council. 
(4) No act done by the Councll shall be called in question on the 
gt'ound merely of the existence of ally vacaney in, or detect in the 
constitution of, the Council. 
Resigna-
tion of 
member. 
ship and 
casual 
vacaneies. 

Duration 
and dis-
solution 
of the 
Council. 
Functions 
of the 
Council. 
8 
If. (1) The duration of any Council constituted under thia Act shall 
be three years from the \ date of its first meeting. 
(2) Notwithstanding the expiration of. the duration of a Council 
(hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the former Council)" the 
, fonner Council shall continue to exercise its functions under this &t 5 
until a new Council is constituted in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and on such constitution the former Council shall stand 
dissolved. 
15. (1) The duty of carrying out the provisions of this Act shall be 
vested in the Council. 10 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice t& the generality of the 
foreg:>ing power, the duties of the Council shall include-
(a.) the preacribing of the standards for, and conduct of exami-
nations for enrolment of candidates in the Register and of the fees 
therefor; I 5 
(b) the registration and training of students; 
(c) the prescribing of qualifications for eaWy in the Register; 
(d) the recognition of foreign qualifications and training for' 
purposes of enrolment; 
(e) the grantine or refusal of certificates of practice under this 20 
Act; 
(f) the maintenance and publicStion of a Register Qf persons 
qualified to practise as Company Secretaries; 
(g) the levy and collection of fees from members, examinees 
and other persons; 
(h) the removal of names from the Register and restoration to 
the Register of names which have been removed; 
(i) the regulation and maintenance of such status and of such 
standards of professional qualifications of members of the Institute, 
as may be prescribed; 
(j) the carrying out, by financial assistance to persons other than 
members of the Council or in any other manner, of researeh in such 
matters of interest to Company Secretaries as may be prescribed; 
(k) the maintenance of libraries and publication at books and 
periodicals relating to management of companies in the prescribed 35 
manner and such allied subjects as may be prescribed; 
(1) the granting of such financial or other assistance to persolll 
prosecuting studies for Company Secretaryship course as may be 
prescribed; 
(m) the exercise of such disciplinary powers as may be pres- 40 
cribed. 

16. (1) For the efficient performance of its duties and iunctions, the 
Council shall appoint a Secretary who shall be a member of the Institute 
and may-
(a) appoint such other persons on the staff of the Institute as it 
5 deems necessary; 
(b) prescribe the terms and conditions of service and the scales 
of pay of the Secretary and other employees of the Institute, includ~ 
Jog persons who have become employees of the Institute under 
section 33; 
10 (c) fix the allowances of the President, Vice-President and other 
members of the Council and its Committees. 
(2) The Secretary of the Institute shall be entitled to participate in 
the meetings of the Council and the Committees thereof but shall not be 
entitled to vote thereat. 
IS 17. (1) The Council shall constitute from amongst its members the fol-
lowing Standing Committees, namely:-
(a) an Executive Committee; 
(b) a Disciplinary Committee; and 
(c) an Examination Committee. 
2.0 (2) The Council may also constitute a Training and Educational Faci-
lities COmmittee, Professional Research and Publications Committee and 
such other Committees from amongst its members as it deems necessary 
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(3) 1'he Executive Committee shall consist of the President, and the 
as Vice-President, ex officio, and three other members of the Council elect-
ed by the CouncIl. 
(4) The Disciplinary Committee shall consist of the President, ex 
officio, one member to be nominated by the Central Government from 
amongst the members nominated to the Council by that Government and 
30 one member to be elected by the Council. . 
(5) The Examination Committee shall consist of the President or the 
Vice-President, ex ofJiciJ:>, as the Council may decide, and two other 
members of the Council elected by the Council. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything ccntained in this section, any Commit-
35 tee formed under sub-section (2), may, with the sanction of the Council, 
co-opt such other members of the Institute not exceeding two-thirds of 
the total membership of the Committee as the Committee thinks fit, 
and any member so co-opted shall be entitled to exercise all the rights 
of a member of the Committee. 
40 (7) Every Committee constituted under this section shall elect its 
own Chairman: 
Provided that where the President is a member ot suchCemm.ifltee, 
he shall be the Chairman of such Committee and in his absence the Vice-
President, if he is a member of S\.1.Ch Committee, shall be its Chainnan. 
45 (8) The Standing Committees and other Committees formed under 
, this section shall exeJclse such functions and be' subject to' S'UCh condi-
tions in the exercise. thereof as m,y be prescribed. 
Staff, re-
munera-
tionaDd 
allow-
ances. 
Committe-
es of the 
Council. 

Finances 
ofb 
CooneU. 
Register. 
JO 
18. (l) 'I'here .hall be established a fund under 'the management and 
control· of. the Council into w~h shall be paid all moneys (inducting 
donations and grants) received by the Council and out of which shall be 
met all expenses including any donations made and liabilities properly 
incurred by the Council. 5 
(2) The Council may invest any money for the time being standing 
to the credft of the fund in any G<r.remment security or in any other 
security approved by the Central Government. 
(3) The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fundo distinguish-
ing capital from re'lenue. 10 
(4) The anJlual accounts cf the Council shall be su'bject to audit by a 
Chartered Accountant in practice wi thin the meaning of the Chartered 
Accountants Act, 19419, to be appoi!lted annually by the Council: 38 of 1949. 
Provided that no member of the Council who is a Chartered 
Ac('ountant or a person who is in partnership with such member shaIl be r 5 
eligible for appointmen t as an auditor under this sub-section. 
(5) As soon as may be practicable at the end, of eaeh year, but not 
later than the 30th day of September of the year ~xt following" the 
Council shall cause to bepubUshed in the Gazette 01 India a copy of the 
audited accounts and the report of the Council for that year and copies 20 
of the said accounts and report shall be forwarded to the Central Gov-
ernment and to all the members of the Institute. 
(6) Subject to such directions as the Central Government may, by 
order in writing, make in this behalf, the Council may borrow-
(a) any money required for meeting its liabilities on capital ac- 25 
CGtlIlt on the security of the fund or on the security Q! any other 
8&1ets for the time b@ing belonging to it; Or 
(b) for the purpose of IIle('ting current liabilities pending -the 
receipt of income by way of temporary loan or over-draft. 
CHAPTER IV 
RmlSTER OF MEMBEBS 
19. (1) The Council shall maintain in the prescribed manner a Regis-
ter of the members of the Institute. 
(2) The Register shall include the following particulars about every 
30 
member of the Institute, namely: - 3S 
(a) his full name, date of birth, domicile, residential and pro-
feuiODAl addr ..... ; 
(b) the date on which his name is entered in the Register; 
(c) his qualifications; 
(cl) wh..-ther he hold& a certific:ate of praetke; aDd 
(e) any other particuUra whida may .. pnseI'ibe& 
40 

11 
(3) The Council shall cause 'to be pubJished in such manner as may 
be prescribed a list of membl. ... s of the Institute as on the 1st day of 
April of each year, and shall, if requested to do so by any such member, 
send him a copy of such list. 
5 (4) Every member of the Insttitute shall, on his name being entered 
in the Register, pay such annual membership fee differing in amount ac-
cording as he is an Associate or a Fellow as may be prescri'lled, which 
sball not e?{ceed three hundred rupees in any case. 
ZOo (1) The Council may remove from tbe Register the name of any 
10 member of the Institute-
20 
(a) who is dead; or 
(b) from whom a request has been received to that effect; or 
(c) who has not paid any prescribed 'fee required to be paid by 
him; or 
(d) who is found to have been subject at the time when his 
name was entered in the Register, or who at any time ther~ 
after has become subject, to any of the disabilities mentioned in 
section 8, or who for any other reaSOn has ceased to be entitled to 
have his name borne on the Regis~er. 
(2) The Council shall remove from the Register the name of any 
member in respect of whom an order has been passed under this Act 
removing him from membership of the Institute. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCONDUCT 
2S 21. (1) Where on receipt of information by, or a complaint made to 
it, the Council is prima facie of opinion that any member of the Institute 
has been guilty of any professional or other misconduct, 'the Council 
shall refer the case to the Disciplinary Committee constituted under 
section 17, and the Disciplinary Comm~ttee shall thereupon hold such 
30 inquiry and in such manner as may be prescribed and shall report the 
result of its inquiry to the Council. 
(2) If on recc::ipr. of such report the Council finds that the member of 
the Institu.le is not guilty ot any professional or other misconduct, it 
shall record its finding accordingly and direct that the proceedings shall 
35 be filed, or the complaint shall be dismissed, as the 'Case maybe. . 
(3) It on receipt of such report the Council finds that the member of 
the Ins.itute is guilty of any professional or other misconduct, it shall 
record its finding accordingly, and shall proceed in the maDner laid down 
in the succee~g lub-SectiOns. 
, 
40 (4) Where the finding is that a member of the Institute hQ beeJl 
guilty of a professional misconduct specified in the First Schedule, the 
Council shall afford to the member an opportunity of ~ing heard before 
orders are passed against him on the case, and may thereafter make any 
of the following orders, namely:- . 
(a) reprimand the member; 
Removal 
from the 
Register. 
Procedure 
in inquir-
ies relat-
ing to mis_ 
conduct 
ofmem-
bers 
of the 
Institute. 

12 
(b) remove the name of the member from the Register for such 
period, not e-x:ceeding five years, as the Council thinks fit: 
Provided that where the Council is of. opinion that the case is one 
in which the name of the member ought to be removed from the Register 
for a period exceeding five years or permanently, it shall not make any' 5 
order referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), but shall forward the case 
to the High Court with its recommendations thereon. 
(5) Where the misconduct in respect of which the Council has found 
any member of the Institute guilty is a misconduct specified in the Second 
Schedule, it shall forward the case to the High Court with its recom- 10 
mendations thereun. 
(6) On receipt of any case under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5), 
the High Court shall fix a date foOr the hearing of the case and shall 
cause notice of the date so fixed to be given to the, member of the Insti-
tute concerned, the Council and to the Central Government, and shall 15 
afford sllch member, the Council and the Central Government an oppor-
tunity of being heard and may thereafter make any of the following 
orders, namely:-
(a) direct that the proceedings be filed, or dismiss the com-
plaint, as the case may be; 20 
(b) reprimand the member; 
(c) remove him from membership of the Institute either per-
manently or for such period as the High Court thinks fit; 
(d) refer the case to the Council for further inquiry and report. 
(7) Where it appears to the High Court that the transfer of any case 2S 
pending before it to another High Court, will promote the ends of justice 
or tend to the general convenience of the parties, it may so transfer the 
case, subject 'to such co-nditions, if any, as it thinks fit to impose, and the 
High Court to which such case is transferred shall deal with it as if the 
case had been forwarded to it by the Council. 30 
Explanation I.-In this section, "High Court" means the highest civil 
court of appeal, not including the Supreme Court, exercising jurisdiction 
in the area in which the person whose conduct is being inquired in.1Io is 
in service or carnes on his profession or has his principal place of pro-
fession at the commencement of the inquiry: 35 
Provided that where the cases relating to two or mo.re members of 
the Insti'Lute have to be forwarded by the Council to different High 
Courts, the Central Government shall, having regard to the ends of 
justicP. and the general convenience of the parties, determine which of 
the High Courts to the exclusion of others shall hear the cases againsP'~ 40 
all the members. . 
Erplcn4tion H.-For the purposes of this section, "member of the 
Institute" includes a person who was a member of the Institute on the 
date of the alleged misconduct although he has ceased to be a member 
of the Institute at the time of the inquiry. .45 

18 
(8) For the purposes of any inquiry under this section the COWlcil 
and the Disciplinary Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall have 
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
5 of 1908. Procedure, 1906 in respect of the following matters, namely:-
5 (a) summQIling and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
ex&mining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits. 
22. For the purposes of this Act, the expression "professional miscon-
10 duct" shall be deemed to include any act or omission specified in any of 
the Schedules, but nothing in this section shall be construed to limdt or 
abridge in any way the power conferred or duty cast on the Council 
under sub-section (1) of section 21 to inquire into th'e conduct of any 
member of the ImHitute under any other circumstances. 
CHAPrER VI 
REGIONAL COUNCILS 
23. (1) For the purpose of advising and assisting it· on matters con-
cerning its functions, the Council may constitute such Regional Councils 
as and when it deems fit fo,r one or more of the. regional constituencies 
20 that may be notiJled by the Central G(Jvernment under clause (a) ot sub-
section (2) of section 9. 
25 
30 
(2) The Regional Councils shall be constituted in such manner and 
exercise such functions as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VII 
24. Subject to the provisions of section 7, any person who,-
(01) not being a member of the Institute,-
(i) represents that he is a member of the Institute; or 
(ii) uses the designation "Company Secretary"; or 
(iii) uses the letters IIA.C.S." or "F.C.S." after his name; or 
(b) being a member of the In,titute, but not having a certificate 
of practice, represents that he is in practice or practises as a Company 
Secretary, 
shall be punishable on first conviction with flne which may extend to 
35 one thousand rupees, and on any subsequent OCUlviction wi:th imprison-
ment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees, or with both. 
Protes-
sional 
miscon-
duct 
defined. 
Constitu-
tion and 
functions 
olRe-
gional 
Councils. 
Penalty 
for falsely 
claiming 
tobea 
member, 
etc. 

Penalty 
for using 
name of 
the Coun-
cil, or 
award-
ingdegree 
of 
Company 
Secretary. 
Companies 
not to 
engage in 
Company 
Secre-
taryship. 
Unquali-
fled 
persons 
not to sifJl 
docu-
ments. 
14 
!S. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall-
(a) use a name or a common seal which is identical with the 
name Ql' the common seal of the Institute or so nearly resembles it 
as to deceive or as is likely to deceive the public; 
(b) award any degree, diploma or certificate or bestow any j 
designation which indicates or purports to inddcate the position or 
attainment of any qualification or competence in Company Secretary-
ship similar to that of a member of 'the Institute; or 
(c) seek to regulate in any manner whatsoever the profession ot 
Company Secretaries. 10 
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, 
without prejudice to any other proceedings which may be taken against 
him, be punisha'ble on first conviction with fine which. may extend to 
one thousand r'.lpees, and rm any subsequent convicti9ll with imprism-
ment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 15 
to five thousand rupees, or with both. 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any University 
or other institution established by law or to any body affiliated to the 
Institute. 
(4) If the Central Government is satisfied that any diploma or ceI1ti- 20 
ficate or any designation granted or conferred by any perso,n ot~r than 
the Institute, whidl purports to b! a quaWICation in Company Secretary-
shipoot whit-h, in the opinion of the Central Government, falls S'hort of 
the standard of qualifications prescribed for Company Secretaryship 
and does not in fact indicate or purport to indicate the position or attain- 25 
ment of any qualification or competence in Company Secretaryship 
similar to that of a member of the Institute, it may, by ndtifi.cation in tht' 
Official Gazette and subject to such conditions as it may think fit to im-
pose, declare that 'this section shall not apply to such diploma or certifi-
cate or designation. 30 
26. (1) No company, whether incorporated in India or elsewhere, 
shall practise as Company Secretaries. 
(2) Any company contravening the provilions of sub-section (1) shall 
be punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to one thou-
sand rupees, and. on any subsequent conviction with fute which may 35 
extend to five thousand rupees. 
~. (1) No person other than a member of the Institute shall sign any 
document on behalf of a Company Secretary, inpracti.ce or a firm of 
such Company Secretaries in his or its profeSSional capacity. 
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of .9lib-section (1') shall, 
without prejudice to any ether proceedings which may be taken against 40 
him, be punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with imprisonment 
which may extend to six months, or with fine whim may extend to o.ve 
thousand rupees, or with both. 4 S 

IS 
28. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a Cotn4 
pany, the company as w~ll as every person in charge of, and responSible 
to, ~e company for the conduct of its business at the time of the com-
mission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
5 shall ,be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
. 
Provided that nothing con1ained in this sub-section shaU render any 
such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge 01' that he had exercised all due dili· 
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
10 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a· company and it is proved 
that the offence haSi been committed with the consent or connivance of, 
or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on 
the part of, i any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the com-
15 pany, such director, manager, secretary or other offtcer shall also be 
deemed to Ibe guilty of that offence and shall be Jiable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly. 
20 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) ucompany" means any body corporate and inciudes a firm or 
other association of individuals; an. 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
finn. 
Oftences 
by com-
panies. 
20. No person shall be prosecuted under this Act except on a com- Sanction 
plaint made by or under th,e order of the Council or of the Central to 
25 Government. prosecute . 
CHAPTER VIII ... 
ApPEALS 
30. (1) Any mem.ber of the Institute aggrieved by any order of the Appeala. 
Council imposing on him any of the penalties referred to in clause (a) 
30 or clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 21, may, within thirty days 
o,f the date on which the order is commun,icated to him, prefer an appeal 
to the High Court: 
Provided that ',he High Court may entertain any such, appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the 
3S member was prevented by sufficient cause from fiWog the appeal in time. 
(2) The High Court may, on its own motion or otherwise, af.er call-
ling for the records of any cue, revise ~ 0* made by the Council 
under sub-section (2) or sub-aection (4) of JeCtion 21 and may-
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order; 
(/:» impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, confirm or enhanae 
the penalty impor.ed by the order; , ! 
(c) remit the case to the COWlcil for such further enquiry as ths 
High Court consider!'! proper in the circumstances of the CaBle; 

Dissolu-
tion of the 
Institute 
of Com-
pany Sec-
retaries of 
India re-
gistered 
under the 
Compan-
ies Act. 
Transfer 
of assets 
and 
liabilitie'i 
of the 
dis-
solved 
companY' 
to the 
Institute .. 
• 16 
(d) pass such other order as the High Court thinks fit: 
Provided that no order of the Council shall be modified or set aside 
unless the Council has been given an opportunity of being heard and no 
order .imposing or enhancing a penalty shall be passed unless the person 
concerned has been given an opportunity of being heard. 5 
E:rplanation.-In this section, "High Court" and "member of the Ins-
titute" have the same meanings as in section 21. 
CHAPTER IX 
DISSOLUTION OF THE INSTITUrE OF COMPANY SEcRETARIES OF INDIA 
REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT 10 
31. On the commencement of this Act-
(a) the company known as the Institute of Company Secretaries 
of India registered under the Companies Act shall stand dissolved 
and thereafter no person shall make, assert or take any claims or de-
mands or' proceedings agaipst the dissolved company or against any J 5 
officer thereof in his capacity as such officer except in so far as may 
be necessary, for enforcing the provisions of this Act; 
(b) the right of every member to, or in respect of, the dissolved 
company shall be extinguished, and thereafter no member of that 
company shall make, assert or take any claims or demands or pro- 20 
ceedings in respect of that company except as provided in this Act. 
32. (1) On the commencement of this Act, there shall he transferred 
to and vested in the Institute all the assets and liabilities of :the dissolved 
company. 
(2) The assets of the dissolved company shall be deemed to include 2S 
all rights and powers, and all property, whether movable or immovable, 
of that company, including In particular, cash balances, reserve funds, 
investments, deposits and all other interests and rights in or arising out 
of such property as may be in the possession of the dissolved company 
and all books of accounts, papers or documents of the dissolved com- 30 
pany; and the liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities 
and obligations of whatever kind then existing of that company. 
(3) All contracts, debts, bonds, agreements and other instruments 
of whatever nature jo which the dissolved company is a party, subsist-
ing or having effect immediately before the commencement of this Act, 3, 
shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the Institute, 
as the case may be, ~,~d may be enforced as 'fully and effectively as if 
instead of the dissolved company, the Institute had been a party thereto. 
(4) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other 
legAl proceeding of. whatever nature by or against the dissolved com .. 40 
pany is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any 
way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the Institute of 
the assets and liabilities of the dissolved company or of anything con-
tained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be 
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Institute, in the 4S 

17 
same manner and to the same extent as it would or may be continued, 
prosecuted and enforced by or against the dissolved company if this 
Act had not been passed. 
33. (1) Every person employed in the dissolved company and conti-
5 nuing in its employment immediately before the commencement of this 
Act shall, as from such commencement, become an employee of the 
Institute, shall hold his office or service therein bv the same tenure and 
upon the same terms and conditions and with th~ same rights and pri-
vileges as to pension and gratuity as he would have held the same under 
J fJ the dissolved company if this Act had not been passed, and shall con-
tinue to do so unless and until his employment in the Institute is ter-
minated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment 
are duly altered by the Institute. 
14 of 1947. Ij 
20 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer 
of. the services of any employee of the dissolved company to the In~ti­
tute shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under 
that Act or other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any· 
court, tribunal or other authority. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCEILANEOUS 
Provisions 
respecting 
employees 
of the 
dissolved 
company. 
34. (1) Where an order is made under this Act reprimanding a mem- Alteration 
ber, a record of the punishment shall be entered against his name in the in the 
Register. Register 
.'.. and can-
25 (2) Where the name of any member is removed, the certificate of cellati1ln 
practice granted to him under this Act shall be recalled and cancelled. ot certi-
flcate. 
Directions 
of the , .. 
35, (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such 
directions to the Council as in the opinion of the Central Government 
30 are conducive to the fulftlment of the obj,ects of this Act and in the 
discharge of its· functions the Council shall be bound to carry out any 
such directions. 
(2) Directions issued under sub-section (1) may include directions 
to the Council to make any regulations or to amend or revoke any regu-
I ':ltions already made. 
35 (3) If, in the opinion of the Central Governr:hent, the Council has 
persistently committed default in giving effect to the directions issued 
under this section, the Central Government may, after giving an 
oPJlOrtunity to the Council to state its case, by order, dissolve the 
Council, whereafter a new Council snall be constituted in accordance 
40 with the provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be 
specified by the Central Government. 
(4) Where the Central Government passes an order under sub-
section (3) dissolving the Council, it may, pending the constitution of 
a new Council in accordance with the provisions of this Act, authorise 
~5 any person or body of persons b take over the management of the 
affairs of the Institute and to exercise such functions as may be speci-
fied in this behalf by the Central Government. 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 

Protection 
of action 
taken in 
~oodfaith. 
Mainte-
nanceof 
branch 
offtoea. 
Recipro-
city. 
Power to 
make 
regu!a-
tiona. 
18 
36. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or the Council in respect of anyfhing which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act 01' 
of any regulations or orders made thereunder. 
37. (1) Where a Company Secretary in practice or a firm of such 5 
Company Secretaries has more than one office in India, each one of 
such offices shall be in the separate charge of a member of the Institute: 
Provided that the Council may in suitable cases exempt any Company 
Secretary in practice or firm of such Company Secretaries from the 
operation o£ this sub-section. 10 
(2) Every Company Secretary in practice or firm of such Company 
Secretaries maintaining more than one office shall send to the Council 
a list of offices and the persons in charge thereof and shall keep the 
Council informed of any changes in relation thereto. 
38. (1) Where any country, notified by the Central Government in IS 
this behalf in the Official Gazette. prevents persons of Indian domiCile 
from becoming members of any- institution similar to the Institute estab-
lished under this Act or from practising the profession of Company 
Secretaryship or subJects them to unfair discrimination in that country, 
no subject of any such couniry shall be entitled to become a member of 2.0 
the Institute or practise the profession of Company Secretaries in India. 
G2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Council may 
PTesCribe the conditions, if any, subject to which foreign qualifications 
relating to Company Secretaryship shall be recognised for the purposes 
of entry in the Register. 2.5 
39. (1) The Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette make 
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provision:; of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such regulations may provide for all CU' any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-- 30 
(a) the professions that may be recognised under sub-section 
(2) of sectIon 2 and items (1), (3) and (4) of Part I of the First 
Schedule; 
(b) the eXall\inations and training for the purposes Qf clauses 
(c), (d) and (e) of SUb-section (1) of section 4; 35 
(c) the manner of making an application and granting thereof 
under sul>section (3) of section 4 or sub-section (3) of section 5; 
(d) the fees payable under sub-se~tion (3) Qf section 4, sub-
section (3) of section 5, sub-section (2) of section 6, clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 15, sub-section (4) of section 19 and clause 40 
(c) of sub-section (1) at. section 20; 
(e) the qualifications and practical experi"'lce for the purposes 
ol sub-section (3) of section 5; . 
(I) the form in which an application may be made under sub-
section (2) of section 6; 4) 

s 
10 
(g) the manner in which an election to the Council may be C~ 
ducted under section 10; 
(h) the transaction ot business by the Council for the discharge 
of its functions under section 15 and other provisions of this Act, the 
place at which and the intervals at which the Council shall hold its 
meetings for the transact;on of such business, the procedure to be 
followed at such meetings and all other matters connected therewith; 
(i) the regulation and maintenance of the status and standards 
of professional qualifications of members of the Institute, as required 
by clause (i) of sub-seotion (2) of section 15; 
(j) the carrying out of research in matters ot interest to Com-
·pany Secretarks as required by clause (j) of sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 15; 
(k) the maintenance of libraries and pUblication of books and 
periodicals relating to management of companies and allied sub-
jects, as required by clause (k) of sub-section (2) of section 15, 
(0 the exercise of disciplinary powers, as required by clause (m) 
of sub-section (2) of section 15; 
(m)the transaction of business by the Standing Committees 
20 and other Committ€es referred to in section 17, the places at which 
and the intervals at which such committees shall hold their meet-
ings for the transaction of such business, the procedure to be followed 
at such meeting and all other matters connected therewith; 
(n) the manner in which the Register may be maintained under 
25 sub-section (1) of section 19; 
(0) the other particulars to be included in the Register, as re-
quiredby clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 19; 
(p) the manner in which the annual list of members of the Ins-
titute may be pUJblished under sub-section (3) of section 19; 
(q) the inquiries to be held under sub-section (1) of section 21: 
(r) the manner in wh:ch Regional Council may be constituted 
under sub-section (2) of sectiC'n 23 and the functions 'thereof; 
(~) the conditions subject to which 'foreignqualitkations may 
be recognised under sub-section (2) of section 38; 
3S (t) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed under this Act. 
(3) All regulations made by the Council under this Act shall be 
subject to the condition of previous publication and to the approval of 
the Central Government. 
40 (4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made by 
the Council, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Govern-
ment shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which 
may be comprised in one se~sion or in two or more successive sessions, 
4S and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successiVe sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in mak-
ing any modification in the reguI<l'ion or both Houses agree that the 
regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have 

effect only in such modifIed form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regu-
lation. : : ~ .. I.' i; ''ll 
i ' I 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 21 (4) and 22] 
PART I 
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the 
Institute in prartice 
5 
A Company Secretary in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of 10 
professional misconduct, if he-
(1) allows any other person to practise· in his name as a Com-
pany Secretary unless such other person is a Company Secretary 
or is a member of such other recognised profession as may be pres-
cribed in this behalf, and is in partnership with or employed by IS 
him; 
(2) pays or allows or agrees to payor allow, directly or indi-
rectly, any share, commission or brokerage in the fees or profits 
of his professional work to any person, other than a member of the 20 
Institute or a partner or a retired partner or the legal representa-
tive of a deceased partner. 
Erplanation.-In this item, "partner" includes a person resid-
ing outside India with whom a Company Secretary in practice has 
entererl into partnership which is not in con1ravention of item '(4) 
of this Part; 25 
(3) accepts or ~grees to accept, except from a member of the 
Institute or from anyone belonging to any of the recognised profes-
sions prescribed for the purpose, any part of the profits, fees or 
other remuneration arising out of the work which is not of a profes-
sional nature; 30 
(4) enters into partnership with any person other than a Com-
nany Secretary in practice or a mrmber of any other recollnised pro-
fession as may be prescribed r)r a person resident without India 
who but for his residence abroad would have been entitled to be 
registeren as a member of the Institute under clause (e) of sub- 35 
section (1) of section 4 or whose qualifications are recognised by 
the Central Government or the Council for the purpose of mem-
bership of the Institute provided that the Company Secretary 
shares in the fees or profits of the profesRional work of the partner-
ship both within and without India; 40 
(5) secures, either through the services of a person not qualified 
to be his partner or by means which are not open to n Company 
Secretary, any professional work; 
(6) solicits clients or professional work, either directly or 
indirectly, by circular, advertisement, pf'rsonal communicati')n or 45 
interview or by any other means; 
(7) advertises his professional attainments or services, or uses 
any designation OY' expression (\theT than Company Serrctary on 
professional documents, visiting cards, letter-heads or sign boards, 

~I 
. .,...~ .... 
unless it be a degree of a University established by law in India 01' 
recognised by the Central Government or a title indicating mem-
bership of the Institute or of any other institution that has been 
recognised by the. Central Government or may be recognised by the 
S Council; 
(8) accepts the position of a Company Secretary in practice 
previously held by another Company Secretary in practice without 
first communicating with him in writing; 
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to accept, in 
10 respect of any professional employment fees which are based on 
a percentage of profits or which are contingent lIpon the findings 
or results of such employment, except in cases which are permitted 
under any regulations made under this Act; 
(10) engages in any business or occupation other than the pro-
IS fession of Company Secretary unless permitted by the Council so 
to engage: 
20 
Provided that nothing contained herein shall disentitle a Com-
pany Secretary from being a director of a company except as pro-
vided in the Companies Act; 
(11) accepts a position as Company Secretary in practice pre-
viously held by some other Company Secretary in practice in such 
conditions as to constitute under-cutting; 
(12) allows a person not being a member of the Institute in 
practice or a member not being his partner to sign on his behalf 
Or on behalf of his firm anything which he is required to certify 
as a Company Secretary, or any other statements related thereto. 
PART II 
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute 
in service 
30 A member of the Institute (other than a membf:r in practice) shall 
be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he, being an em-
ployee of any company, firm or person-
(1) pays or allows or agree& to pay, directly or indirectly, to 
any person any share in the emoluments of the employment under-
3' taken by the member; 
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part Ilf fees, profits or gains 
from a lawyer, a Company Secretary or broker engaged by such 
company, firm or person or agent or customer of such CQlnpany, firm 
or person by way of commission or gratification; 
dO (3) disc10ses confidential information acquired in the coUrse df 
his employment otherwiJDe than as required by any law for the time 
being in force or as pertnitted by his employer. 

PAR1 III 
Professional 7'I~isconduct in relation to members of the Imtitutt 
ge11erally 
A member of the Institute whether in practice or not shall be deemed 
to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he- S 
(1) includes in any statement, return or form to be submitted 
to the Council any particulars knOlWing them to he false; 
(2) not being a Fellow styles himself as a Fellow; 
(3) does not supply the information called for or does not com-
ply with the requirements asked for by the Council or any of its 10 
Committees; 
(4) defalcates or embezzles moneys received in his professional 
capacity. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See sections 21 (5) and 22] 
PAR'I I 
Professional miscondu.ct in relation to members ot the Imtitute in 
practice requiring action by a High Court 
A Company Secretary in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of 
15 
professional misconduct, if he- 20 
(1) discloses information acquired in the course of his profes-
sional engagement 'to any person other than the client so engaging 
him, without the consent of such client, or otherwise than as re-
quired by any law for the time being in force; 
(2) certifies or submits in his name or in the name of his firm 25 
a report of an examination of the matters relating to Company Secreta-
rial practice and related statements unless the examination of such 
statements has been made by him or by a partner or any employee 
in his firm or by another Company Secretary in practice; 
(3) permits his name or the name of his firm to be used in con- 30 
nection with any report or statement contingent upon future trans-
actions in a manner which may lead tQ the belief that he vouches 
for the accuracy of the forecast; 
(4) expresses his opinion on any report or statement given to 
any bUsiness enterprise in which he, his firm or a partner in his firm 35 
has a substantial interest, unless he discloses the interest also in his 
report; 
(5) deliberately aids in or abets the concealment :in his report 
.. statement of a material fact known to him although the disclosure 
of which is necessary to make such statement not misleading; 4" 
(6) fails to diSClose in his report a material mis-statement 
known to him and with which he is concerned in a professional 
capacity; 
(1) iJ grossiynegligent in the conduct of his professional dUtiesl 

(8) full to obtain sufftcient information to warrant the expree-
i lion of an opinion or makes exceptions which are sufficiently mate-
rial to negate the expression of an opinion; 
(9) fails to invite attention to any material departure from the 
5 generally accepted procedure relating to the secretarial practice; 
_ (10) fails to keep moneys of his client in a separate banking 
a~Eoun{or"tO' use sUch morieys for' purposes for which they are in-
tended:-
l' PART II 
10 ProfesriOnal miscOnduct in relation to members of the Insiitute 
genera.lly requiring action by (1 High Cou7'i-
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he--
(1) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the regula-
15 tion~' rri'li.de'-thereunder; 
(2) is guilty of such other act or omission as may be specified 
by the Council in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
One of the basic concepts recognised by the Companies Act, 1956, is 
that the affairs of companies encompass not only the interests of the 
shareholders and those entrusted with the man3.gement, but also. the 
interests of workers, consumers and the community at large. Besides 
the Companies Act, there are other allied legislations like the Capital 
Issues (Control) Ad, 11)47, the Industdec; (Development and. Regu-
lation) Act, 19M, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade. ·Practices Act, 
1969, the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 and other Aots which 
aJso have a direct and substantial bearing on the woi"king of th~ corpo-
rate sector in India. In order to ensure that companie~ do complywtth 
various provisions of law, the necessity for companies ~o appoint quali-
fied Secretaries with certain professional qualifications and training was 
being increasingly fe~t. From 1961 onwards, therefore, the Department 
of Company Affairs started holding of examinations for company secre-
taryship and awarding the Diplom:l ClUed the Government Diploma in 
Company Secretaryship. This position continuen till 1968 when the 
Government conceived the idea of giving statutory recognition to the 
Institute of Company Secretaries. However, to begin with, it was 
decided in 1968 to promote a separate institution under section 25 of 
the Companies Act, i.e. a non-profit sharing company and later to 
convert it into a statutory body. Accordingly, the Government of India 
promoted the Institute of Company Secretaries of India and registered 
it as a company on the 4th October, 1968 under a licence granted under 
section 25 of the Companies Act. 
The Administrative Reforms Commission has also examined· the 
desirability of encouraging the growth of the profession of Company 
Secretaries as a necessary adjunct for a more efficient working of the 
corporate sector. The said Commissio'1 has also recommended that the 
companies with a certain paid-up capital should compulsorily appoint 
qualified Secretaries and that suitable qualifications for such Secretaries 
should be grescribed by the Government. They furiher observed. that 
the qualification should include passing of an examination conducted by 
the Government on all-India basis and training in the corporate sector 
(Recommendation No. 10, Chapter VI, Paragraph 12). For the past ten 
years, the profession of Company Secretaries has grown and more and 
more of our younger citizens are registering for examinations conducted 
by the Institute. Apart from the employment prospects and potential 
which the pnfession holds out, the need for having increasing number 
of professionally qualified Company S'~cretaries has been further recog-
nised by the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1974, which requires every 
company having; a paid-up share capital of Rs. 25 h.kho; and aoove to 
appoint a qualified person as a whole-time ~tarv. Even in respect 
of companies with a paid-up share capital of less thzm Rs. 25 lakhs thai 
need and desirability of having Ihn c:ervices of qualified Secretaries in 
practice is being increasingly felt by the companies. The scope of the 
24 

2S 
functions and duties of a Secretary has increased considerably under 
modern conditions and the importance of the status of the Secretary as 
a Company Administrator has been both judicially and statutorily re-
. cognised. • ., ,; 
It is therefore proposed to undertake legislation to regulate the 
. profession of the Company Secretaries on the same lines as the profession 
of Char,tered Acc,ountants and the profession of Cost and Works Account-
ants whlchare regulated respectively by the Chartered Accountants 
Act. 1949 and the Cost and Works Accountants Ad, 1959, since all these 
. p~of·essions have a direct bearing on the efficient functioning of corporate 
sector. The Institute of Company Secretaries of India to be 'constituted 
under the 'proposed legislation will have the resQonsibility for conducting 
examinations for the profession of Company Secretaries, for regulating the 
profession including profeSSional misconduct and for creating necessary 
facilities for the growth and training of the members of the profession. 
The Bill is intended to give effect to the above proposals. The previ-
sions of the Bil! a:-e further explained in the notes on clauses. 
NEW DELHI; SHANTI BHUSHAN. 
The 7th F.ebruary , 1979 

Notes on. clauses 
Clause 2.-Sub-clause (I) of this clause seeks to define the various 
expreSsions used in this legislation which have not been deftnecl.'lDthe 
. Companies Act; 1956: Sub-clause (2) of this clause speciflei' u to . when 
a'member of the' Institute shall be deemed to be in practice. " '.' 
C141401e 3.-This c~use provides that the kuijtute of Co~ny,~.r'­
taries of India shall be a body corporate having.,P8fpe tUal,. ~uc~s.~~on 
and a common s·..:al. . '. ' , 
C141Ue 4.-Thia clause enumerates the categories of persons who ~l 
be entitled to have their names entered in the Register of Members Glthe 
Institute. • 
This clause also provides for the conferment of Honorary i',uo.w 
Membership on any person who has made a significant contribution to 
the profession of Company Secretaries. 
Clause 5.-Under this clause, the membership ,of the Institute wiU be 
restricted to Associates and Fellows and such Associales'''' and l'enoWs 
shall be entitled to use the letters A.C.S. 'or, as the case may be, 
F.C.S., after their names. 
CLauae 6.-This clause leeks to prohibit any member of the Institute 
kom practiSing a profession of Company Secretaries unless he has 
obtained from the Council a certificate of practice. 
Clause 7.-This clause seeks to declare that the members of the Insti-
tute shall be known as Company Secretaries. 
Clause B.-This clause enumerates the circumstances under which 
a person shall not be entitled to have his name entered in, or borne on, 
the Register of Members. 
t.:14uae 9.-Thi. clause provides for constitution of the Council of the 
Institute and for the num her of members who will constitute the Counc1l. 
Clause IO.-This clause deals with the mode of election of the Coun-
cil. Where any dispute arises regarding any such election, the matter 
will be:-eferred by the Council to a Tribunal which shall consist'of one 
or more members of the Board of Company Law Administration 
constituted under section 10E of the Companies Act, 1956, whom the 
Central Government may nominate in this behalf and the decision of 
such Tribunal shall be final. 
This clause also provides that the Council which functioned under the 
Institute of Company S£'cretaries of India (which Institute is proposed to 
be dissolved on the commencement of the legislation) may continue to 
function as the Council of the Institute for a period of two years or till the 
new Council is constituted under sub-clause (2) of clause 9, whichever 
is earlier. 
. • __ " __ l __ ' ... 

17 
Clause H.-This clause empowers the Central Government to nominate 
any duly qualified person to fill a vacancy in the Council 'caused' by the 
failure of the members of the Institute to elect any IrienibEir from any 
regional constituency. 
CLause 12.-This clause prov:des for the election by the Council ot 
the President and the'Vice~President, and lor their term of office. ' 
CLau.se 13.-This clause provides for the resignation of membership 
I;)t the 'Council and for the mode of filling casual vacancies in the Council. 
Clause 14.-Under this clause, the duration of the Council shall be 
three years from the date of its first meeting. Provision has also been 
made in this clause for allowing the Coun~il to continue even after the 
expiry of its duration until a new Council is duly constitutld 
Cla1loBe 15.-This clause seeks to enumerate the functions of the Coun-
cil. 
Clause 16.-This clause empowers the Council to appoint a Secretary 
and other members of the staff of the Institute, to prescribe by regulatior::; 
the tt'rms Bnd conditions of setviC(> and the scales of pay of the Secretary 
and other employees of the Institute, including persons who have becOme 
employees of, the Institute under clause 33, and fix the al10wances of the 
PreSident, Vice_I>resident and qther mt'mbers of, the' Cowlcil and its 
Committees. ' 
Clause 17.-Under this clause, the Council shall cO~,titute, from 
~png its, members, an ~xecutive Committee, a Di~c.iplinary Com~ittee 
and an ,Examination Committee. The Council is also empowered to 
coostitu,te a Training and Educational Facilities Comwittee, a Profes-
sional Research and Publications Committee, and such other Committees 
as it deems necessary. 
CLause 18.-Tpis clause deals with the financiail powers of the Council 
and also provides for accounts to be maintained by the Council and its 
audit. 
Clause 19.-This clause empowers the Council to maintain a Register 
of Members to be maintained by the Council and specifies the particulars 
,which. the regist~r ,should contain. . 
Cta'U8e 20.- This clause empowers the Council to remove, the names 
of the members under certain circumstances. . . " ,'. . 
Clause 21.-This clause specifies the procedure to be followed in 
ir.quiries relating to misconduct of the members of the Institute, and 
the authority which will deal with the cases relating to such misconduct. 
Cl4use 22.-This clause seeks to define the expression "professional 
misconduct" . 
C14use 23.-Under this clause, the Council may constitute Regional 
Councils in the manner prescribt'd by regulations and specify the func-
tions that are to be exercised by such Regional Councils: 
Clause 24.-This clause specifies the penalty for falsely claiming to 
be a member of the Institute. 
Cl~use 25.-This clause prOVides for penalty where a person uses the 
name of the Council or awards any degree of Company Secretaryship in 
COIltravention of the provisions of this legislation. ' 

Clause·26.-This dause seeks to prohibit companies frolll practising 
the profession of Company Secretaries. 
Clause 27.-This clause seeks to prohibit unqualified persons from 
signing documents as, or on behalf of, Company Secretaries. 
Ctause 28.-This clause provides for the liabilities of pereons in res-
pect of the .offences committed. by companies. 
Clause :&g.-Under this clause, no person shall be prosecuted except 
on a complaint made by, or under the order of, the Council or the Cen-
tral Government. 
Clause 30-This clause provides for filing of appeals under certain 
circumstances by a member of the Institute. 
Clause :H.--This clause seeks to provide that the Institute oi Company 
Secretaries of India, a company regisU!red under the Companies Act, 
will be dissolved on the commencement of this legislation. 
Clause 32.-This clause provides for the transfer of assets and Labili-
ties of the dissolved company to the Institute to be constituted under this 
legisl.ation. 
Clause 33.-This clause seeks to provide for the transfer of, the ser-
vices of the employees of the dissolved company to the Institute to be 
constituted under this legislation. 
Clause 34.-"Under this clause whEre an order is made reprimanding 
a member, a record of punishment shall be entered against his name in 
the Register, and where the name of any such member is rE"moved from 
the Register. the certificate of practice granted to him will be cancelled. 
CLause 35.-This clause empowers the Central Government to issue 
directions to the Council which in the opinion of. the Central Government 
may be conducive to the fulfilment of the objects of this legislation. 
This clause also empowers the Central Government to dissolve the 
CounCil if the Council commits any default in giving effect to the direc-
tions. • 
Clause 36.-This clause seeks to prohibit any action against the 
Central Government or the Council in respect of anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done by or under this legislation. 
Clause 37.-This clause seeks to provide that where a Firm of Com-
pany Secretaries has more than one office in India, each one 01l such 
office shaJl be in the separate charge of the member of the Institute, 
unless exempted by the Council. 
Clawe 3B.-This clause provides for recognition of foreign qualifica-
tions pn the basis of reciprocity. 
Clause 39.-This clause empowers the Council to make reguiations 
for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of the legislation. Sub-
clause (2) of th:s clause enumerates the matters in respect of which 
such regulation may be made. This clause also provides that the Council 
has to frame the regulation subject to the condition of previous publica-
tion and with the approval of the Central Government, and for the lay-
ing of' regulations before each House of Parliament. . 
, 'the First and the Second Schedules.-These Schedules seek to enume-
rate the categories of professional misconduct. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 39 empowers the Council to make regulations 
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the lcgislaHon. The mat-
ters in respect of which such regulations may be made are specified in 
sub-clause (2\) of that clause. These matters are of procedural character. 
Moreover the regulations made under this clause will have to be laid 
before each House of Parliament and they will be subject to the serutiny 
of Parliament. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character . 
• 
• 

LOK SABHA .. ", 
I," 
• 
A 
BILL 
to make provision for the regulation and development of the profession 
of Company Secretaries. 
T~ : 
(Shri Shanti Bh1L8han, Minister of Law, Justice and 
Company Affairs.) 