., As INTRODVDED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 19 of 1982 
THE IRON ORE MINES AND MANGANESE ORE MINES LABOUR 
WELFARE FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
j,. 
A 
BILL 
ta amend the Iron Ore Mines and Mangvese Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund Act, 1976 . 
. ' ~, .'BE'it '~nact~d by Parliam\!!nt in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
. Of tndia as 'follows:-
i, . t. .. (l) This Act rn.y be called the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese 
pi, . MiDes Labour Welfare Funcf (Amend:nent) Act, 1982. :~:rt1lnd 
5 (2) It shall corne into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. . . 
, . 
Z. In the Iron Ore Mines . and Mangalle'3e Ore Mines Labour Welfare 
81 of 1978.
l
1 .,,~u~d Act, 197e (herein~er ,referred to as the principal Act), in the 
long title, for the word$ ,"atid m~ganese ore mines", the words 
10 CI. manganese ore mines and' chrome ore rnint:S" shall be subs.tituted. 
commence· 
ment. 
Amend. 
ment of 
Inn, 
title 

Amend_ 
ment ot 
section 1. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 2. 
Am~nd­
rr,ent of 
section 3. 
/\mend-
mt.nt of 
section 4. 
3. In section 1 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1), for the words "and Manganese Ore 
Mines Labour Welfare", the words II, Manganese Ore Mines and 
Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), in the proviso,-
(i) after the words "only to manganese ore mines", the 
words ", or only to chrome ore mines" shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "and manganese ore mines", the words 
", manganese ore mines and chrome ore mines" shall be 10 
substituted. 
A. In section Z of the principal Act.-
(a) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- . 
'(aa) "chrome ore" includes ferro-chrome;'; 
15 
(b) in clause (d), for the words "and Manganese Ore Minei 
Labour Welfare", the words ". Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome 
Ore Mines Labour Welfare~' shall be substituted; 
(e) in clause (g).-
(i) in sub-clause (i), after the words "or manganese", the 20 
words "or chrome" shall be inserted; 
(Iii) in sub-clause' (ii) , after the words "manganese ore", 
the words "or chrome ore" shall be inserted; 
(d) in clause (h) ,-
(i) tn the opening portion, after the words "or manganetle 
ore mine", the words "or chrome ore mine" shall be inserted;. 25 
(ii) in sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (2), after the words 
"or manganese ore", wherever they occur. the words "or 
chrome ore" shall be inserted. 
5. In I!IeCtion .3 of the prJndpal Ad; for the words "and Man ..... 30 
Ore Mines Labour Welfare", in both the plaees where they oeeur, the 
word If, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour WeI-
'are" shall be substituted . 
.-
6. In section 4- of the principal Aet,-
(a) in the opening portion, for the ~ "and DI.IlQPII8Ie ore 
mines", the words ", manganese ·;ore mines and chrome ore mines" 35 
shall be substituted; 
(1b) in dRUSe (a), In the opening portion, after the wonts "Ol' 
manganese ore mines", the words "or 'chrome ore mines" shan he 
lnse~ 
(e) in clause (b),-
(i) after the words "or of a manganese ore mine", the worM 
"or of a chrome ore mme" shal1 be IDsertelt: 
(if) after the words "or manganese ore mines", the wor41s 
II-or eb1'OJlle ore mines" ,h,II' " inserted; . 
40 

li.JK SA3H.A 
W RRI GENOlAl 
to 
THE IRJN uRE ~ili-.JES Ai'ID ~,ANGANESE urlE MINES LAB.JUR vlELFAAE 
F'J:JD tMtENCiliiEtlT) BILL, 1982 
(To be/AS introduced in J.o k S abh.£l) 
Page 2, line 31,-
fOr "v.<>rd8 read ·~rdsll 
--
NE\i DELHI; 
~ arch ~ J _1-,i2 
P halguna 11, .190-3\SaKaJ 

5 
3 
(d) in e1ause (c),-
(i) after the words "or mancan.e&e ore miDes", the WOl'cis 
"or chrome ore min,es" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in the proviso, after the words, "or of a maDlanfl8e ore 
mine", the words "or of a chrome ore mine" shall be inserted; 
7. In section 5 of the principal Act,- Amend. 
- ment of 
(a.) in aub-sectiob (1),- .- section 5. 
(1) in clause «(1;), after the words "or mangaNSe orfl'l the 
words ('or chrome ~" shall be in.8erted; 
(itt) in clause ('b), for the words "both iron ore and 
10 JDaDganese ore", tire words "any two of or aD such ores" and for 
the words "iron ore only or mancanese ore only, or in respect of 
both", the words "anyone of such ores only, or in respect of 
any two of such ores O~y, or in respect . of all such ores" shall 
be substituted; 
15 (b) in 8ub-section (2), in the proviso, for the words ('and 
maJICIln888 ore mines", in both the places where they occur, the 
words ", manganese ore . mines and chrome ore mines" shaD be 
substituted. 
8. In aec.tion 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the proviSo, 
20 for the words "and asanganes·e ore mines", in both the places where &hey 
occur, the woMs ", manganese ore mines and 'chrome ore mines" shan 
be subttttutecl. 
9. In section 8 of the pdncipal Ad, in sub-section (1) and sub-section 
(2), for the words "and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare", the words 
25 'I, M ........ Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare" shaH be 
nbstituted. 
10. In section 9 of the principal Act, after the words "manganese 
ore mines", the words "or chrome ore mines" shall be inserted. 
H. In section 11 of the principal Act, after the words "of a manganese 
~tt ore mine", the words "or of a chrome ore mine" shall be inserted. 
II. In section 12 of the principal Act, in SUb-section (2) ,_ 
(a) in clause (e), after the words "manganese ore mines", the 
words "or chrome ore nUnes" shall be inserted' , 
~ 
(b) in clause (h), after the words "of manganese ore mineS", 
35 the words "or of chrome ore mines" shall be inserted. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 6. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 8. 
Amend. 
ment of 
!'(·ctlOn 9. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 11. 
An-end. 
ment of 
section 12. 

Chrome or~ is mined largely in Orissa· in belts contiguous to iroil 
ore mines. It also occurs in small proportions in, KamatU~, Maha-
rashtra and Andhra Pradesh. It is mostly used in the produ<:tion of 
iron and different types of steels. With the increased production of 
stainless steel in the country an:! abroad; the demand for chrome ore is 
growing. About 6,000 workers nre employed in chrome Qre ll}ines and 
their living .conditions need amelioration. Welfare facilities, which are 
at present being enjoyed by workers in iron ore and Jminganese ore 
mines, are proposed to be made available to workers in cb~ome ore 
mines also. 
2. As the number of workers engaged in chrome ore milles is small, it 
may not be practicable to set up a separate welfare fund and to make 
separate arrangements for the welfare of these workers. It is, there-
-"fore, proposed to utilise· the machinery and arrangements· .(mder the 
Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 
1976, for the purpose of providing for- the welfare of the workers in 
chrome ore mines al$o. For this purpoae, the Fun(,i under this AQl;, which 
is at preflent for the welfare of the workers in iron ore qrloes and 
manganese ore mines, is proposed to be converted into a joint JURd for 
the welfare of the workers in iron ore mines, maniane5e ore mines and 
chrome ore mines. The cess on chrome ore UDder the amendments 
protJ08ed to be made to the Iron Ore Min~ and Manganese Ore Mines 
Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1976 by the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese 
Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1982, after deduct-
ing therefrom the cost of collection and aftu due appropriatittn,WOtJtH 
be credited to the said Fund. The said Fund will be utilised for the 
welfare of persons employed in chrome ore mines in the same manner 
:as in ~ case of workers in iron ore mines and manganese ore mines. 
a. TheBiU seeu to achieve t8e above objects~ 
NEW D!IJa; 
<. 
The 25th February, 1982. BHAGWAT JHA AZAD. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 
117 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. M. 15011/4/78-M. IV, dated the 2nd March, ltS2· 
from Shri Bhagwat Jh'a Azad, Minister of State of the Ministry of 
Labour to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed ~f the subject matter Of the 
above Bill to amend the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines 
Labour W.elfare Fund Act, 1976, has recommended under article 117 (3) 
of the Constitution, the consideration by Lok Sabha, of the said Bill. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANi:JUM 
The.,Iron Ore Mine~ aDd Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred 1:Io .• as the 'principal Act) provides for the 
financing of activities to promote the welfare of workers employed in 
the iron ore mines and manganese ore mines and the present Bill seeks 
to extend the scope of this Act to cover activities to promote the welfare 
of . perso1'l5 employed in chrome ore mines also. The Fundundel' the 
Act hi proposed to be converted into ,a joint fund 'for the welfare of the 
workers in all these mines (vide clause 5 of the Bill). .Section 4 of th, 
principal Act relatilig to the purposes for which the Fund may be 'applied 
is being amended (vide clause 6) to cover also the welfar.e of persons 
employed in chrome ore mines. Sections 5, 6 and 8 Telating respec-
tively to Advisory Committees, Central Advisory Committee and" ap,?oint-
ment of Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Administrators,Inspectors 
and other officers and staff for the administration of tl:te Act· are being 
amended!O that they apply for purposes of welfare of persons employed 
ih chrome ore mines in the manner as they now apply for pUrposes 
of wc:>lfare of persons· employed in iron ore mines and manganese ore 
mines (vide clauses '1, '8 and 9 O'f. the Bill). . 
2. The scheme of the afQreme -. tioned amendments is to utilise as far 
as ,possible the existing machinery under the. principal A'Ct for the pur .. 
. poses of welfare of persons employed in the:chrome ore mines' also. 
However, the composition of the Advisory CQmmittees and the Central 
Advisory Committee will have to be altered so as to include therein 
representatives of the owners of, and persons employed in, the chrome 
ore mines and some augmentation of the officers and staff for the admin-
istration of the Act may also be necessary to· 'Cope with the additional 
work relating to activities for welfare of persons employed in chrome 
ore mines. However, it may be stated that the additional expenditure 
on the representatives of the owners 'and persons employed in chrome 
ore mines in the Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory. Com-
mittee and on the additional omcers and staff will not exceed. 10 per cent. 
of the total yield of the proposed cess on the chrome ore which is 
estimated to be of the order ot Rs. 9 lakhs per annum. Such additional 
expenditure would be of a recurring nature and will be met from out 
of the Fund under the principal Act. It would thus be seen that there 
would be no outgo from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature. 
5 

MEMORANDUM R!aARnlNG D~LEGA1'ED L£GISLAfION 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 of the Lron Ore Mines 
and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1976 to empower. 
the Central Government to direct, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
that all or any of the provisions o'f the Act shall not apply or shall apply 
to any State or part thereof, subject to such exceptions or rnodificatiOOl 
as may be specified in the nc-tiftcation, if that Government is satisfied 
that there is in force in such State or part thereOf a law making adequate 
provisions for financing the activities to promote the welfare of persons 
employed in chrome ore mines. As the clause specifies clear guidelines 
for ~ssuing a notification, the delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. . . 
2. Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to amend clauses (c) and (h) of sub-
section (2) of s9Ction 12 of the Act, to empower the Central Government 
to make rules with respect to the standard of welfare measures to be 
provided by the owners of chrome ore min~ for the purpose of clause 
(c) of section 4 of the Act, and with respect to the furnishing of statisti-
cal and other information by the occupiers of metallurgical factories 
and the owners, agents or managers of chrome ore mines to the Central 
Government under section 11 of the Act. The matters with respect to 
which rules may be made under the above-mentioned provisions are 
matters of procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a nonnal character. 
ti 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE IRoN On MINES AND MANGANESE OR! MINIS LAsol1a 
WELFARE FuND ACT, 1976 
(61 OF 1976) 
• • • • • 
An Act to provide for the financing of activities to promote the 
welfare of persons employed in the iron ore mines and mangan~ ore 
mine •. 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Iron Ore Mines and Mang~nese 
Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, U176. 
• • • • • 
(3) It shall come into fprce on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates 
may be appointed for different States: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Ofticial Gazette, apply in the first instance the provisions of tbls Act, 'only 
to iron are mines, or only to manganese are mines, in a State with effect 
from such date as may be specified in the notification, and if that Gov· 
ernment is satisfied thai it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may 
extend this Act to all iron ofe mines and manganese ore mines in that 
State with effect from such date as may be specified tn the notification 
, published in the Official Gazette. 
Z. In this Act, unless the cQntext otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(d) "Fund" means the tron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines 
Labour Welfare Fund formed under section 8; 
• • • • • 
(g) "metallurgical factory" means-
(i) a factory in which iron or steel or manganese is being 
proc~ssed Of manufactured; 
(if) any other 'factory, being a factory in which iron are or 
manganese ore is used for any purpose which the Central Q6v. 
emment may, by Mtification in the Official· Gazette, declare to 
be a metallurgical factory for the purposes of this Act; 
(h) a peNon is s/iir.l to be employed in an iron ore mine or 
manganese o~e mine,-
(1) if he is employed within the premise'! or in the vicinity 
of such mine by the owner, agent or manager of such mine or by 
a contractor or any other agency exclusively in anyone or mort'! 
of the following, namely:-
(i), any iron are or manganese are mining operation; 
. ' .. ~. ~ 
r ,"',.-, 
Short 
title, ex 
tent and 
commence· 
'm.nt. 
DeftnJ-
tiona . 

. ~ \ 
Iron Ore 
Mines and 
Manlanese 
Ore Mines 
Labour 
WeUare 
Fund. 
Appli-
cation 
of 
Fund. 
• 
(ii) the operation, Fervicing, maintenance or repair OJ. 
any machinery or any' part thereof used in or about such 
mine; , 
(iii) the loading, unloading or despatch of iron ore qr 
manganese ore or. any other material connected with the 
mining of iron ore or manganese ore; 
(iv) any work in 'any office, canteen or creche situated 
within the precincts cf such mine; 
(v) any welfare, health, sanitary or~cy ser .. 
vices or any watch and ward duties at any place situated 
within such premises .or vicinity, not being a place occupied 
by any re.identtal building; Or 
(2) if, in any such area as may be notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf, he 1's employed 
by the owner, agent or manager of such mine or by a contractor 
or ~y other agency efclusively. in the loading, uiUqading or 
de.patch of iron ore or manganese ore or any other material con-
nected with the mining of iron ore O!" manganese ore; 
,. • • • • 
3. ~shal1 be· formed a Fund, to be called the Iron Ore Mines'and 
ikagailese Ore Mines Labour' Welfllre Fund, and there shaU be credited 
ttteHto- . 
(a)· an amount which the Central Government may, after due 
. ~ appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, proVide 
from and out of the proceeds of duty of customs and dUty ,of excise 
credited under section 5 of the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore 
Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1976, after deductin~ therefrom, 
the cost of collection as determined by t)1e Central Government 
~deJ" this Act; 
(b) 'any income' ftom' investment. of the amount credited . under 
the Act'referred to in clause (a:) and any other moneys received b" 
. the Central Government for the purposr:s of this Act. 
4. The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the 
expenditure incurred in connection with the measures which, in the 
opinion of that Government, are nece<;sary or elC'pedient to promote the 
we11al"e of: persons employed in the iron ore mines and man~anese ore 
Mbtes; and to pail'ticular- ' 
. (a) to defray the cost of measures for the'benefti of' persons 
employed in the iron, ore mine!'; 'or manganese ore mInes directed 
. towarD-
• .. • • • 
.(b) to grant loan or ~ubsidy to a State Government. 'II local 
authority or the owner of an iron ore mine OIl" of a manganese ore 
miRe, ~ aid of anv sche1lle ancroved b~ thf' Cpntral ~emm~t. far 
anv purpose con'ne<!ted with the welfare of p~rsonc; employed In Iron 
ore mines or man~anese ore mines: 
, '(e) to pay annually grants-in-atrl to such of the ownerS of iron 
ore mines or man~anese ()IT'E' mi'~ who providp, to the !!8tisfaction of 
the Central Government welfare measures of the prescribed standard . '. , 

9 
for the benefit of persons employed in their mines, so, however, that 
the amount payable as grants-in-aid to such ownerS shall not exceed-
(i) the amount spent by them in the provision of welfare 
measures as detf¥'mined by the Central Government or any 
persOn specified by it in this behalf, or 
(ti) such amount as may be" prescribed, 
whichever is less: 
P:tonded that no grant.-in,..aid shall be payable in respect of 
any welfare measures provided by! the owner of an iron are mine 
or of a manganese are mine where the amount spent thereon deter-
mined as aforesaid is less than the amount prescribed in this behalf; 
... ... . ... ... • 
. B. (1) The Central Government may,-
(a) constitute for each State which produces 'iron are or manga-
nese ore an Advisory Committee, or 
(b) where both iron ore and manganese ore are produced in a 
State, constitute, for such State, an Advisory Committee i'l1 respect 
of iron ore only or manganese ore only, or in respect of both, 
to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the 
administration C1f. this Act as may be referred to it by that Government, 
including matters relating to the application of the Fund. 
(2) Each Advisory Comm'ttee shall consist of such number of persons 
as may be appointed to it by.the Central Government of whom one shall 
be a woman and the members shall be chosen in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that each Advisory C~mittee shalf include an equal num-
ber of members representing Government, the owne~s of iron are mines 
and manganese ore mines and the person, employed in lhe iro:1 ore 
mines and manganese are mines. 
... ... • ... • 
6. (1) ... ... • • • 
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shan consist of such number of 
persons as may be appointed by the Central Government of whom one 
shall be a woman and the members shall be chosen in suCh manner as 
may be presCribed: 
Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include an 
equal number of members r~presenting the Government, the owners of 
iron are mines and manganese ore mines a'1d t1-je rcrsr)ns employed in 
the iron Qre mines and manganese are mines . 
... ... • ... • 
6. (1) The Centra] Government mav appoint as many Welfare Com-
missioners. Wrlfare Administrators, Inspectors and such other office,:,s 
and stnff as it thinks necessary for the purposes of th1s Act and the Iron 
Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines LabOur Welfare Cess Act, 1976. 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct 
a Welfare Commissioner to appoint such staff as is considered necessary 
Advisory 
Commit. 
tees. 
Central 
Advisory 
Com-
mittee. 
Appoint_ 
ment of 
Welfare 
Commis-
sioners, 
etc., 
and their 
powers. 

Power of 
. Central 
Govern_ 
ment to 
exempt. 
Power 
to 
call for 
informa. 
tion. 
, Power to 
make 
rules, 
10 
for the purposes of this Act and the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore 
Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1976. 
• • • • • 
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Central Gov-
ernment is satisfied that there is in force in any State or PlP't thereof a 
law making adequate provision for the financing w activities to promote 
the welfare of persons employed in the iron ore mines or manganese ore 
mines, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or 
any of the provisions of this Ad shall not apply or shall apply to Sl!.ch 
State or part thereof subject to such exceptions and modifications as 
may be specified in the notification. 
• • • • • 
11. The Central Government may require an ocCllpier of a metaUurgi-
cal factory or the owner, agent or manager of an iron ore mine or of. a 
manganese ore mine to furnish, for the purposeS' of this Act, such statisti-
cal' and ather information in such form and within guch period as may 
be prescribed. 
12. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for-
• " • • • 
-(c) the standard of welfare measures to be provided by owners 
of iron ore mines or manganese ore mines for the purposes of clauSe 
(c) of section 4; 
• • • • 
(h) the furnishing to the Central Government by the occupiers 
of metallurgical factories and the owners, agents or managers of iron 
ore mines or of manganese ore mines, of such statistical and other 
information as may be required to be furnished,. from time to time, 
by that Government under section 11; 
• • • • • 

LOK .SABHA 
• 
A 
BILL 
\ 
to amend the Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund Act, 1976. 
• 
(Shri Bhagwat Jha Azad, 
Minister of State 
oj the Ministry of Labour). 
) , 
I 