mn. DisPUTED ELECTI6w.~.:.wRiME. MiNfsUilt r 
AND SP.EAJ<E~) ·.~l~J ~977 
" Ii' 
CLAUSE 
. J I. 
CHAPtER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
_,'I 
CHAPl'ER n 
AUTHOIUTla; FOR l>IsPuTI:D Eucnon 
3. Petitions in respect of disputed elections. 
4. Authority to try a petition. 
CHAPTERm 
PRESENTAnoN OF PETmONS IN RESPECT 01' DISPUTED ELECTIONS 
5. PreSentation of petition. 
6. Parties to the petition. 
7. Contents of petition. 
8. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner. 
9. Procedure on receiving petitions. 
CHAPTER IV 
'l'RIAL 01' PETITIONS 
w. Trial of petitions. 
11. Procedure before the Authority. 
12. Secrecy of voting not be infringed. 
13. Answering of criminating questions and certificate of indemnity. 
14. Expenses of witnesses. 
15. Recrimination when seat claimed. 
16. Decision of the AuthOrity. 
17. Other orders to be made by the Authority. 
18. Ground for declaring election to be void. 
19. Grounds for which a candidate other than the returned candidate 
may be declared to have been elected. 
20. Communication of orders of the Authority. 
21. Costs. 
22. Orders Of Authority to be final. 
(i) 

ti:.AbsllS 
til) 
CHAPTER t 
MJSCEloLAlfIlOtT8 
23. mett i1t· araeri· of Authority. 
24. Withdrawal artdabatementof Pt!titl(bi~. 
25. Payment of costs out of security deposits and rl!htrn of such delN)l'lits 
26. Execution of w4era as· t9 COlts. 
27. Power to make rules. 
28. Repeal and lIaving. 

'J: "1"'"1 
1'1 • 
' .. 
BlU No.1' of ,1.71 
THE DISPUTED ELECTIONS (PRIME MINISTER 
A~D SPEAKER) BILL, 1m. 
A 
BILL 
to provide jor Authorities to deal with disputed elections to Parlia-
fraefttif& the cae of Prime Mi1li.ter cmd sPeaker '01 the"OuIJ~ ot'th, 
"" "\0 • \ 
People' and fo;. matters cOnnected theTetoith. . . 
BE it enacted by ParU~ment in the Tw~nty-eighth ~ear of the 
Republic of tndla as fOllows:-
~" ! 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
,. 
S 1. (1) ThIs Act may be caUed. the Disputed Elections ()?rime Min. Shod 
ter and Speaker) Act. 1977. " ,~. . "tie and 
10 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day' of menee. 
F b lfteQ&. e ruary . .l9'77. 
Z. In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires,- Deftni~ 
(a) "Authority" means 'an Authority constituted under section tiqllt, 
4 for the trial of a petition; 
(b) "candidate" means a person who hal been or claims to have 
been duly nominated as a candidate at any election; 
(e) "costs" means all costs, charges and expenB~s of, Qr inctden. 
J$ tal to. a triftl ot. peUtton undQr this Act; 

Petitiou 
in rea-
pact of 
disputed 
electionL 
Authority 
toh7a 
petltioo, 
, ".: .'/, .... : 2 
(d) "election" means an election in tne case of Prime Minister 
or in the case of Speaker j 
, -""1,' 
(e) '''el~tion in the case ot Prime Minister" means an election 
to either House 01 Parliament of a person who holds the oftlce of 
Prime Minister at the time of such elec~on or is appointed as Prime S 
Minister atter such electionj 
(f) "election in the case of Speaker" means an election to the 
House of the People o~ a person who holds the office of Speaker at 
the time of such election or is chosen as the Speaker for that House 
after such election; 10 
(g) "petition" means a petition calling in question an electionj 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Actj 
(i) "returned candidate" means a candidate whose name has 
been published under section 67 of the Representation ot the People 
Act, 1951, as duly elected at an election in the case of Prime Minister IS 43 of 1951. 
or, as the case may be. an election in the case of Speakerj 
(;) each of the expressions defined in the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951. but not defined in this Act shall have the same 
meaning as in that Act. 
~ll:l"""""·'''-·lI'~"»I..GjMII'.If.··'·'' .... ~·''''· CHAPTER IT 
. ~ ':;!. ~ .. . ~. ,..' i t ~ / 
3. No elJ!Ctlon shalt be called in question except by a petition presented 
in accordance with the provisions of. this Act. . 
20 
,"; C, (1) ~':peti • .wl lie tried..,. •• Authodty,eonltl'" for 
tile pu.rpo&e by the Central Govemment I.y .etifieatioa·iu the· 'Ofletal 25 
G •• ette. 
(2)' The Authority shall consist of • siD,,~ ~ber. wh. is a ~udre 
of the Supreme Court, to be nom~ted in this behalf by the Chief JUs. 
tiee of IDdIa. . . . 
43 of 1951. 
(3) It for any reason a vacancy occut4 ~n the office of member afore- 30 
lIaid. the Chief Justice shall, as soon as practicable. nominate a person to 
J. fi1l the vacaney. 'andthereupon the trial of the petition ~hal1. be· continuo 
ed as if that member had been the Authority from the commencement 
01 th~ trW, of IUchpetitfCln: 
Presenta. 
tion of 
petition. 
Provided that the Authority may. if it thinks fit, reca11 arid re- 3S 
examine any of the witnesses already examined. 
CHAPTER m. 
PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS IN RESPECT' OF -DISPUTED • ELECTIONS 
5. (f) A petition 'calling in question any electIon may be presented on 
one or more of thegl'ounds speeifted 'in sUb-section(1.~ of section '100 40 
and section )O~ of the RepRt8entati~n of the People Act; U51, to the Elec- 43 of1951.. 
tion COmmission by any can~id.te.at such elti:tifl!ll ~r: ~y e1tc:4or :\1'Iithin 

rorty-five days from, but not earlier than, the (& ... ,e of' eleetion ,tJi the 
returned candid41te, or if, there are more returned candidates than one at 
the election and the dates of their election a~e different. the last of those 
dates: 
5 ':> Provided that' a petition calling in question the election of a person 
who does not hold the oftlce of Prime MiDilter or, as the ease may be, 
Speaker of the House of the People at the time of such election and who 
is appointed or chosen to that office after such ~lection but before the 
expiry of the time for presenting sucb election petition~ may be pJ!ese!l-
10 ted within forty-five days from the date on which such pe;rsonwas 
appointed as the Prime Minister or chosen as the Speaker of the House 
of the People. 
~l4nation.-In this' Bub-section, '~eleotor" mean, .. person who was' 
entitled to vote at the election to which the petition relates. whether he 
IS has voted at such election or not. 
(2) A petition shall :be deemed to have been presented Ul the Eleetion' 
Commission when it is delivered to the Election Commission or to such 
other omcer as may be appointed by it iii this behalf-
(a), by the person 'making ,the petition; or 
(b) by a person authorised in writing in this behalf by the per-
son making the petition. 
, , 
(3) Every petition shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof 
as there are respondents mentioned in the petition and one more copy for 
the use of the Election Commisslon;and eVery such copyshaU be attested 
25 by the petitioner under his own sigublre to ,be a tlU! copy of the petition. 
(4) At the time of presenting a petition, the'1JftItioner shan deposit' 
with the Ejection Commission in such manner as may be prescribed a 
sum of two thousand rupees 'as .Scurtty for costs. 
(5) The Authority trying a petition may at any time during the cou~e 
30 of the trial of the petition caW upon th~ petitioner to give' such furtlier, 
~urity for costs as it may cbiect., " ' 
35 
(6) No person shall be entitled to be joined as a respondent to a peti. 
tion under sub-section (3) of section 10 unless he 'hal given iucb security 
fnr costs as the Authority may direct. ' 
I. A petitioner shall join as' respondents to his petitfon--:-
(a) where the petitioner, in addition to claiming a dec1arat,ion 
that the election of all or any of the returned candidates is void. ·clabn. 
a further declaration that' he himself or 'any other candidate has been 
duly, elected, al1 the contesting candidate& other than the petitioner. 
and where no such further deelaration is, claimed, an the returned 
candidates; and 
(b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any corrupt 
practice are made in the petition. j 
Parties 
to the 
petition. 

ContQta 
of peti-
tion. 
Relief 
that may 
be claim-
ed by the 
petitioner. 
Procedure 
on receiv·. 
ing peti-
tions. 
Trial of 
petitions. 
-~ .. -- 4, 
7. (l) A petition-
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material fa(;.11 un 
which the petitioner relies; 
(b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that 
the petitionel alleges, including as full a statement as possible of the S' 
names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practice 
and the date and place of the commiBSion of each such praetice;and 
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner 
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for the verification of 0 of 1908. 
pleadings: 10 
Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, the 
petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form 
in support of the allegation of such corrupt practice and the particulars 
thereof. 
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the tletition shall also be signed by IS 
the pet'ltionerand verified in the same manner as the petition. 
R. A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a declaration that the 
election of all or any of the returned candidates is void, claim a fUTther 
declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected. 
\. 
9. (1) The Election Commission shall, as soon as may be aftel" the:ao 
receipt of a petition under section 5, forward it to the Authority for try-
ing the pet1tion. . . 
(2) Where more petitions than one have been received under sec· 
tion '5 in respect of the same election, the Election Commisiion shall 
forward them to the Authority and such Authority ma.y, in ifs discre- 25 
tion, try them separately or in one or more groups. " 
CHAPTER IV 
TRIAL OF PETITIONS 
10. (1) Suhjeet to any rtNs made in dais behalf. the Authority 'for 
the trial of any petition sllall hold the triat at New Delhi. 30 
(2) ~e Authority shall dismiss the petition-
(a) it the petition has not been presented within the period 
specified in sub-section (1) o~ section 5; 
(b) if the petition does not comply with the provisions of sub. 
section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 5 or section 6. 3S 
E~lana.tion..-An order dismisBin~ a petition under this sub.section 
sb,ll be Gleemed to be an order made under clause (a) of section 16. 
(3) Any candidate not already a respondent to a petition shall, upon 
BPolication made by him to the Authoritv within fO\lrteen days from 
the date of commencement of the trial and l'ubiect to any order R~ to 40 
seeuritv for cOCJts wl;lich may be made by the Authority, be entit1ed to 
be joined as a. respoftdent. 

1011908. 
t;XPWnA"On:.-.hr the purposes _ of . this sub-aection and of leet.i.e>n 1D~ 
tile Ulal 01 a peutlon Sllat! be aeemea to commence on the C1a~ tix~ 
lor toe respooueots to appear belore the AutnOl'lty and answer the 
CLaim 01' clalms made in toe petition. 
~ (4j "rtle Authority maf, upon such terms as to costs and otherwise 
as It m.....y deem 11t, allow toe particwars 01 any' corrupt practice aHe.ed 
In tne peUuon to be amended or amplltlecl in such manner as may in Its 
opiDlon be necessary lor ensuring Ii lair and effective trial of tHe pet1-
uon, but shall not allOW any amendment of 10e petition wnich wUJ. nave 
to the ettect· of introducing particu.lars Qf a corrupt practlce not previuuslr 
aHeged . in the petition. . , 
(5) The trial of a petition shall, so far as is practicable consistenUy 
with the interests of justice in Iespect of the trial, be cohtinued from day 
to day until its conclUsion, unless the Authority finds the adjournment 
IS of the trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be 
recorded. 
(6) Every petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and en-
deavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the 
date of commencement of the trial. 
• 
a 11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules made 
o thereunder, every petition shall be tried by the Authority, as nearly as 
may be, in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 to the trial of suits: 
Provided tha.t the AuthOrity shall have the discretion to refuse, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, to examine any witness or witnesses, 
.2.5 if it is of the opinion that the evidence of such witness or witnesses is 
not material for the decision of the petition or that the' party tendering 
such witness or witnesses is doing so on frivolous grounds or with a 
view to delay the. proceedings. . 
(2) For the purposes of any such trial, the AuthOrity shall have all 
30 the powers of a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
a of 1908. Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
35 
1 of 1872. 
(4) summomrtg and enforcing the attendance of any person 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production gf any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on a1Bdavitsj 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesser. or 
documents; 
(J) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(3) The provialoDi of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, shall, subject 
to the provisions of this Act, be deemed to apply in all respects totbe 
trial of a petition. .. 
Proce-
dure 
before 
the 
Authority. 

Secrecy 
of voting 
not to 
be in-
fringed. 
Answer-
in, of 
criminat-
ingques-
tiona and 
certifi-
cate of 
indem-
nity. 
ExpenJeS 
of wit-
ll'elle" 
Recrlm1. 
nation 
when 
seat 
claimed. 
,d 
l4)An.y proceed.illg before the Authority shall be deemed to be ii 
judicial proceeding witbin the meaning of section 193 of theiru:tian 
Penal Code. 
U. No witness or other personshaIl be required to state fOl" whom he 
. has vo~d at an election. ' S 
'13. (I) No witness Ithall be excused from answering any question as 
to any matter relevant to a matter in Issue in the trial of a petitioDupon 
the ground that the answer to such question may criminate or may tend 
to criminate him, or that it ~ay expose or may tend to expose bim to 
any penalty or forfeiture: 10 
Provided that-
(,,) a Witness, who answers truly all questions .wb.ich he is .1'. 
quired to answer s'hall be entitled to receive acerWicate of indemnity 
.rrom the Authority; and 
.. 
. (b) an answer given by a witness to a question put by or before IS 
the Authority shall not, except in the c~se of any criminal proceeding 
for perjury in respect of the evidence, be admissible in evidence 
against him in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
(<2) When a certificate of indemnity has been granted to any witness, 
it may be pleaded by him in any court and shall be a full and complete 20 
defence to or upon any charge under Chapter IXA of the Indian Penal 
Code or Part VII of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, arising 
out of the matter to which such certificate relates, but it shall not be 
deemed to relieve him from any disqualification in connection with an 
election imposed by this Act or any other law. 
14. The I;88IODaW. expe ... inc:W'red. It)' IU1l' I*'5OIl in aU.,diol.te 
live evidence before the Authority may be allowed. by it to I~h perIOD, 
and shall, unless the Authority otherwise diJ;eets,be deemed .to be part 
of the coats. 
U. (1) Wbe in a petition a declaration that any candidate other than 80 
the returned candidate haa been duly elected is claimed, the returned 
candidate or any other party may eiv~ evidence to prove that the elec-
tion &f such candidate would have been void if he had been the' returned 
candidate and a petition had been presented calling in question hiselec-
~ ~ 
Provided that the returned candidate or such other party, as aforesaid 
shall not be entitled to: give such evidence unless, he has, within fourteen 
days trom the date of commencement of the trial, given notice to the 
Authority of hi. inten$ien to Go 10 ancl hal also giVeD. thesacurlty ad; the 
further securitr x-eferred to in sub-aeetions (4), ~5) and (6) respectively 40 
of section 5. 
45 of 1860. 
45 ot 1860. 
43 of 1951. 

43 of 1951. 
" 
1 
(~) l!:very notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be accompanied 
by tae maternent and particul@l's rQquir8(i by ~tiOD 7 mtbe case of Ii 
petition and shall be lfilne:cta,ld. ~ec1 iIJ. ~e m~. . 
16; At the conclusion of the trial of a petition the Authority shall make 
5 an order- ... , .. . --,-, 
{a) dismissing the 'petition; or 
(b) declaring the election of all or any of the returned candi-
dates to- be void; or' 
10 
(c) declaring the election of all or any of the retumed candi .. 
dates to be void and 'the pet1tioher or asy' o~ercandidate to have 
been duly elected. 
17. (1) Aitbe time of, ruking anor<k!r WMi~J' secijop 1A .ijMAu.,rity 
shall also make an order-
(a) where, any charge is made in the petition of any corrupt 
IS practice having been committed at the electiOn, recordihg-
20 
,I 
(i) a finding whether any conupt pra~tiae'" OI'has not 
been prove4 to have been committed at the election, and the 
nature o~ that corrupt practice; and 
(ii) the names of all persons, if any, WBo luw. be-. proved 
,at the trial to have beeR .guilty of any COITupt practice and the 
nat)U'e of that practice; and 
. (b') 'ibdngthe total antOOftt of cosQi payable aDd specitfing the 
persons by and to whom costs shall be paid: 
Provi,dedthat 'a person who is not a party to the petiti(tl'll shall not be 
25 named in the order under sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) un1ess-
(a) he has been given nOtice to appear belere the Atithot"ity and 
to show cause why he should not be so named; and 
. (b) if he appears in pursuanCe of the notice, he' has been given 
an. 'opportunity of cross,.examining arty Witness who has :'atready 
been examined by the Authority and has gIven evidence agaiIiSt him, 
of calling evidence in his defence and of bejng heard. ' 
(2) In this section and in section 16, the expression "4'lent" has the 
same meaning as in sec:tion 123 of the Representation ()f' the People Act, ' 
1051. 
35 18. (1) Subject to the prOVisions of sQ.l>-section (2), if the Authority 
is of opinion-
(4) that on the date of his election a returned candidate was 
not qualified, or was disqualified" to be ch~ to fill the seat under 
Decision 
of Ute 
Authority; 
Other ' 
orders 
to be 
made 
by the 
Authority. 
43 ot 1951. the Constitution or the Representation of the People Act, 1951 or 
Oroundt 
fOr dec. 
larfl'lg 
'etectIon 
to the 
void. 
20 of 196$, 40 thUl At:t or the. Governmen.t of Union Territories Act, 1003; or 
(b) that any corrupt practice-has been committed by, 8 returned 
candicblte or hiS election agent or by any ~ percon With the 
consent of a retumed candidate or his electiOR ageftt;or 
(c) that any nomination has been improperly 'rejected; or 

Grounds 
fOr which 
a cand1-
date 
other 
than the 
returned 
c:andi .. 
date ',J 
ma.y be 
declared 
to haVe 
been 
t1«lted. 
Communi-
cation ot 
brdeI'8 of 
the 
Authority. 
.. . ., i 'I ~ 
tit) that the result of the ejection, :in so far 8S it esncem. tI1fi 
returned candidate, has been materially aifected-
(i) by the improper acceptance of any nomination, or 
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed .ui the inierest.s, o~ 
the returned candidate by an agent other than his election , 
agent, or 
(iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any 
vote or the reception of any vote which is void. or 
(i'V) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the 
Constitution or of this Act or of any rules or orders made under 10 
this Act, 
the Authority shall d~lare the election of the returned candidate to be 
void 
(2) iJf in the opinion of the Authority a returned candidate has been 
guilty by an agent, other than his election agent, of any corrupt practice I; 
but the Authority is satis.fted-
• , , 
(Ci) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the elec-
tion. by the candidate or his election agent, and every such corrupt 
practice was committed contrary to the orders, and Without the 
censent, of the candidate or his election agent; 20 
(b) that the candidate and his election agent took all reasonable 
means for preventing the commission of corrupt practices at the 
election; and 
(c) that in all other respects the election was tree from any 
corrupt practice on the part of the candidate or any Of his, aaents, 2; 
then the Authority may decide that the election of the returned candidate 
is not void. . I 
U. U any person who has lodged a petition has, in addition to calimg 
in question the election of the returned candidate, claiDied a declara-
tion that he himself or any other candidate has been duly eleCted and 30 
the Authority is of opinion-
(4) that in fact the petitioner or such other candidate received 
a majority of the valid votes; or 
(b) that but for the votes obtained by the returned candidate 
by corrupt practices the petitioner or such other eandidate would 3; 
have obtained a majority of the valid votes, 
the Authority shall after declaring the election of the returned candidate 
110 be void declare the petitioner or such other candidate, as the case 
may be, to have been duly elected. 
20. The Authority shall, as soon as may be aftet the conclusion of the # 
mal of a petition, intimate the 'Substance of the decision to the Elec-
tiGn Commission and the Speaker or, the Cha:irman, as the case may be, 
of the House of Parliament and, as soon as may be thereafter, shall 
send to the Election Commission an authenticated copy of the deciSion. 
21. Costs shall be in the diicreti~n of the Authority: 

43 of 1951. 
9 
Provided that where a petition is dismissed under clause (a) of 
.ectJon 16, the returned candidate shall be entitled to the costs incurred 
by him in contesting the petition and accordingly the Authority shalI 
make an order for costs in favour of the returned candidate. 
22. No order made by an Authority under this Act shall be called 
in question in any court. 
Orders 
of 
Authority 
to be 
final 
23. (1) An order made by an Authority under this Act shall take 
effect as soon as it is pronounced by the Authority. 
EA"ect of 
orders of 
Authority. 
(2) Where by an order under section 16 the election ofa returned 
10 candidate is declared to be void, acts and proceedings in which that 
returned candidate has, before the date thereof, participated as a mem-
ber of Parliament or, as the Prime Minister or as the Speaker of the 
House of the People shall not be 'invalidated by reason of that order, 
nor shall such candidate be subjected to any liability or penalty on the 
IS ground of such participation. 
CHAPTER V 
MlscELLANEous 
24 . .The provisions of sections 109 to 116 (both inclusive)' of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951, relating to withdrawal and 
30 abatement of election petitions shall, so far as may be, apply in rela-
tion to withdrawal and abatement of petitions under this Act subject 
to the modifications that the references therein to an election petition, 
High Court and petitioner shall be construed as references to a petition 
under this Act, the Authority for hearing such petition and the petitioner 
"": in respect of such petition respectively. 
25. (1) If in any m-der as to CctSts under the provisions of this Act 
there is a direction for payment of costs by any party to any person, such 
costs shall, if they have not been already paid, be paid in full, or so far as 
possible, out of the security deposit and the further security deposit, if 
30 any, made by such party under this Act on an application made in 
writing in that behalf within a period of one year. from the date of such 
order to the Election Commission by the person in whose favour the costs 
have been awarded . 
. (2) If there is any balance left of any ot the said security deposits 
3S after payment under sub-section (1) of the costs referred to in that ,sub-
section, such balance, or where no ~osts have been awarded or no appli-
cation as aforesaid has been madp witlitn the said period of one year, the 
whole of the said securitv deposit.o; may, on an application made i~ that 
behalf in writin~ to the Election Commission bv the person by whom t~e 
40 deposits have been made, or it such person dies after making such 
deposits, by the legal representative of such person, he returned to the 
said person or to his Jegal representative. as the case may be. 
With-
drawal 
and 
abate-
ment of 
petitions. 
PaYmeQt 
ot C08ts 
out of 
security 
deposits 
an8 
retum of 
IUch 
depolits. 
241. Anv order as to costs under the provisions of this Act may be 
produced before the principal civil court of original jurisdiction Within 
45 the local Ijmit~ of whose jurisdi<,Uon Anv persnn dirP.Cted by stich order 
to pay any sum of money has a place o~ residence Qr business, or where 
Execution 
Of orders 
.. to 
coa 
.J 
.,j 
~ 
,\ 
I 
J 

Power to 
.. make 
rules. 
~ 
and 
savtnl. 
.. .. 
.' 10 .. 
lUeh plaee is within a pl'88idelicy"'towni befonr the cOllJ'i of. IdaD: C8WIe8 
hwmg juriadtcUon there, aDd ·suCh court shall execate the oMei' or tause 
the same to. ~ executed 11'1 the same manner and by the l81De proaeiihve 
. aa· if it wwe ~ de£ree. fur the payment of money made by i~lf.in a suit: 
Provided that where any such costs or any portion thereof may be S 
recovered by an application made under sUb-section (1) Of section 25, no 
application shall lie under this section within a period of one year from 
,·we dlitse't)f'S1iclf order'unless·it is fOr the reoovery·af the·balance of any 
costs which has bee»' leffurirealfsed after an applitatiOll bas been made 
,under that, sub-section ~wing to the insufficiency of the amount of the 10 
,sectirifY. 'deposits referred to in that sub-section. 
, 21. (1) Tbe-Central Government may make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of ·this Act. 
(Z) In pariicuiar' and without prejudice' 'to 'the ge~erallty of the. 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 01 the following IS 
matters, namely:-
',. .... (4) the deposit or further deposit to be made by the petitioner 
as ·seCurity' -fOr" tile &sar.' , 
."\.. , 
, . tlr) tile ..appointment of offieers IUld ·other emplO!"MS for. usistlnjt 
'tIae·Alltlaorities·iD.the..dbcUrJlle of their. functions and tIle conditions of 20 
·senice· -of 'such olleen aad, other employees;· 
,'. ,. ,"' 
,(~). -the. c.ustoo.v. of deposits ma..de und~r. thi's .·~ct, the pay-
ment of costs out of such deposito; on an application m~de under sec-
tion 25 and other matters relating to the disposal of such applications; 
(d) 'th!-! fees, if any, payable in respect of any petition Or applica- 2S 
,tion unc;lel" thi~. Act; . 
\ 
(e) any other matter whiCh has to be prescribed by or prbvitled 
for ··by: rules made under 'th)s ~ct. . 
(3) Every· rule made by theCeritraI" Government unaer" this -Act 
~liall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 30 
of.Parliament wbile. it is in session, ft;'f iii total period of thirty days which 
may! be cOlI)prised in o.ne session or. tn two or more successive seSsions, 
·and. if, ·before· the expiry of the ses!':ion immediatelv. .folloWing the-
session. or the successive sessfonsafore\!aid, both Houses a~ee in' making 
• 8fty. modification in, the rule' or both .Rou~s a~ee that th~ rule should 35 
. lIOt be· made, the rule shall thereafter have etTect only in sUcb mOdtffed 
form .or be of no eifectr·as the case'may be; so. however.· that· any Such 
modification or annulment shall. be wit~out preju~Uce ~ the .va1fdity 'of 
anything previously done under that rule. . 
28. U)· The. Disputed Elections (prime Minister and Speaker) Ordl- 40 
nance, 1977)· is hereby repealed. 4 ol1977. 
(Z) NotwifhstA1'1~ne !mch repeal, anythitl~ done or any action taken. 
under· tlie provisions of (he said Ordinance shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corresponding Qrovisions of this Act. 

( .. ~ STA~M.EJ:Ifr OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
. ," . ~ r': -, ". ! '. : I" : J 'I.; .. t ~~.... ... _ r ~ ~ 
~ WA: Of 'theC811Stttution· mu.p&, special p;ovi~jont. .. iil i~p~ ()~ 
cr..: foHowlng eleetion&:.- . ~ . . 1 . ,. • .n 
(s). election in: flur cliSe of Pi1~ MU!{S1et '8'l'·,SpilkW/tllef·Dr. ... 
say •. ~l~ctfon to .either lloU$e of ~Hfatrlent· ot a pe~'\vid1 h1_'fii6 
ofttce ,o1.fttttne MmiS'te'r al 'Me . tifrle . ofslI(!h d1.etlon' otr, Whor Ii~. 
potnted as ~e Mltnster artet sU'eh e1e~'ofl'; 'lU'ht' .• ..', .. '~ .. 
", . '\ 
EO)· ehetion, in· the- case of Speaker. jhatis to. say., ~tecrttori. t~ .the 
ao~e of the .People of a person. who holds the ofttce of Speaker of 
. t!Ult·1tou~e !it the· ~ 'td. $\iefl eleMfon or who fa dIosea ·a .. .speaker 
ot ~Irt ttduse after. stiers, . elee~IM\. ' • 
,2~ AceeMblg to. tAilt. article, an.~lecti.OD i~.'the c~s~' 0' .rri~e ~fS"~ 
ft· 8pealler' cap- be. questioned. only, btfoy;e. s~~ .A,jl~ofi~Y. ,f~llt, b~ _ 
saeJt aat~Y'_isl'efel'ec1 to ·in clause (b) Qf,at;t!.cl,e 3~j· or 'body altd 
• Ie SlIea.1ftRIUI8r as. ~ . .ber-PE.o~de4. wx:. b~ o.:t' qnder~n:y laW ttla-de bt 
ParlialU9Df6' As ·the ·HoUie .ot. thePeopJe. \\las cJjss~l~ed on til!! "l8th h:tf.. 
'd.ray, 1977 'and. the CouncU af States. was not in se~i~n,_ ~,d 'geW~t:.I1f. e1ee .. 
tiC'1ft· foil the purpose of consti~uting a new, House. of the People was to be 
held shortly. it became necessary to provide for the setting 'Q.pot suell 
Authority urgently. Hence, the Disputed Elections (Prime Minister atld 
S[Jeakt!!itl otdIYu:inee, 1W1; was p~mulg&ted by the President on. 3m Feb-
!Uai-y, 191'1: . 
3. Government consider that the above Ordinance should be ~n,.cted 
• 6ubj~ct. to the modiftc~tian that the Authority for tryfiig a petrtfOb., quell-
tioning an election in the case. of Prime MI~fStet or Speaker, shd coJlStst 
of a single member, who is, a J~dge.of t~e.Sup~e Court, to be nomirrataid 
by the Chief Justice of India. and shan not' be a Cou.nCi'l const8ttrrg til 
Dine members, as envisaged in· the Ordinance. . The. ~Ul prQyides ~Qr such 
11ft. Authority, ed contains the necessary consequential modif\ca~I()"s. 
" 4. The p~oc.edUre to' be' foliowed' by the Authority, the ~ em 
which the election m~y .be called tn question: 811d other metterso··b!·detatl 
relating to secur·fty· for costs. reliefS that m&1 ~ elaimed by' the- peUtlcmer, 
withdr-awal and. abatement of petiti.ons, etc .• are simi~ar to those COD. 
tainaci·in the conresponding provisions of the R~Presentatf(yn or twe'l'eople 
~AGt •. 1-96], and· do IlOt make aqy signiftcant d~p.~.iift,lre fr~. the pro'\ft8ltH11 
of, the Ordinance ,iD' that~ beltalf. . 
NiW' DiIi.1t'I; .. SHAN:l'1 Bl!UStrAN. 
The 41th April, 1977. 
II 

., FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4(1) of the Bill provides for the trial at a petition iri the case 
of Prime Minister or Speaker of the HoWIe of the People by 'the Authority 
constituted for the purpose by the C'entral Government. Clause 4 (2) 
specifies that the Authority shall consist of a single member, who is a 
Judge of the Supreme Court. to be nominated in this behalf by tlie Chief 
Justice of India. Clause 27 of the BUl empowers the Central Government 
to make rules intu alia to provide for the appointment of ofBcers and 
other employees for assisting the Authority in the discharge of its func-
tions and the conditions of service of such officers and other employees. 
2. . The need for the constitutien of an Authority will arise only if any 
petition is presented in respect oil election in the case of Prime Minister 
or Speaker. The Authority will be an ad 'hoc body, constituted solely for 
the disposal of the petition. The Judge of the Supreme Court, who is 
nominated by the Chief Justice of India as the Authority"will not draw 
any remuneration for his functioning as the Authority for trying the peti-
tion. The expenditure towards salaries and allowances of the omcera and 
other employees, appointed for assisting the Authority, fs likely to tie 
about rupees thirty thOusand (Rs. 30,0(0) for a: period of six months, 
namely,· the period within which the trial of petition is normally expected 
to conclude. . 'j 
3. According to clause 10 of the Bill" the Authority for the trial of a 
petition. has. subject to any rules made in this behalf, to hold the trial 
at New Delhi. It may be necessary for the Authority to hold some of 
the sittings outside New Delhi in special circumstances. In tliat event, 
some expenditure will be incurred on account of travelling allowance and 
daUy allowance of some of the officers and staff assisting the Authority. 
n is not possible to make any feir estimate of such expenditure. 
4. Clause 14 of the Bill provides for expenses of witnesses to be allowed 
by the Authority. These expenses are deemed part of the costs. unless 
the Authority otherwise directs. When the Authority otherwise directs. 
it will become necessary to incur some expenditure on this aceount. It 
is, however, not possible to envisage tlie amount of such expenditure. 
5. The expenditure mentioned in the preceding paragraphs is of a re-
curring nature as the Authority has to be constituted whenever elections 
in the case of Prime Minister or in the case of Speaker take place and 
petitions are presented in respect thereof. In case it becomes necessary 
to constitute two separate Authorities to deal with the petitions in respect 
of ~lection in the case o~ Prime Minrster and Speaker, the expenditure 
to be incurred in pursuance of the provisions of this Bill will be nearly 
double. 
6. No other expenditure, whether recurring or non-recurring is expect-
e.d to b~ incurred consequent upon the enactment of tlte Bill. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10(1) lays down that subject to any rules made in this behalf, 
the Authority for trial of any petition shall hold the trial at New Delhi. 
Clause 11 (1) provides that subject to the provisions of the Bill and of 
any rules made thereunder, every petition shall be tried by the Authority 
as nearly as may be, in accordance with the procedure appYcable under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to the trial of suits. . ~ 
Clause 27 enables the Central Government to make rula:!s for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill, and sub-clause (2) thereof enumerates certain 
matters for which such rules may be made. 
The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
detail or procedure and as such the delegation of legislative power in-
volved is of a normal character. 
13 

, , 
Memo1'~m Tegardi:ng modifications contained in the Bm to replace 
the disputed elections (Prime Minister and Speaker) Ordinance, 1977. 
Uru:1er .section 40f the Disputed Elections (Prime Minister ami 
Speak~ ~Dc:e, 1977, the Authority fo.r the trial of petitiOJls in r~­
peet of disputed. elections in the case of Prime M,iQister aJ').d the Speak,er 
of the House of the People consists of a Council of 9 members, whereas 
under clause 4 of the con-esponding provisions in the Disputed Illections 
(Prime Minister and Speaker) Bill, 1977, the Authority consists of a 
single member who is a Judge of the Supreme CO\:l1"t nominated by the 
Chief Justice of India. The ot,her changes in the draft Bill are of a 
consequential nature. 
The provisions in the Bill relating to the procedure to be followed by 
the Authority, grounds on which the election may be called in question 
and other matters of detail like security for costs, reliefs that may be 
claimed by the petitioner, withdrawal and abatement of petition etc., 
are similar to those contained in the Ordinance and follow the con'es-
ponding provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 

LOK SABHA ..... 
BDL 
10 IJI'Ovide for Authorities to deal with diaputed elections to Parliament 
in the cue of Prime MinIster and Speaker of the House of the People 
aDd for matten connected therewith. 
•. f 
(Shri ShAn.ti Bhushan., 
Mmimw of La.w. JUBttce 
cmd CompCIt'l!l Affair8.) 