As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA ott 
BUI No, I9 of 19" 
THE ORISSA LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (EXTENSION 
OF DURATION) BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the extension of the duration of the present Legisla-
tive Assembly of the State of Orissa. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
RepUblic of India as follows: _I I 
1. This Act may be called the Orissa Legislative Assembly (Exten- Short title. 
lion of Duration) Act, 1966. 
, oZ. The period of five years [being the period for which the Legis- Extension Of 
lahve Assembly of a State may, under clause (1) of article 172 of the duration of 
Co tOt t" " f' fi the pre.ent ns 1 u lOn, continue from the date appomted or Its rst meeting] Oriasa 
in relation to the present Legislative Assembly of the State of Orissa LeA gialativo 
.L_ •• embly. 
~lilll, while the Proclamation of Emergency issued on the 26th day 
10 Of October, 1962, ta in operation, be extended for a period of one year: 

Provided that if the Proclamation ceases to operate before the 
expiration of the said period of one year, the present Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Orissa shall, unless previously djssolved 
under clause (2) of article 174 of the Constitution, continue until six 
months after the cesser of operation of the Proclamation and no 5 
longer. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On the 10th December, 1965, the Home Minister made a statement 
in Lok Sabha that the general election for constituting a new Legis-
lative Assembly of Orissa on the expiration of the d.uration of the 
present Assembly will be held simultaneously with the countrywide 
General Elections early in 1967. The duration of the present Orissa 
Assembly will in normal cours'.? expire on the 20th August, 1966. In 
pursuance of the above statement of the Horne Minister it is now 
proposed to extend the duration of the present Legis]ative Assembly 
of Orissa in accordance with the proviso to dC'lUse (1) of article 172 
of the Constitution. Under that proviso, while a Proclamation of 
Emergency is in operation, Parliament has the power to extend by 
law the duration of the LegislathTe Assembly of a State for a period 
not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case 
beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to 
operate. I 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
) G. S. PATHAK. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th February, 19~6. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the extension of the duration of the present 
Legislat ive Assembly of the State of Orissa. 
(Shri G. S. Pathak, 
Minister of LafO.) 