HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
~"" 
~ Corrigendum 
<#. 
to 
l 
-1 THE GOVERNMENT PREMISES (EVICTION) AMENINENT BILL f 195:' 
1 
" 
Annexure 
~ , -
A t page 4-, in line 8, for -
"(3) If any person refuses or fails to pay the 
dama ge wi thin the time" 
.jHbstitute -
"(2) In particular, and without prejudice to 
the generali ty of the fore-" 
NEi'l DELHI, 
The 18th ~~rch, 1953. 
M.N. KAUL, 
SECRETARY 

Bm Bo. l' of 1'53 
THE GOVERNMENT PREMISES (EVICTION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1953 
(As nrnoDUOBD IN TIUI HoUSE 011 TBB PBoPLB) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Qovernment Premi'68 (Eviotion) Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short Utle.-This Aot may be oalled the Government Premisel 
(Evi~ion) Amendment Ao~, 1958. 
2. Amendment of the IoDa tttie &lUI IICtioDI I, I, , aDd 10, Mt UVII 
of 1950.-1n the long title and in section I, seotion S, section 4 and 5 
sectiou 10 of tht! Government Premises (Eviotion) Aot, 1950 (hereinafter 
referred to 8S thu principal Aot) for the words "Government prdmises" 
wherever they ocour, the words "public premises" shall be subsbituted. 
8 . .Amendment of Mctlon I, Act DVU 01 lUO.-For clause (0) of 
sactioo 2 of the principal Aot, the follOwing clause &hall be dubstltuted, 10 
llamely:-
'(b) the expression "public premises'/' means any premises or 
land heJongulf to, or taken on lease or requisitioned by, the Central 
Government Or requisitioned by the competent authority undAr the 
R~quisitioni.ug and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 15 
(XXX of 1952) and, in relation to the State of Delhi, includes any 
premises or land vested in the Delhi Improvem6lilt Trust or a local 
authority in that State, whether suoh premises or land are or is in 
the possession of, or leased out by, the Trust or Iluthority, as the 
case may b~." to 

, 
2 
STATEME;NT Olt' OEJEOTS AND REASONS. 
In ~he Gov~ent Premises (Eviction) Act, 1950, the expression 
'Government premises' has been So defined tha.t while in rtllation to the 
Government IWd municipalities, it QOvers both premises and land but 
in relation to the Delhi Improvement Trust, it covers land ()[lly a.nd llot 
buildings btllonging to that lbody. The Delhi Improvement Trust owns 
a number of premises and it is experiencing considtlrable difficulties in 
both evicting the unauthorised occupants and recovering the arrears of 
rent aDd damages in respect of such premises. It is, therefore, proposed 
iu this Bill to amend the definition of the term "Government. premises" 
10 as to cover the premiBeB belonging to the Delhi Improvement Trust 
also. ()pportunity has also been taken to subsutute the expression 
"public premises" for "Government premise8" o.a th", latter term is not. 
appropriate in relation to local authorities or the Improvement Truat. 
SWARAN SINGH. 
NB'W DIl.m. 
The 6th March, 1958. 

3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS PHOlol THE GOVERNlBNT PREMISES (EVICTION) AO'f, 1950 
(XXVn of 1950). 
Long 'itl6 
An Act to provIde for the eviction of certain persons from Government 
premisef', and for certain matters connected therewith, 
• • • • 
B6ction 1(1) 
t. Short title lAd eztellt.-(l) This Act. may be caUed the Government 
l>remil!~s (Eviction) Act, 1950. 
• • • • 
B6ction 8(1) 
8. Power to evict certa1n penou from' GoV8l'DIIltDt premilu.-(l) If the. 
COlllp9teat I',uthority i. satisfied. 
(11) that the person Quthotifled to boOuP1 any Gott!rnment premises 
has, whether before or after the commencement of thit Aet,-
(i) sub-let, without the permission of ~. Oeatral Gonrnment or 
Ilf the tompetent aut.ority, the whole or Bny part of such premises, or 
(u,) otherwise acNd ill contraveD~n of any 01 ~ terms, ej;pre~. 
Or implied, under whiob he is .utboriaed to oooupy IUc:.b premi88ll, or 
(b) that any person is in unauthorised occupatioll of aby Govern-
ruent premises, 
the colDpetent authority may, by noiiae served by poe' or .otherwise, order 
that, th". person as well _ &ttY other penod who may be in aeoupation of 
the whole or any part of the Government premises, shall ,""cate them 
within tHte£Jl days at tile date of th. service of the noti<!e. 
• • • • 
Be"titm 4 
,. Power to l'8COYer rut or cIaIDaI8I bl I'8Ipect 01 GoTenuneDt 
premlaol u arrean 01 !aDd reveDue.-{l) Subject to any rules that may 
be ma~e i!l this behalf by the OeniM'a} Govemment, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, any sum due by way of rent in t'esPt!ct of any Govern-
ml'lnt premises which is in arrear may be recovered by the competent 
authority from the person lia.ble to pay the same in the BllIJle mOllDer BS 
an arrear or land revenue. 
(2) Where any person is in unauthorised occupa.tlon of nny Govern-
ment, premises, the competent authority may, in the {>rescribed manner, 
assep su~h damages on account of the use and occupatIon (1f the Govern-
ment pramiBes as it thinks fit and may, by notice Berv~d by po9t or in 
luch other manner, 88 may be prescribed b)' rule. made in this behalf, 
order that person to pay the damages within such time Ra mfty bA 
speeifled in the notice. 

, 
(3) If any person refuses or fails to pay 'he damage within the time 
specified in the notice under sub-sootion (.9), the damages may be recovered 
in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
• • 
Seotion 10(S)(b) 
10. Power to IDIob raIea.-
• 
• • • 
• 
(3) If auy person refuses or fails to pay the damage within the time 
goillg power, suoh rules may provide for aU or any of the following 
mat~rs. name1y:-
It 
* * • 
(b) the procedure to be followed in taking possession of Govel"ll-
mellt. IJremiS8s; 
• • • • 
.~ect'on S 
2. DeJlD1t1OD1.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise r~quires,-
(a) "competent authority" means any person autbot,ised by the 
Coentral Government, by notification in the Official Oau:ette, toO 
perf(ol'JlI the functions of the competent authority under this AClt for 
5.llch area as nlay be specified in the notification; 
(b) 'Government premiSRS' means any premis~iI or land 
b6longing toO, or taken on lease or requiaitiooed 'by, the Central 
Oovernmentor requisitioned by the competent authority under the 
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable J'roperty Act, 19~2. 
and. in relation to the State of Delhi. includes any pre.mises or lund 
belonging to any municipality in Delhi 'Or any land belonging to the 
Improvement Trust. Delhi. whether such land iI~ in the possossion 
of, or leased out by, the Improvement Truati; 
(0) "premises" means any building or part of a building and 
in~lude8-
(,) .the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to 
sucll building or part of a building, and 
(ii) any fittiDP affixed to luch building or part. of a building for 
th~ more. beneficial enjoyment thereof; 
(d) "prescribed" meaDB prescribed by rule. made under this 
Act. 
• • • 

HOUSE 6F'T~ ~OPLE' 
. -., 
.» b 
A 
BtU: 
further to amend the Qovernm9nt PremiBea(Eviotton) Act;, 1960 . 
• 
(Sardar Swaran. BingA, 
MinUter for Work8, H DUsing tlIM SUPP"') 