Pi Soc IN LoK SABHA

Bill No. 19 of 2005
_ THE PROVISION OF IDENTIFICATION MARKS ON SECURITY
हर PAPERS BILL, 2005

By
= Suri S.P.Y. २६००४, M.P.
हे ‘
3 | ‘BILL

) provide for the provision of ident
prevention of their Jorgery and ma
. 400७8
BE it enacted by
( lows :—

3 I. (/) This Act may be called the Prov
80675 Act, 2005. |

ification marks on the security papers and for
ke provisions incidental or consequential thereto.

Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

ision of Identification Marks on Security Short title,
। extent and
| commencement.
- (2) It extends to the whole of India. | |

a

; 3M
’ a

(3) 1 shall come into force at once. |
q 2. In this Act, unless the context requires, — Definitions.

(i) ‘appropriate Government’ means the Central Government or a State

Government, as the case may be;


Provisions to
give effective
identification
of security
papers.

Directions to
be issued to all
agencies for
implementing
the provisions
of this Act.

Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Power to make
rules.

(ii) ‘Security papers' means,—

(a) Bank guarantees including letter of credits and certificates of
authority;

(b) Bank instruments including cheques, drafts, pay orders or any
other such instrument;

(2) currency notes of all denominations; -

(d) educational degrees, diploma certificates and mark sheets issued _
by the Universities, Deemed Universities and professional institutions;

(९) insurance cover notes of all varieties;

(f) invoices of vehicles and consumer durables where Banks and
Financial Institutions are involved;

(2) Property Deeds and Deed of Titles including Wills;

(h) Sales Tax Registration Forms and Excise Tax documents including
challans and Way Bills

(i) tickets for railway journeys issued by the various railway authorities;
and

(j) such other documents as may be specified by the Government of
India from time to time.

3. It shall be mandatory for the appropriate Government to provide for effective
identification of security papers so as to prevent forgery and imitation of such papers
and to make them fool proof to prevent their duplication.

4. (/) The appropriate Government shall issue directions to all agencies concerned,
to comply with the provisions of section 3.

(2) Any person who does not comply with the directions issued under sub- ©
section (/) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten |
years and with fine which may extend to rupees fifty thousand.

(3) No institute, authority, organisation or an individual who incurs losses due to
its failure to take sufficient steps to check forgery of security papers shall make any
claim for compensation of the loss suffered or file a suit in any court of law for the
recovery of loss

5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force.

-

6. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make

rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

_ The problem of forgery and fake duplication of various documents including currency
notes has, of late, assumed menacing proportions. Revenue loss incurred by the Government
as a result of the infamous stamp paper scam is estimated to be in the range of rupees thirty
thousand to fifty thousand crore. But this is merely a tip of the iceberg. If we include the
forgery and fraudulent reproduction of currency notes, bank guarantees, letters of: credit,
forged documents relating to houses, land, vehicles and consumer durable goods for the
purpose of obtaining loans and forged railway tickets to quote, just a few, the amount
involved would be an astronomical figure. Unless we take necessary and effective steps in
this direction to control effectively this burgeoning menace of such large scale forgery of
public documents, we would, before long, be surrounded by scams all over which would not
only result in huge loss of revenues to the Government and other public bodies and banks
and financial institutions but also lead to a serious erosion of the cred ibility of the Government
in ensuring effective governance. Keeping this serious position in view, it is proposed to
_ bring forward a legislation which would make it mandatory for all concerned institutions to
take necessary and sufficiently effective and preventive steps to ensure that their documents
are fraud-resistant and are incapable of being replicated for fraudulent purpose.

The proposed Bill seeks to achieve this objective.

_ New DELHI; | S.PY. REDDY
November 18, 2004.

eee eee ee

Sie ea.

Suen

i
F
it +
|
q



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that it shall be mandatory for the appropriate Government
to provide effective identification of security papers to prevent forgery and imitation of such

_ papers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of

India to establish the methods to give effective identification to security papers. As far as
State Governments are concerned, the expenditure will be met from the Consolidated Funds
of the respective States. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees
one hundred crore is likely to be incurred per annum

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved

3 es 1 नर कि. ०5 a aie
+ 22223: ५ ५ Po po ८ «रू ५ “जन # >> = f gee Se er ey : bs .
. : . ५4 7 : ४ 3 ॥४ 2056 7 42 2 225 आओ 0 ee ee 2520 ets ae at ae es ८ ही: 2 3 oe “-
+ es? Pee ES IN GEIS Oe ne ee = 2 >> 3 =
- ee ‘ 2 PT a Me RP ee ee बे 85 ४1 et on oe 2 ‘ :
my ४-22 420 कट 3 5 we i or ail a ‘arc
4 * . ue Tass a nee 4 >> ot ree so sa के कक ४ न्श कि = -
: a Be +i fs है ae Se ee -ध्श िए कक 2 अड 25 ID PO a
z . nes a in ६ 20 डी ० ee FN 2. “42 et Yet ee arr
ae es pte ke ee ease ee a ? a a
> 2 3 & 25% 5 ad aie ae er Op Re re “>>: Oe eee ee ae z
es ee Pr. Fe ee Se FL a Sh OD ee es 32८ = .
IS fF gs ee eee SS ee ee —



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, make rules to give effect

___ tothe provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
4 __ legislative power is of a normal character. -


LOK SABHA

A

BILL 3
to provide for the provision of identification marks on the security papers and for

prevention of their forgery and make provisions incidental or consequential thereto.

(Shri SPY. Reddy, MP)

MGIPMRND—4134LS(S3)—08.02.2005.