Bill No. 19-F of 2011
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF
DELHI LAWS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS)
BILL,  2011
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA  ON 18TH MARCH, 2011
RAJYA SABHA ON 22ND MARCH, 2011)

1
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2011
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a further period
up to the 31st day of December, 2011 and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
WHEREAS there had been phenomenal increase in the population of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi owing to migration and other factors resulting in tremendous pressure on
land and infrastructure leading to encroachment or unauthorised developments which are
not in consonance with the concept  of planned development as provided in the Master Plan
for Delhi, 2001 and the relevant Acts and building bye-laws made thereunder;
A
ND WHEREAS the Master Plan for Delhi, 2001 was extensively modified and notified by
the Central Government on the 7th day of February, 2007 with the perspective for the year
2021 keeping in view the emerging new dimensions in urban development vis-a-vis the
social, financial and other ground realities;
A
ND WHEREAS the Master Plan for Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021
specifically provides for strategies for housing for urban poor as well as to deal with the
informal sector;
Bill No.  19-F  of  2011

2
AND WHEREAS a strategy and a scheme has been prepared by the local authorities in the
National Capital Territory of Delhi for regulation of urban street vendors in accordance with
the National Policy for Urban Street Vendors and  the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021, and is
being implemented;
A
ND WHEREAS based on the policy finalised by the Central Government regarding
regularisation of unauthorised colonies, village abadi area and its extension,  the guidelines
and regulations for this purpose have been issued;
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of the guidelines and regulations necessary steps are
being taken for regularisation of unauthorised colonies which, inter alia, involve scrutiny of
layout plans, assessment of built up percentage existed as on the 31st day of March, 2002,
identification of mixed use of streets, approval of layout plans, fixation of boundaries, change
in land use and identification of colonies not eligible for regularisation;
A
ND WHEREAS more time is required for proper implementation of the scheme regarding
hawkers and urban street vendors and for the regularisation of unauthorised colonies, village
abadi area and its extension;
A
ND WHEREAS  the revised policy for proper arrangements for relocation and
rehabilitation of slum dwellers and jhuggi-jhompri clusters in the National Capital Territory
of Delhi has been formulated and accordingly, the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board
Act, 2010 has been enacted by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi and
notified with effect from the 1st July, 2010 to provide for implementation of schemes for
improvement of slums and  jhuggi-jhompri clusters with a view to bring improvement in
environment and living conditions, and to prepare housing scheme for such persons;
A
ND WHEREAS the draft policy regarding farm houses is under consideration in the
Delhi Development Authority;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021, the Zonal Development
Plans in respect of various Zones have been notified which provides for regularisation of
schools, dispensaries, religious institutions and cultural institutions;
A
ND WHEREAS the policy with respect to storages, warehouses and godowns used for
agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural areas built on agricultural
land are under consideration of the Central Government in consultation with the Delhi
Development Authority;
A
ND WHEREAS the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act,
2007 was enacted on the 5th day of December, 2007 to make special provisions for the areas
of the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a period up to the 31st day of December, 2008
which ceased to operate after the 31st December, 2008;
AND WHEREAS the National Capital Territory of  Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act,
2009 was enacted in continuation  of the aforesaid Act for a period up to the 31st day of
December, 2009 to make special provisions for the areas of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi and that Act ceased to operate after the 31st day of December, 2009;
A
ND WHEREAS the National Capital Territory of  Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second
Act, 2009 was enacted in continuation  of the aforesaid Act for a period up to the 31st day of
December, 2010 to make special provisions for the areas of  the National Capital Territory of
Delhi and that Act ceased to operate after the 31st day of  December, 2010;
A
ND WHEREAS it is expedient to have a law in terms of the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021,
in continuation of the said Act for a period up to the 31st day of December, 2011 to provide
for temporary relief and to minimise avoidable hardships and irreparable loss to the people of
the National Capital Territory of Delhi against any action by the concerned agency in respect
of persons covered by the policies referred to above.
Delhi Act
7 of 2010.
43 of 2007.
24 of 2009.
40 of 2009.

3
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special
Provisions) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of January, 2011.
(4) It shall cease to have effect on the 31st day of December, 2011, except as respects
things done or omitted to be done before such cesser, and upon such cesser section 6 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply as if this Act  had then been repealed by a Central Act.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “building bye-laws” means bye-laws made under section 481 of the Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 or the bye-laws made under section 188, sub-section
(3) of section 189 and sub-section (1) of section 190 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911,
as in force in New Delhi or the regulations made under sub-section (1) of section 57 of
the Delhi Development Act, 1957, relating to buildings;
(b) “Delhi” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi except
the Delhi Cantonment as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Delhi Municipal
Corporation Act, 1957;
(c) “encroachment” means unauthorised occupation of Government land or
public land  by way of putting temporary, semi-permanent or permanent structure for
residential use or commercial use or any other use;
(d) “local authority” means the Delhi Municipal Corporation established under
the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, or the New Delhi Municipal Council
established under the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 or the Delhi Development
Authority established under the Delhi Development Act, 1957,  legally entitled to
exercise control in respect of the areas under their respective jurisdiction;
(e) “Master Plan” means the Master Plan for Delhi with the perspective for the
year 2021, notified vide notification number S.O.141(E), dated the 7th day of February,
2007 under the Delhi Development Act, 1957;
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(g) “punitive action” means action taken by a local authority under the relevant
law against unauthorised development and shall include demolition, sealing of premises
and displacement of persons or their business establishment from their existing location,
whether in pursuance of court orders or otherwise;
(h)  “relevant law” means in case of—
(i) the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Development Act, 1957;
(ii) the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the Delhi Municipal Corporation
Act, 1957; and
(iii) the New Delhi Municipal Council, the New Delhi Municipal Council
Act, 1994;
(i) “unauthorised development” means use of land or use of building or
construction of building or development of colonies carried out in contravention of
the sanctioned plans or without obtaining the sanction of plans, or in contravention of
the land use as permitted under the Master Plan or Zonal Plan or layout plan, as the
case may be, and includes any encroachment.
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the Delhi Municipal
Corporation Act, 1957 and the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
10 of 1897.
66 of 1957.
Punjab Act 3
of 1911.
61 of 1957.
66 of 1957.
66 of 1957.
44 of 1994.
61 of 1957.
61 of 1957.
61 of 1957.
66 of 1957.
44 of 1994.
Short title,
extent,
commence-
ment and
duration.
Definitions.
61 of 1957.
66 of 1957.
44 of 1994.

4
Enforcement
to be kept in
abeyance.
3. (1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any relevant law or any rules, regulations
or bye-laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall before the expiry of this Act,  take
all possible measures to finalise norms, policy guidelines, feasible strategies and make orderly
arrangements to deal with the problem of encroachment or unauthorised development in the
form of encroachment by slum dwellers and Jhuggi-Jhompri clusters, hawkers and urban
street vendors, unauthorised colonies, village abadi area (including urban villages), and its
extension, existing farm houses involving construction beyond permissible building limits
and schools, dispensaries, religious institutions, cultural institutions, storages, warehouses
and godowns used for agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural
areas built on agricultural land, as mentioned below:
(a) orderly arrangments for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers  and
Jhuggi-Jhompri clusters in the National Capital Territory of Delhi in accordance with the
provisions of the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board Act, 2010 and the Master Plan
for Delhi, 2021 to ensure its development in a sustainable, planned and humane manner;
(b) scheme and orderly arrangements for regulation of urban street vendors in
consonance with the national policy for urban street vendors and hawkers as provided
in the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021;
(c) orderly arrangements pursuant to guidelines and regulations for regularisation
of unauthorised colonies, village abadi area (including urban villages) and its extension,
as existed on the 31st day of March, 2002, and where construction took place even
beyond that date and up to the 8th day of February, 2007;
(d) policy regarding existing farm houses involving construction beyond
permissible building limits;  and
(e) policy or plan for orderly arrangement regarding schools, dispensaries,
religious institutions, cultural institutions, storages, warehouses and godowns used
for  agricultural inputs or produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural areas built on
agricultural land.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1) and notwithstanding any
judgment, decree or order of any court, status quo—
(i) as on the 1st day of January, 2006 in respect of encroachment or unauthorised
development; and
(ii) in respect of unauthorised colonies, village abadi area (including urban
villages) and its extension, which existed on the 31st day of March, 2002 and where
construction took place even beyond that date and up to the 8th day of February, 2007,
mentioned in sub-section (1),
shall be maintained.
(3) All notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against encroachment
or unauthorised development referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall be deemed to have been
suspended and no punitive action shall be taken till the 31st day of December, 2011.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Act, the Central Government
may, at any time before the 31st day of December, 2011, withdraw the exemption by notification
in respect of encroachment or unauthorised development mentioned in sub-section ( 2) or
sub-section (3), as the case may be.
4. During the period of operation of this Act, no relief shall be available under the
provisions of section 3 in respect of the following encroachment or unauthorised development,
namely:—
(a) encroachment on public land except in those cases which are covered under
clauses (a), (b) and (c) 
of sub-section (1) of section 3;
Provisions of
this Act not
to apply in
certain cases.
Delhi Act 7 of
2010.

5
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
Validation of
acts done or
omitted to be
done, etc.,
during 1st
January, 2011
up to the date
of com-
mencement
of this Act.
(b) removal of slums and Jhuggi-Jhompri dwellers, hawkers and urban street
vendors, unauthorised colonies or part thereof, village abadi area (including urban
villages) and its extension  in accordance with the relevant policies approved by the
Central Government for clearance of land required for specific public projects.
5. The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such directions to the local
authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act and it shall be the
duty of the local authorities, to comply with such directions.
6. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all things done, or,
omitted to be done, and all action taken, or, not taken, during the period beginning on or after
the 1st day of January, 2011 and ending immediately before the date of commencement of this
Act, shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to
have been done, or, omitted to be done, or, taken, or, not taken, under these provisions as if
such provisions were in force at the time such things were done or omitted to be done and
action taken or not taken during the aforesaid period.
————
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
Dated the Chairman.
————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a further period up
to the 31st day of December, 2011 and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—7464RS—(S3)—23-03-2011.