1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 19 of  2018
THE RIGHT TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION FOR
CHILDREN OF FARMERS LIVING IN DROUGHT
PRONE AREAS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for right to free and compulsory education from primary to university level
to the children of farmers living in drought prone areas and for matters connected
 therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Free and Compulsory Education for Children
of  Farmers Living in Drought Prone Areas Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "college" means an educational institution owned or controlled by the Central
Government or the State Government which imparts higher education;
(c) 'child' means a male or female who has attained the age of five years but not
attained the age of twenty-five years;
(d) "drought prone areas" means the areas consistently receiving below normal
rainfall and includes such areas which in the opinion of Central Government are drought
prone areas and declared as such, by notification in the Official Gazette, in consultation
with the State Governments concerned;
(e) "farmer" means a person who performs agricultural related works and has no
income from any source other than agriculture;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "school" means any school recognised by the State Government or the
Central Government; and
(h) "University" means any university or deemed university recognised by
University Grants Commission (UGC) or All India Council for Technical Education
(AICTE) or Medical Council of India.
3. (1) Every child of a farmer living in drought prone area shall have the right to free
and compulsory education in a neighbourhood school or college or university till completion
of his graduation.
(2) No child shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charge or expenses for pursuing
and completing the education till graduation or any other equivalent degree.
(3) Any child above the age of five years and not been admitted in any school shall be
admitted in a class appropriate to his age:
Provided that a child who is directly admitted in a class appropriate to his age, shall,
in order to be at par with others, have the right to receive special training, in such manner
and within such time as may be prescribed:
Provided further that a child so admitted to school shall be entitled to get free education
till he completes his graduation or equivalent degree.
(4) Every child shall be provided books, uniform, shoes, school bags, water bottle and
other stationery items required for his study in any school or college or university free of
cost.
(5) Every child shall be provided such amount of scholarship as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government which shall be payable to the parents of the child for encouraging
them not to withdraw their children from school to help them in earning livelihood.
4. The Central Government shall, with the assistance of the State Government
concerned in whose jurisdiction the drought affected area falls, ensure free education till
graduation to the children of farmers living in drought prone areas in such manner as may
be prescribed.
Definitions.
Right of every
child to free and
compulsory
education in
any school or
college or
university.
Central
Government to
ensure free
education to
children in
drought
affected areas.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. The appropriate Government shall maintain adequate supply of free mid-day-meal
and potable water to the children studying in educational institutions through tankers or
through other means as it may consider appropriate in the drought prone areas.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law,
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force.
8. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Provision of free
mid-day-meal
and potable
water to the
children in
drought prone
areas.
Central
Government
to provide
funds
Act not in
derogation of
only other law.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Over sixty per cent. of  India's  total  land is under agriculture and nearly twenty-three
per cent. covered by forests. Though, India is no longer an "agricultural economy", around
seventy per cent. of its rural households still depend primarily on agriculture for their
livelihood.
In India, the failure of the monsoons result in water shortages, resulting in
below-average crop yields. This is particularly true of major drought-prone regions. Large
numbers of areas in various parts of the country particularly in the States of Jharkhand,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, etc. are frequently affected by
unprecedented drought and play havoc in such areas. The onset of drought is slow and the
impact is multi-dimensional. One of the most obvious ways of breaking out of the cycle of
poverty is education. Unfortunately, education is the most severely affected aspect of
children's life in the event of drought and indebtedness. Children are often withdrawn from
school and compelled to work on the field or look for jobs, or simply migrate with their
parents. Their education needs to be compromised, so they don't go to bed hungry.
In the event of food insecurity and drought, younger children often migrate with
their parents, in search of better livelihoods. According to the report, these young children
are vulnerable to hazards at work sites which their parents are exposed to. These children
are perhaps the most vulnerable to the worst kinds of child labour. In a desperate situation,
children are forced to contribute to the family income. Meanwhile, the children who are
left behind to take care of the elder members of the family are expected to juggle between
their education and responsibilities at home.
It is, therefore, necessary that the appropriate Government shall provide free and
compulsory education to every child of farmers living in drought prone areas along with a
scholarship or consolation amount to ensure their education and to remove their debts and
poverty.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT  KHAIRE
December 8, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every child of a farmer living in drought prone areas
shall have a right to free and compulsory education in a neighbourhood school or college or
university till completion of his graduation. Clause 5 provides for provision of free mid day
meal and potable water to the children studying in educational institutions in drought prone
areas. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide funds to the State
Government for carrying out the provisions of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees five hundred crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for right to free and compulsory education from primary to university level
to the children of farmers living in drought prone areas and for matters connected
 therewith.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P . )
GMGIPMRND—3652LS(S3)—23-01-2018.