1
THE DUAL TIME ZONES BILL, 2020
By
SHRI PRADYUT BORDOLOI, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish and demarcate two separate Time Zones to provide for more practical
and inclusive administration of the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Dual Time Zones Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “IST ONE” refers to the time zone to be adhered to by the States of Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Goa, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, New Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, Uttarakhand,
Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Bihar and the
Union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Puducherry, Dadra and Nagar Haveli
and Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 19 of  2020
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
  5
10

2
(b) “IST TWO” refers to the time zone to be adhered to by the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, Assam, Meghalaya, Sikkim
and the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(c) “Time Zone” refers to a range of longitudes where a uniform standard time
is used for commercial, social and legal purposes; and
(d) “Universal Time Coordinated” means Coordinated Universal Time used as
the primary time standard by the world to regulate clocks and time;
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
separate Time Zone for the States of,—
(a) Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, Assam,
Meghalaya, Sikkim and the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands at Universal
Time Coordinated + 6.30 which shall, for all purposes, be referred to as the IST TWO;
and
(b) Gujarat, Rajasthan, Goa and Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, New Delhi, Haryana,
Punjab, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh,
Odisha, Bihar and the Union Territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Dadra and
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep and Puducherry at Universal
Time Coordinated + 5.30 which shall, for all purposes, be referred to as the IST ONE.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the CSIR—National Physical Laboratory shall, in consultation with State Government
concerned, implement and administer the Time Zones as referred to section 3 in all areas
connected therewith.
(2) The CSIR—National Physical Laboratory shall be responsible for the following,
but not restricted to,—
(a) the realization, establishment, maintenance and dissemination of the
IST ONE and IST TWO as notified;
(b) creation and maintenance of a Time Zone portal to disseminate information
related to the functioning and administration of the Time Zones;
(c) publishing information of the database on its website and making all possible
efforts to make it publicly accessible;
(d) creation of  a Time Zone map that is accurate, to be used for further reference;
and
(e) maintenance of time and frequency measurements with respect to each
Time Zone which shall include upgradation of the same when necessary.
5. The Central Government shall, in anticipation of initial logistical hurdles with
respect to the inter-State functioning of the Railways, Airlines and similarly affected
sector, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Zonal Management  Authority to
specifically overcome the difficulties arising during the bifurcation of two Time Zones
and deal with all matters connected therewith.
6. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as it appears to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Demarcation
of Time Zones
by the Central
Government.
CSIR—National
Physical
Laboratory to
Administer and
Implement
Time Zones.
Central
Government to
constitute a
zonal
Management
Authority for
inter-State
functioning of
Railways.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
25
30
35
40
  5
10
15
20
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Geographically, India stretches from 97.4 East in Arunachal to 68 East in Gujarat a
difference of almost 30 degrees of longitude—this translates into a time difference of nearly
about two hours across the breadth of India and hence having a single time zone for all of
India is impractical to begin with. The people from our North-East are genetically attuned
and practically accustomed to waking up very early, finishing dinner early in the evening
and other similar such lifestyle habits, in sync with their geographical and societal norms.
The current setup completely ignores the specific regional and cultural context for such a
large chunk of our citizens and it is rather wasteful and inconveniencing.
Globally, across all the larger nations, all but China use multiple Time Zones for
increased efficiency and productivity and easier coordination. Following two separate and
specific Time Zones instead of one standard Time Zone will allow for greater productivity
and efficiency for citizens as well as contribute to savings in energy consumption. The
current setup is discriminatory towards vast sections of the populace and it causes economic
loss and loss of productivity as well.
By advancing the IST, so as to increase daylight hours in the evening, the State and
national Governments can potentially benefit from energy savings and improved social
outcomes across domains such as health, safety, and well-being. Just for example, the
estimated annual energy saving comes out to be 2 x 107 kWh, as per a report from the
National Physical Laboratory, which is significant considering the fact that these States are
already short on electric power.
In 2006, the Planning Commission released a report that stated that having two Time
Zones would lead to substantial energy savings and subsequently numerous other research
papers have confirmed the same. In a global where energy efficiency and carbon savings
matter for everyone, India can lead the way in modifying its own practices to make a
difference. The initial hurdles in the process of transition are a minor glitch when considering
the long-term convenience post implementation of the Time Zones and the overall positive
impact it can have on the general well-being of citizens as well as providing a fillip to
economic activity.
The Constitution already grants the autonomy to States to define and set local times
for their respective industrial areas under the provisions in labour laws, such as the
Plantations Labour Act, 1951. Given the widespread adoption of mobile phones and other
such  digital devices—which can automatically adjust for a time change—the barriers to
introduction of such a change have lessened over the years. Plus, this Bill incorporates a
host of existing scientific and practical research inputs into its prescriptive provisions so as
to ensure that the disruption and need for change is very minimal and gradual.
This Bill seeks to initiate a conducive framework for establishing and implementation
of Time Zones more specific to the geographical co-ordinates of the area, eventually leading
to more inclusive and systematic governance of the country at large. This has been a long-
standing demand, one backed by a host of socio-economic and scientific reasoning.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRADYUT  BORDOLOI
November 29, 2019.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to constitute a Zonal
Management Authority to deal with logistic hurdles related to inter-State functioning of
Railways, Airlines and other similarly affected sectors  after implementation of Time Zones.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of sum of about rupees twenty-five
crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-five crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish and demarcate two separate Time Zones to provide for more practical
and inclusive administration of the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Pradyut Bordoloi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4400LS(S3)—13-01-2020.