1
THE PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT AS MANUAL
SCA VENGERS AND THEIR REHABILITATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their
Rehabilitation Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers
and their Rehabilitation (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their
Rehabilitation Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No. 19 of 2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(i) in sub-section (1)—
(a) for clauses (d) and (e) the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
'(d) "hazardous cleaning" by an employee, in relation to sewer or
septic tank means manually entering into a septic tank or sewer to manually
clean it;
(e) "insanitary latrine" means a latrine which requires human excreta
to be cleaned or otherwise handled manually, in situ, in an open drain or
pit into which the excreta is discharged or flushed out, before the excreta
fully decomposes; and
(b) For part (a) of Explanation to clause (g), the following part shall be
substituted, namely—
'(a) "engaged or employed" means being engaged or employed on a
regular, contract, private, casual or daily wage basis or any other forms of
employment;'.
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the second proviso, for the
words "may give assistance", the words "shall give assistance" shall be substituted.
4. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "and shall be
assigned work other than manual scavenging", the words "and shall be assigned non-
scavenging dignified work" shall be substituted.
5. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),
(i) in clause (a), after sub-clause (ii), the following shall be inserted, namely—
"(iii) a compensation, not less than rupees one lakh, in addition to cash
assistance in sub-clause (ii), as one time cash payment on identification in the
survey under section 12.".
(ii) for clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely—
"(b) "all the children of the manual scavenger shall be entitled to free
education from primary to higher education including professional, doctoral
and post-doctoral for one generation.".
6. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (b), the words 'he has
reasonable cause to believe', shall be omitted.
7. In section 23 of the Principal Act,
(i) for sub-section (2), and explanation thereunder the following sub-section and
explanation shall be substituted, namely—
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any
offence under this Act has been committed by a company, the director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals;
(b) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm; and
(c) public officials to be held accountable for non-implementation of this Act,
which shall be construed as dereliction of duty by the public official.".
Amendment of
section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 23.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. In section 31 of the principal Act,—
(i) In sub-section (1)—
(a) in clause (b), for the words "enquire into complaints", the words
"investigate into complaints" shall be substituted; and
(b) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(e) to impose fine on a person, if found guilty, after investigation
under clause (b), of contravening the provisions of this Act."
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) In the discharge of its functions under sub-section (1), the National
Commission shall have the power to—
(a) call for information with respect to any matter specified in that
sub-section from any Government or local or other authority; and
(b) summon and enforce the attendance of any person from any part
of India and examine him on oath."
Amendment
of section 31.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013
was enacted to prohibit employment as manual scavengers and for rehabilitation of manual
scavengers and their families. The Bill aims to correct the deficiencies in the principal Act and
recognizes that manual scavenging in itself is a hazardous activity, even if done with or
without protective gear. Protective gears given to scavengers are of poor quality and they
have to manually clean sewers or septic tanks which is a violation of human dignity and
fundamental rights as enshrined in the Constitution. This Bill also makes the State Government
duly accountable and responsible to provide proper sanitation to people. People who are
identified as manual scavengers under this Act, their children will be imparted free education
from the primary to post-doctoral level for one generation, an extremely pertinent step required
to undo the historical injustices they have been subjected to.
It recognizes not just contract workers but also people who work on daily wage basis or
any other form of employment and perform such prohibited in law. The Bill makes liable every
company, private or public official under the Central, State or local authority who employs
any person as manual scavengers under the Act and make it a punishable offence. This step
becomes essential for proper implementation of this law as it is widely known that the
Government bodies employ and aid the casteist practice of manual scavenging. The National
Commission for Safai Karamcharis is empowered to monitor and enquire into the complaints
regarding the contravention of the provisions of this Act. But no one has been punished
even if the accused is found guilty by the Commission due to inherent lacuna in the Act. It is,
therefore, necessary that the National Commission for Safai Karamcharis be empowered to
summon the accused, investigate into the complaints, and impose fine on the accused, if
found guilty on completion of investigation in the matter.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
January, 17, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for compensation to be paid to manual scavengers. It also
provides for providing free education to children of manual scavengers. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum will be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE PROHIBITION  OF EMPLOYMENT  AS MANUAL  SCA VENGERS AND
THEIR REHABILITATION (A MENDMENT ) ACT, 2013
(ACT NO. 25 OF 2013)
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(d) "hazardous cleaning" by an employee, in relation to a sewer or septic tank,
means its manual cleaning by such employee without the employer fulfilling his
obligations to provide protective gear and other cleaning devices and ensuring
observance of safety precautions, as may be prescribed or provided in any other law,
for the time being in force or rules made thereunder;
(e) "insanitary latrine" means a latrine which requires human excreta to be cleaned
or otherwise handled manually, either in situ, or in an open drain or pit into which the
excreta is discharged or flushed out, before the excreta fully decomposes in such
manner as may be prescribed: Provided that a water flush latrine in a railway passenger
coach, when cleaned by an employee with the help of such devices and using such
protective gear, as the Central Government may notify in this behalf, shall not be
deemed to be an insanitary latrine.
* * * * *
(g) "manual scavenger" means a person engaged or employed, at the
commencement of this Act or at any time thereafter, by an individual or a local authority
or an agency or a contractor, for manually cleaning, carrying, disposing of, or otherwise
handling in any manner, human excreta in an insanitary latrine or in an open drain or pit
into which the human excreta from the insanitary latrines is disposed of, or on a railway
track or in such other spaces or premises, as the Central Government or a State
Government may notify, before the excreta fully decomposes in such manner as may be
prescribed, and the expression "manual scavenging" shall be construed accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause,—
(a) "engaged or employed" means being engaged or employed on a regular or
contract basis;
(b) a person engaged or employed to clean excreta with the help of such devices and
using such protective gear, as the Central Government may notify in this behalf, shall not be
deemed to be a 'manual scavenger';
* * * * *
5. (1) * * * *
(2) Every insanitary latrine existing on the date of commencement of this Act, shall
either be demolished or be converted into a sanitary latrine, by the occupier at his own cost,
before the expiry of the period so specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4:
Provided that where there are several occupiers in relation to an insanitary latrine, the
liability to demolish or convert it shall lie with,—
(a) the owner of the premises, in case one of the occupiers happens to be the
owner; and
Definitions.
Prohibition of
insanitary
latrines and
employment
and
engagement of
manual
scavenger.

(b) all the occupiers, jointly and severally, in all other cases:
Provided that the State Government may give assistance for conversion of insanitary
latrines into sanitary latrines to occupiers from such categories of persons and on such
scale, as it may, by notification, specify:
Provided further that non-receipt of State assistance shall not be a valid ground to
maintain or use an insanitary latrine, beyond the said period of nine months.
* * * * *
6. (1) * * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no person employed or
engaged as a manual scavenger on a full-time basis shall be retrenched by his employer, but
shall be retained, subject to his willingness, in employment on at least the same emoluments,
and shall be  assigned work other than manual scavenging.
* * * * *
13. ( 1) Any person included in the final list of manual scavengers published in
pursuance of sub-section (6) of section 11 or added thereto in pursuance of sub-section (3)
of section 12, shall be rehabilitated in the following manner, namely:—
(a) he shall be given, within one month,—
(i) a photo identity card, containing, inter alia, details of all members of his
family dependent on him, and
(ii) such initial, one time, cash assistance, as may be prescribed;
(b) his children shall be entitled to scholarship as per the relevant scheme of the
Central Government or the State Government or the local authorities, as the case may be;
* * * * *
20.( 1) * * * * *
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an inspector may, within the local limits of
his jurisdiction, enter, at all reasonable times, with such assistance as he considers necessary,
any premises or place for the purpose of,—
(a) * * * * *
(b) examine any person whom he finds in such premises or place and who, he has
reasonable cause to believe, is employed as a manual scavenger therein, or is otherwise in a
position to furnish information about compliance or non-compliance with the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder;
* * * * *
23. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that offence has been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
Contract's,
agreement,
etc., to be
void.
Rehabilitation
of persons
identified as
manual
scavengers by
a
Municipality.
Appointment
of inspectors
and their
powers.
7

(a) "company" means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
* * * * *
31. The National Commission for Safai Karamcharis shall perform the following functions,
namely:—
(a) to monitor the implementation of this Act;
(b) to enquire into complaints regarding contravention of the provisions of this
Act, and to convey its findings to the concerned authorities with recommendations
requiring further action;
(c) to advise the Central and the State Governments for effective implementation
of the provisions of this Act; and
(d) to take suo motu notice of matter relating to non-implementation of this Act.
* * * * *
Function of
National
Commission
for Safai
Karamcharis.
8

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation
Act, 2013.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3299LS(S3)—31-01-2019.