1
THE INTERNATIONAL TREATIES AND AGREEMENTS ( EQUAL
REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN) BILL, 2017
By
DR. THOKCHOM MEINYA, M.P.
A
BILL
to ensure equal participation of men and women in representing the Government of India
while entering into any international treaty, agreement, covenant, resolution or
negotiation, including those relating to war or peace, in order to uphold
the values of international human rights and convention to
which India is a signatory.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighthYear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called International Treaties and Agreements (Equal
Representation of Women) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  19 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "prescribed" means prescribed by
rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming  into force of
this Act, by notification of the Official Gazette, appoint a Commissioner of International
Negotiations and such number of Deputy Commissioners of International Negotiations as
may be necessary, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Commissioner of International Negotiations shall be a person who is or has
been a Judge of the High Court to be appointed in consultation with the Chief Justice of
India for a period of three years.
(3) The Deputy Commissioners shall be appointed from amongst persons who are
qualified to be appointed as Judge of a High Court after consultation with the Chief Justice
of India for a period of three years.
(4) The Central Government shall, within six months of coming into force of this Act,
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Committee to be known as the
International Negotiations Committee.
(5) The Chairperson of the International Negotiations Committee shall be a person
who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court to be appointed in consultation with the
Chief Justice of India for a period of three years.
(6) The International Negotiations Committee shall consist of three members to be
appointed by the Central Government, of whom one shall be a person who is or has been a
Judge of the High Court to be appointed in consultation with the Chief Justice of India and
the other two members shall be appointed from amongst persons having knowledge and
experience of refugee issues and refugee law for a period of three years.
(7) The Commissioner of International Negotiations may assign such of his function,
as may be necessary, to the Deputy Commissioners of International Negotiations.
4. The Commissioner of International Negotiations, the Deputy Commissioners of
International Negotiations and the International  Negotiations Committee shall be responsible
for ensuring equal participation of men and women—
(i) in every international conference, international association and other
international bodies, wherein they shall represent the Government of India;
(ii) in representing the Government of India while entering into treaties and
agreements with foreign countries and while implementing such treaties or agreements;
(iii) while representing the Government of India in any negotiation, resolution or
international conversation regarding war or peace; and
(iv) in every peace talk at national level, wherein they shall represent the
Government of India.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
Authorities. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Ensuring
gender parity
in peace
conversation.
Power to
make rules.
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Beijing Platform Action 1992 makes clear that the women, peace and security
agenda is not simply about making war safe for women, as it is sometimes understood, but
about preventing the outbreak of violent conflict and resolving it where it does occur. It also
stresses the importance of fostering a culture of peace among men and women, alluding to
links between gender norms and militarization.
The Security Council adopted a resolution (S/RES/1325) on women and peace and
security on 31 October, 2000. The resolution reaffirms the important role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations, peace-building, peacekeeping,
humanitarian response and in post-conflict reconstruction and stresses the importance of
their equal participation and full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security. Resolution 1325 urges all actors to increase the participation of women
in all United Nations peace and security efforts. It also calls on all parties to conflict to take
special measures to protect women and girls from gender-based violence, particularly rape
and other forms of sexual abuse, in situations of armed conflict. The resolution provides a
number of important operational mandates, with implications for Member States and the
entities of the United Nations system.
There have been 17 peace talks in the country and only 2 women have participated so
far. Currently there are none in these peace talks. The main objective of this Bill is to establish
an appropriate legal framework to recognize the stake of women in conflict talks and to
ensure that international negotiations including peace negotiations maintain gender-parity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; THOKCHOM MEINYA
November 18, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Commissioner of International
Negotiations and such number of Deputy Commissioners of International Negotiations as
may be necessary. It also provides for constitution of the International Negotiations Committee
consisting of  three members. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore will be involved as
a recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to tune of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to ensure equal participation of men and women in representing the Government of India
while entering into any international treaty, agreement, covenant, resolution or
negotiation, including those relating to war or peace, in order to uphold
the values of. international human rights and convention to
which India is a signatory.
————
(Dr. Thokchom Meinya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4043LS(S3)—03.02.2017.