1
THE TRIBUNALS REFORMS (RA TIONALISATION AND
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 2021
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952, the Customs Act, 1962, the Airports
Authority of India Act, 1994, the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the Protection of Plant
Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001 and certain other Acts.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation and Conditions
of Service) Act, 2021.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 19 of 2021
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
10

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "notified date" means the date appointed by the Central Government under
sub-section (2) of section 1;
(b) "Schedule" means the Schedule appended to this Act.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS  TO THE CINEMATOGRAPH  ACT, 1952
3. In the Cinematograph Act, 1952,—
 (a) in section 2, clause (h) shall be omitted;
(b) in section 5C,—
(i) for the word "Tribunal", at both the places where it occurs, the words
"High Court" shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
(c) sections 5D and 5DD shall be omitted;
(d) in section 6, the words "or, as the case may be, decided by the Tribunal (but
not including any proceeding in respect of any matter which is pending before the
Tribunal)" shall be omitted;
(e) in sections 7A and 7C, for the word "Tribunal", wherever it occurs, the
words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(f) in sections 7D, 7E and 7F, the words "the Tribunal,", wherever they occur,
shall be omitted;
(g) in section 8, in sub-section (2), clauses (h), (i), (j) and (k) shall be omitted.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS  TO THE COPYRIGHT  ACT, 1957
4. In the Copyright Act, 1957,—
(a) in section 2,—
(i) clause (aa) shall be omitted;
(ii) clause ( fa) shall be re-lettered as clause ( faa) and before the
clause (faa) as so re-lettered, the following clause shall be inserted namely:
'(fa) "Commercial Court", for the purposes of any State, means a
Commercial Court constituted under section 3, or the Commercial Division
of a High Court constituted under section 4 of the Commercial Courts
Act, 2015;';
(iii) for clause (u), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(u) "prescribed" means,—
(A) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed
by rules made by the High  Court; and
(B) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act’;
(b) in section 6,—
(i) for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the words
"Commercial Court" shall be substituted;
(ii) the words "constituted under section 11 whose decision thereon
shall be final" shall be omitted;
(c) in Chapter II, in the Chapter heading, the words "AND APPELLATE BOARD"
shall be omitted;
(d) sections 11 and 12 shall be omitted;
Definitions.
Amendment
of Act 37 of
1952.
Amendment
of Act 14 of
1957.
4  of  2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(e) in sections 19A, 23, 31, 31A, 31B, 31C, 31D, 32, 32A and 33A, for the words
"Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the words "Commercial Court" shall be
substituted;
( f ) in section 50, for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the
words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(g) in section 53A,—
(i) for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the words
"Commercial Court" shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), the words "and the decision of the Appellate Board
in this behalf shall be final" shall be omitted;
(h) in section 54, for the words "Appellate Board", the words "Commercial
Court" shall be substituted;
(i) for section 72, the following section shall be substituted,—
 "72. ( 1) Any person aggrieved by any final decision or order of the
Registrar of Copyrights may, within three months from the date of the order or
decision, appeal to the High Court.
(2) Every such appeal shall be heard by a single Judge of the High Court:
Provided that any such Judge may, if he so thinks fit, refer the appeal at
any stage of the proceeding to a Bench of the High Court.
(3) Where an appeal is heard by a single Judge, a further appeal shall lie
to a Bench of the High Court within three months from the date of decision or
order of the single Judge.
(4) In calculating the period of three months provided for an appeal under
this section, the time taken in granting a certified copy of the order or record of
the decision appealed against shall be excluded.";
(j) in sections 74 and 75, the words "and the Appellate Board", wherever they
occur, shall be omitted;
(k) in section 77,  the words "and every member of the Appellate Board" shall be
omitted;
(l) in section 78, in sub-section (2),—
(i) clauses (cA) and (ccB) shall be omitted;
 (ii) in clause (f), the words "and the Appellate Board" shall be omitted.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENTS  TO THE CUSTOMS  ACT, 1962
5. In the Customs Act, 1962,—
(a) in section 28E, clauses (ba), (f) and (g) shall be omitted;
(b) in section 28EA, the proviso shall be omitted;
(c) in section 28F, sub-section (1) shall be omitted;
(d) in section 28KA,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words "Appellate Authority", at both the
places where they occur, the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
Appeals
against orders
of Registrar of
Copyrights.
Amendment
of Act 52 of
1962.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(e) in section 28L, the words "or Appellate Authority", wherever they occur,
shall be omitted;
(f) in section 28M,—
(i) in the marginal heading, the words "and Appellate Authority" shall be
omitted;
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
CHAPTER V
AMENDMENTS  TO THE PATENTS ACT, 1970
6. In the Patents Act, 1970,—
(a) in section 2, in sub-section (1),—
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (u), sub-clause (B) shall be omitted;
(b) in section 52, the words  "Appellate Board or", wherever they occur, shall be
omitted;
(c) in section 58,—
(i) the words "the Appellate Board or", wherever they occur, shall be
omitted;
(ii) the words "as the case may be" shall be omitted;
(d) in section 59, the words "the Appellate Board or" shall be omitted;
(e) in section 64, the words "by the Appellate Board or" shall be omitted;
(f) in section 71, for the words "Appellate Board" and "Board", wherever they
occur, the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(g) in section 76, the words "or Appellate Board" shall be omitted;
(h) in section 113,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(A) the words "the Appellate Board or", wherever they occur, shall
be omitted;
(B) the words "as the case may be" shall be omitted;
(ii) in sub-section  (3), the words "or the Appellate Board" shall be omitted;
 (i) in Chapter XIX, for the Chapter heading, the Chapter heading "APPEALS"
shall be substituted;
 (j) sections 116 and 117 shall be omitted;
 (k) in section 117A, for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the
words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(l) sections 117B, 117C and 117D shall be omitted;
 (m) in section 117E, for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the
words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(n) sections 117F, 117G and 117H shall be omitted;
(o) in section 151,—
(A) in sub-section ( 1), the words "or the Appellate Board", at both the
places where they occur, shall be omitted;
Amendment
of Act 39 of
1970.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(B) in sub-section (3), for the words "the Appellate Board or the courts,
as the case may be", the words "the courts" shall be substituted;
(p) in section 159, in sub-section ( 2), clauses ( xiia), (xiib) and ( xiic) shall be
omitted.
CHAPTER VI
AMENDMENTS  TO THE AIRPORT AUTHORITY  OF INDIA ACT, 1994
7. In the Airports Authority of  India Act, 1994,—
(a) in section 28A, clause (e) shall be omitted;
 (b) in section 28E, for the word "Tribunal", at both the places where it occurs,
the words "Central Government" shall be substituted;
(c) sections 28-I, 28J and 28JA shall be omitted;
(d) in section 28K,-—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(A) for the words "Tribunal in such form as may be prescribed", the
words "High Court shall be substituted;
(B) in the proviso, for the word "Tribunal" the words "High Court"
shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) shall be omitted;
(e) section 28L shall be omitted;
(f) in section 28M, the words "or the Tribunal" shall be omitted;
(g) in section 28N, in sub-section (2), for the word "Tribunal", the words "High
Court" shall be substituted;
(h) in section 33, the words "or the Chairperson of the Tribunal" shall be omitted;
(i) in section 41, in sub-section (2), clauses (gvi), (gvii), (gviii) and (gix) shall be
omitted.
CHAPTER VII
AMENDMENTS  TO THE TRADE MARKS ACT, 1999
8. In the Trade Marks Act, 1999,—
(a) in section 2, in sub-section (1),—
(i) clauses (a), (d), (f), (k), (n), (ze) and (zf) shall be omitted;
(ii) for clause (s), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(s) “prescribed” means,—
(i) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed
by rules made by the High Court; and
(ii) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act;’;
(b) in section 10, for the word “tribunal”, the words "Registrar or the High Court,
as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(c) in section 26, for the word “tribunal”, the words "Registrar or the High Court,
as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(d) in section 46, in sub-section (3), for the word “tribunal”, the words "Registrar
or the High Court, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
Amendment
of Act 55 of
1994.
Amendment
of Act 47 of
1999.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(e) in section 47,—
(i) for the words “Appellate Board”, at both the places where it occurs, the
words “High Court” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the word “tribunal”, wherever it occurs, the words “Registrar or the
High Court, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(f) in section 55, in sub-section (1), for the word “tribunal”, the words "Registrar
or the High Court, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(g) in section 57,—
(i) for the words “Appellate Board”, wherever it occurs, the words
“High Court” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the word “tribunal”, wherever it occurs, the words “Registrar
or the High Court, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(h) in section 71, in sub-section (3), for the word “tribunal”, the words "Registrar
or the High Court, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(i) in Chapter XI, for the Chapter heading, the Chapter heading "APPEALS"
shall be substituted;
(j) sections 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 89A and 90 shall be omitted;
(k) in section 91,  for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the
words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(l) sections 92 and 93 shall be omitted;
(m) for section 94, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"94. On ceasing to hold the office, the erstwhile Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson or other Members, shall not appear before the Registrar.";
(n) sections 95 and 96 shall be omitted;
(o) in section 97, for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the
words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(p) in section 98, for the words "Appellate Board" and "Board", wherever they
occur, the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(q) sections 99 and 100 shall be omitted;
(r) in section 113,
(i) for the words "Appellate Board", at both the places where they occur,
the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the word "tribunal" the words "Registrar or the High Court, as the
case may be," shall be substituted;
(s) in section 123, the words "and every Member of the Appellate Board" shall
be omitted;
(t) in sections 124 and 125, for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they
occur, the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(u) in section 130, the words "the Appellate Board or" shall be omitted;
(v) in section 141, for the words "Appellate Board", at both the places where
they occur, the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(w) in section 144, for the word "tribunal", the words "Registrar or the High
Court, as the cvase may be shall be substituted;
(x) in section 157, in sub-section (2),—
(i) clauses (xxxi) and (xxxii) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (xxxiii), for the words "Appellate Board", the words "High
Court" shall be substituted.
Bar to appear
before
Registrar.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
CHAPTER VIII
AMENDMENTS  TO THE GEOGRAPHICAL  INDICATIONS  OF GOODS (REGISTRATION  AND
PROTECTION) ACT, 1999
9. In the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999,—
(a) in section 2, in sub-section (1), clauses (a) and (p) shall be omitted;
(b) in section 19, for the word "tribunal",  the words "Registrar or the High
Court, as the case may be," shall be substituted;
(c) in section 23, for the words "and before the Appellate Board before which",
the words "before whom" shall be substituted;
(d) in section 27,—
(i) for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the words
"High Court" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the word "tribunal", wherever it occurs, the words "Registrar or
the High Court, as the case may be," shall be substituted;
(e) in Chapter VII, for the Chapter heading, the Chapter heading "APPEALS"
shall be substituted;
(f) in section 31,—
(i) for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the words
"High Court" shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
(g) sections 32 and 33 shall be omitted;
(h) in sections 34 and 35, for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they
occur, the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(i) section 36 shall be omitted;
(j) in section 48,—
(i) for the words "Appellate Board", at both the places where they ocur,
the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the word "tribunal", the words "Registrar or the High Court, as the
case may be," shall be substituted;
 (k) in sections 57 and 58, for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they
occur, the words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(l) in section 63, the words "the Appellate Board or" shall be omitted;
(m) in section 72, for the words "Appellate Board", wherever they occur, the
words "High Court" shall be substituted;
(n) in section 75, for the word "tribunal", the words "Registrar or the High
Court, as the case may be," shall be substituted;
(o) in section 87, in sub-section (2), clause (n) shall be omitted.
CHAPTER IX
AMENDMENTS  TO THE PROTECTION  OF PLANT VARIETIES  AND FARMERS ’ RIGHTS  ACT, 2001
10. In the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001,—
(a) in section 2,—
(i) clauses (d), (n) and  (o) shall be omitted;
(ii) for clause (q), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(q) "prescribed" means,—
(A) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules
made by the High Court; and
Amendment
of Act 53 of
2001.
Amendment
of Act 48 of
1999.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

8
(B) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act;';
(iii) clauses (y) and (z) shall be omitted;
(b) in section 44, the words "or the Tribunal" shall be omitted;
(c) in Chapter VIII, for the Chapter heading, the Chapter heading "APPEALS"
shall be substituted;
(d) sections 54 and 55 shall be omitted;
(e) in section 56,—
(i) for the word "Tribunal", wherever it occurs, the words "High Court"
shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
(f) in section 57,—
(i) for the word "Tribunal", wherever it occurs, the words "High Court"
shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-section (5) shall be omitted;
(g) sections 58 and 59 shall be omitted;
(h) in section 89, the words "or the Tribunal" shall be omitted.
CHAPTER X
AMENDMENTS  TO THE CONTROL  OF NA TIONAL HIGHWAYS (LAND AND TRAFFIC ) ACT, 2002
11. In the Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002,—
(a) in section 2,—
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(da) "Court" means the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction
in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original
civil jurisdiction;';
(iii) clause (l) shall be omitted;
(b) in Chapter II, in the Chapter heading, the words "AND TRIBUNALS, ETC."
shall be omitted;
(c) section 5 shall be omitted;
 (d) for section 14, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"14. An appeal from any order passed, or any action taken, excluding
issuance or serving of notice under  sections 26, 27, 28, 36, 37 and 38 by the
Highway Administration or an officer authorised on its behalf, as the case may
be, shall lie to the Court.";
(e) sections 15 and 16 shall be omitted;
(f) in section 17, for the word "Tribunal", at both the places where it occurs, the
word "Court" shall be substituted;
(g) section 18 shall be omitted;
(h) in section 19, for the word "Tribunal", at both the places where it occurs, the
word "Court" shall be substituted;
(i) section 40 shall be omitted;
(j) in section 41,—
Amendment
of Act 13 of
2003.
Appeals.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(i) the words "or every order passed or decision made on appeal under
this Act by the Tribunal" shall be omitted;
(ii) the words "or Tribunal" shall be omitted;
(k) in section 50, in sub-section (2), clause (f) shall be omitted.
CHAPTER XI
AMENDMENTS  TO THE FINANCE  ACT, 2017
12. In the Finance Act, 2017 (hereinafter refered to as the Finance Act),—
(i) for section 184, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
'184. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for
the qualifications, appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and
the other conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal as
specified in the Eighth Schedule:
Provided that a person who has not completed the age of fifty years shall not be
eligible for appointment as a Chairperson or Member:
Provided further that the allowances and benefits so payable shall be to the
extent as are admissible to a Central Government officer holding the post carrying the
same pay:
Provided also that where the Chairperson or Member takes a house on rent, he
may be reimbursed a house rent subject to such limits and conditions as may be
provided by rules.
(2) The Chairperson and Members of a Tribunal shall be appointed by the
Central Government on the recommendation of a Search-cum-Selection Committee
(hereinafter referred to as the Committee) constituted under sub-section ( 3), in such
manner as the Central Government may, by rules, provide.
(3) The Search-cum-Selection Committee shall consist of—
(a) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of Supreme Court nominated by
him—Chairperson of the Committee;
(b) two Secretaries nominated by the Government of India—Members;
(c) one Member, who—
(i) in case of appointment of a Chairperson of a Tribunal, shall be
the outgoing Chairperson of the Tribunal; or
(ii) in case of appointment of a Member of a Tribunal, shall be the
sitting Chairperson of the Tribunal; or
(iii ) in case of the Chairperson of the Tribunal seeking
re-appointment, shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired
Chief Justice of a High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India:
Provided that, in the following cases, such Member shall always be
a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High
Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India, namely:—
(i) Industrial Tribunal constituted by the Central Government
under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
(ii) Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals constituted under the
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions
Act, 1993;
Amendment
of Act 7 of
2017.
Qualifications,
appointment,
etc., of
Chairperson
and Members
of Tribunal.
51 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(iii ) Tribunals where the Chairperson or the outgoing
Chairperson, as the case may be, of the Tribunal is not a retired
Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice or Judge of a
High Court; and
(iv) such other Tribunals as may be notified by the Central
Government in consultation with the Chairperson of the
Search-cum-Selection Committee of that Tribunal; and
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or Department
under which the Tribunal is constituted or established—Member-Secretary.
(4) The Chairperson of the Committee shall have the casting vote.
(5) The Member-Secretary of the Committee shall not have any vote.
(6) The Committee shall determine its procedure for making its recommendations.
(7) The Central Government shall take a decision on the recommendations of
the Committee preferably within three months from the date on which the Committee
makes its recommendations to the Government.
(8) No appointment shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or absence
in the Committee.
(9) The Chairperson and Member of a Tribunal shall be eligible for re-appointment
in accordance with the provisions of this section:
Provided that in making such re-appointment, preference shall be given to the
service rendered by such person.
(10) The Central Government shall, on the recommendation of the Committee,
remove from office, in such manner as may be provided by rules, any Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such a
Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest:
Provided that where a Member is proposed to be removed on any ground
specified in clauses (b) to (e), he shall be informed of the charges against him
and given an opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression—
(i) "Tribunal" means a Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or Authority as specified in
column (2) of the Eighth Schedule;
(ii) "Chairperson" includes Chairperson, Chairman, President and Presiding
Officer of a Tribunal;
(iii) "Member" includes Vice-Chairman, Vice-Chairperson, Vice-President,
Account Member, Administrative Member, Judicial Member, Expert Member, Law
Member, Revenue Member and Technical Member, as the case may be, of a Tribunal.;
(ii) in section 184 as so substituted, after sub-section ( 10) and before the
Explanation, the following sub-section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have
been inserted which effect from the 26th May, 2017, namely:—
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
"(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order, or decree of
any court or any law for the time being in force,—
(i) the Chairperson of a Tribunal shall hold office for a term of four years
or till he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier;
(ii) the Member of a Tribunal shall hold office for a term of four years or
till he attains the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier:
Provided that where a Chairperson or Member is appointed between the
26th day of May, 2017 and the notified date and the term of his office or the age
of retirement specified in the order of appointment issued by the Central
Government is greater than that which is specified in this section, then,
notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the term of office or age of
retirement or both, as the case may be, of the Chairperson or Member shall be as
specified in the order of appointment subject to a maximum term of office of five
years".
13. Section 186 of the Finance Act shall be renumbered as sub-section ( 1) thereof,
and after sub-section ( 1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(2)  Subject to the provisions of sections 184 and 185, neither the salary and
allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, Chairman, Vice-Chairman, President, Vice-President, Presiding
Officer or Member of the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, other
Authority may be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.".
14. In the Finance Act, in the Eighth Schedule,—
(i) items 10, 12, 14 and 15 shall be omitted;
(ii) for item 16, the following item shall be substituted, namely:—
(1) (2) (3)
"16. National Consumer Disputes The Consumer Protection Act, 2019
Redressal Commission (35 of 2019)"
15.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,
any person appointed as the Chairperson or Chairman or President or Presiding Officer or
Vice-Chairperson or Vice-Chairman or Vice-President or Member of the Tribunal, Appellate
Tribunal, or as the case may be, other Authority specified in the Schedule and holding
office as such immediately before the notified date, shall on and from the notified date,
cease to hold such office, and he shall be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding
three months' pay and allowances for the premature termination of term of his office or of
any contract of service.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other
Authorities specified in the Schedule appointed on deputation, before the notified date,
shall, on and from the notified date, stand reverted to their parent cadre, Ministry or
Department.
(3) Any appeal, application or proceeding pending before the Tribunal, Appellate
Tribunal or other Authority specified in the Schedule, other than those pending before the
Authority for Advance Rulings under the Income-tax Act, 1961, before the notified date,
shall stand transferred to the Court before which it would have been filed had this Act been
in force on the date of filing of such appeal or application or initiation of the proceeding, and
the Court may proceed to deal with such cases from the stage at which it stood before such
transfer, or from any earlier stage, or de novo, as the Court may deem fit.
Amendment of
section 186.
Amendment
of Eighth
Schedule.
Transitional
provisions.
43 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

12
(4) The balance of all monies received by, or advanced to, the Tribunal, Appellate
Tribunal or other Authority specified in the Schedule and not spent by it before the notified
date, shall, on and from the notified date, stand transferred to the Central Government.
(5) All property of whatever kind owned by, or vested in, the Tribunal, Appellate
Tribunal or other Authority specified in the Schedule before the notified date, shall stand
transferred to, on and from the notified date, and shall vest in the Central Government.
16. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for removing the difficulty:
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years
from the notified date.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10

13
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 15)
1. Appellate Tribunal under the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952).
2. Authority for Advance Rulings under the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).
3. Airport Appellate Tribunal under the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994
(55 of 1994).
4. Intellectual Property Appellate Board under the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999).
5. Plant Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal under the Protection of Plant Varieties
and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001 (53 of 2001).

14
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With a view to streamline tribunals, the Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation and
Conditions of Service) Bill, 2021 is proposed to be enacted to abolish certain tribunals and
authorities and to provide a mechanism for filing appeal directly to the commercial court or
the High Court, as the case may be.
2.   The Government of India began the process of rationalisation of tribunals in 2015.
By the Finance Act, 2017, seven tribunals were abolished or merged based on functional
similarity and their total number was reduced from 26 to 19. The rationale followed in the first
phase was to close down tribunals which were not necessary and merge tribunals with
similar functions.
3. In the second phase, analysis of data of the last three years has shown that tribunals
in several sectors have not necessarily led to faster justice delivery and they are also at a
considerable expense to the exchequer. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has deprecated the
practice of tribunalisation of justice and filing of appeals directly from tribunals to the Supreme
Court in many of its judgements, including S.P Sampath Kumar versus Union of India (1987)
1 SCC 124, L. Chandra Kumar versus Union of India (1997) 3 SCC 261, Roger Mathew versus
South Indian Bank Limited (2020) 6 SCC 1 and Madras Bar Association versus Union of India
and another (2020) SCC Online SC 962. Therefore, further streamlining of tribunals is
considered necessary as it would save considerable expense to the exchequer and at the
same time, lead to speedy delivery of justice. Accordingly, it is proposed to abolish some
more tribunals and transfer the jurisdiction exercised by them to the High Court.
 4. The tribunals that are proposed to be abolished in this phase are of the kind which
handle cases in which public at large is not a litigant or those which neither take away any
significant workload from High Courts which otherwise would have adjudicated such cases
nor provide speedy disposal. Many cases do not achieve finality at the level of tribunals and
are litigated further till High Courts and Supreme Court, especially those with significant
implications. Therefore, these tribunals only add to another additional layer of litigation.
Having separate tribunal requires administrative action in terms of filling up of posts and
such other matters, and any delay in such action further delays disposal of cases. Reducing
the number of tribunals shall not only be beneficial for the public at large, reduce the burden
on public exchequer, but also address the issue of shortage of supporting staff of tribunals
and infrastructure.
5. The Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation and Conditions of Service) Bill, 2021,
inter-alia, seeks to give effect to aforesaid proposal and provide for the following, namely:—
(i) abolition of tribunals or authorities under various Acts by amending the
Cinematograph Act, 1952, the Copyrights Act, 1957, the Customs Act, 1962, the Patents
Act, 1970, the Airport Authority of India Act, 1994, the Trade Marks Act, 1999, the
Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999, the
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001, the Control of National
Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002 and the Finance Act, 2017;
(ii) transfer of all cases pending before such tribunals or authorities to the
Commercial Court or the High Court, as the case may be, on the appointed date;
(iii)  the Chairman and Members of such tribunals shall cease to hold office and
they shall be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three months' pay and
allowances for the premature termination of term of their office or of any contract of
service.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN.
The 11th  February, 2021.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952
(37 OF 1952)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(h) Tribunal means the Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 5D.
* * * * *
5C. (1) Any person applying for a certificate in respect of a film who is aggrieved
by any order of the Board—
(a) refusing to grant a certificate; or
(b) granting only an "A" certificate; or
(c) granting only a "S" certificate; or
(d) granting only a "UA" certificate; or
(e) directing the applicant to carry out any excisions or modifications,
may, within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filling the appeal within the aforesaid period of thirty days, allow
such appeal to be admitted within a further period of thirty days.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be made by a petition in writing and shall be
accompanied by a brief statement of the reasons for the order appealed against where such
statement has been furnished to the appellant and by such fees, not exceeding rupees one
thousand, as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
5D. (1) For the purpose of hearing appeals against any order of the Board under
section 5C, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Appellate Tribunal.
(2) The head office of the Tribunal shall be at New Delhi or at such other place as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) Such Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and not more than four other members
appointed by the Central Government.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman of the Tribunal
unless he is a retired Judge of a High Court, or is a person who is qualified to be a Judge of
a High Court.
(5) The Central Government may appoint such persons who, in its opinion, are qualified
to judge the effect of films on the public, to be members of the Tribunal.
(6) The Chairman of the Tribunal shall receive such salary and allowances as may be
determined by the Central Government and the members shall receive such allowances or
fees as may be prescribed.
(7) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Central Government may
appoint a Secretary and such other employees as it may think necessary for the efficient
performance of the functions of the Tribunal under this Act.
Definitions.
Appeals.
Constitution
of Appellate
Tribunal.
15

16
(8) The Secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be prescribed after consultation with the Chairman of the
Tribunal.
(9) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and members of, and
the Secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
(10) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.
(11) The Tribunal may, after making such inquiry into the matter as it considers
necessary, and after giving the appellant and the Board an opportunity of being heard in the
matter, make such order in relation to a film as it thinks fit and the Board shall dispose of the
matter in conformity with such order.
5DD. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment,
term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairman and other members of the Appellate Tribunal appointed
after the commencement of Part  XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall be
governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:
Provided that the Chairman and member appointed before the commencement of Part
XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall  continue to be governed by the provisions
of the Act and the rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance
Act, 2017 had not come into force.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the Central Government may,
of its own motion, at any stage, call for the record of any proceeding in relation to any film
which is pending before, or has been decided by, the Board, or, as the case may be, decided
by the Tribunal (but not including any proceeding in respect of any matter which is pending
before the Tribunal) and after such inquiry, into the matter as it considers necessary, make
such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit, and the Board shall dispose of the matter in
conformity with such order:
Provided that no such order shall be made prejudicially affecting any person applying
for a certificate or to whom a certificate has been granted, as the case may be, except after
giving him an opportunity for representing his views in the matter:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall require the Central Government
to disclose any fact which it considers to be against public interest to disclose.
(2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on it under sub-section (1), the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that—
(a) a film which has been granted a certificate shall be deemed to be an uncertified
film in the whole or any part of India; or
(b) a film which has been granted a "U" certificate or a "UA" certificate or a "S"
certificate shall be deemed to be a film in respect of which an "A" certificate has been
granted; or
(c) the exhibition of any film be suspended for such period as may be specified
in the direction:
Provided that no direction issued under clause (c) shall remain in force for more
than two months from the date of the notification.
Qualifications,
terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairman and
Member.
Revisonal
powers of the
Central
Government.
7 of 2017.
7 of 2017.

17
(3) No action shall be taken under clause ( a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2) except
after giving an opportunity to the person concerned for representing his views in the
matter.
(4) During the period in which a film remains suspended under clause ( c) of
sub-section (2), the film shall be deemed to be an uncertified film.
* * * * *
7A. (1) Where a film in respect of which no certificate has been granted under this
Act is exhibited, or a film certified as suitable for public exhibition restricted to adults is
exhibited to any person who is not an adult or a film is exhibited in contravention of any of
the other provisions contained in this Act or of any order made by the Central Government,
the Tribunal or the Board in the exercise of any of the powers conferred on it, any police
officer may,  enter any place in which he has reason to believe that the film has been or is
being or is likely to be exhibited, search it and seize the film.
(2) All searches under this Act shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches.
* * * * *
7C. For the purpose of exercising any of the powers conferred on it by this Act, the
Central Government , the Tribunal or the Board may require any film to be exhibited before
it or before any person or authority  specified by it in this behalf.
7D. No act or proceeding of the Tribunal, the Board or of any advisory panel shall be
deemed to be invalid by reason only of a vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the
Tribunal, the Board or panel, as the case may be.
7E. All members of the Tribunal, the Board and of any advisory panel shall, when
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, be deemed to
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
7F. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, the
Tribunal, the Board, advisory panel or any officer or member of the Central Government, the
Tribunal, the Board or advisory panel, as the case may be, in respect of anything which is
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
8. (1) * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules
made under this section may provide for—
* * * * *
(h) the allowances or fees payable to the members of the Tribunal;
(i) the powers and duties of the Secretary to, and other employees of, the
Tribunal;
(j) the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and members of,
and the Secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal;
(k) the fees payable by the appellant to the Tribunal in respect of an appeal;
* * * * *
2 of 1974.
Power to direct
exhibition of
films for
examination.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceeding.
Members of the
Board and
advisory panels
to be public
servants.
Bar of legal
proceedings.
Power to
make rules.
Power of
seizure.
45 of 1860.

18
EXTRACTS FROM THE COPY RIGHT ACT, 1957
(14 OF 1957)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(aa) "Appellate Board" means the Appellate Board referred to in section 11;
* * * * *
(u) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
6. If any question arises—
(a) whether a work has been published or as to the date on which a work was
published for the purposes of Chapter V , or
(b) whether the term of copyright for any work is shorter in any other country
than that provided in respect of that work under this Act, it shall be referred to the
Appellate Board constituted under section 11 whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided that if in the opinion of the Appellate Board, the issue of copies or
communication to the public referred to in section 3 was of an insignificant nature, it
shall not be deemed to be publication for the purposes of that section.
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
C
OPYRIGHT OFFICE AND A BOARD
* * * * *
11. ( 1) The Appellate Board established under section 83 of the Trade Marks
Act, 1999 shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance
Act, 2017, be the Appellate Board for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Board
shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.
12. (1) The Appellate Board shall, subject to any rules that may be made under this
Act, have power to regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of places and times of its
sittings:
Provided that the Appellate Board shall ordinarily hear any proceeding instituted
before it under this Act within the zone in which, at the time of the institution of the
proceeding, the person instituting the proceeding actually and voluntarily resides or carries
on business or personally works for gain.
Explanation.—In this sub-section "zone" means a zone specified in section 15 of the
States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
(2) The Appellate Board may exercise and discharge its powers and functions through
Benches constituted by the Chairman of the Appellate Board from amongst its members:
Provided that, if the Chairman is of opinion that any matter of importance is required
to be heard by a larger bench, he may refer the matter to a special bench consisting of five
members.
* * * * *
(5) No member of the Appellate Board shall take part in any proceedings before the
Board in respect of any matter in which he has a personal interest.
Interpretation.
Certain
disputes to be
decided by
Appellate
Board.
Appellate
Board.
Powers and
procedure of
Appellate
Board.
47 of 1999.
7 of 2017.
37 of 1956.

19
(6) No act done or proceeding taken by the Appellate Board under this Act shall be
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the
constitution of, the Board.
(7) The Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and all proceedings before the
Board shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and
228 of the Indian Penal Code.
* * * * *
19A. (1) If an assignee fails to make sufficient exercise of the rights assigned to him,
and such failure is not attributable to any act or omission of the assignor, then, the Appellate
Board may, on receipt of a complaint from the assignor and after holding such inquiry as it
may deem necessary, revoke such assignment.
(2) If any dispute arises with respect to the assignment of any copyright, the Appellate
Board may, on receipt of a complaint from the aggrieved party and after holding such
inquiry as it considers necessary, pass such order as it may deem fit including an order for
the recovery of any royalty payable:
Provided that the Appellate Board shall not pass any order under this sub-section to
revoke the assignment unless it is satisfied that the terms of assignment are harsh to the
assignor in case the assignor is also the author:
Provided further that, pending the disposal of an application for revocation of
assignment under this sub-section, the  Appellate Board may pass such order, as it deems
fit regarding implementation of the terms and conditions of assignment including any
consideration to be paid for the enjoyment of the rights assigned:
Provided also that, no order of revocation of assignment under this sub-section, shall
be made within a period of five years from the date of such assignment.
(3) Every complaint received under sub-section (2) shall be dealt with by the Appellate
Board as far as possible and efforts shall be made to pass the final order in the matter within
a period of six months from the date of receipt of the complaint and any delay in compliance
of the same, the Appellate Board shall record the reasons thereof.
* * * * *
23. (1) In the case of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work (other than a
photograph), which is published anonymously or pseudonymously, copyright shall subsist
until  sixty years from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the
work is first published:
Provided that where the identity of the author is disclosed before the expiry of the
said period, copyright shall subsist until sixty years from the beginning of the calendar year
next following the year in which the author dies.
(2) In sub-section ( 1), references to the author shall, in the case of an anonymous
work of joint horship, be construed,—
(a) where the identity of one of the authors is disclosed, as references to that
author;
(b) where the identity of more authors than one is disclosed, as references to
the author who dies last from amongst such authors.
(3) In sub-section ( 1), references to the author shall, in the case of a pseudonyms
work of joint authorship, be construed,—
(a) where the names of one or more (but not all) of the authors are pseudonyms
and his or their identity is not disclosed, as references to the author whose name is
not a pseudonym, or, if the names of two or more of the authors are not pseudonyms,
as references to such of those authors who dies last;
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
Disputes with
respect to
assignment of
copyright.
Term of
copyright in
anonymous
and
pseudonymous
works.

20
(b) where the names of one or more (but not all) of the authors are pseudonyms
and the identity of one or more of them is disclosed, as references to the author who
dies last from amongst the authors whose names are not pseudonyms and the authors
whose names are pseudonyms and are disclosed; and
(c) where the names of all the authors are pseudonyms and the identity of one
of them is disclosed, as references to the author whose identity is disclosed or if the
identity of two or more of such authors is disclosed, as references to such of those
authors who dies last.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the identity of an author shall
be deemed to have been disclosed, if either the identity of the author is disclosed
publicly by both the author and the publisher or is otherwise established to the
satisfaction of the Appellate Board  by that author.
* * * * *
31. (1) If at any time during the term of copyright in any work which has been
published or performed in public, a complaint is made to the Appellate Board that the owner
of copyright in the work—
(a) has refused to republish or allow the republication of the work or has refused
to allow the performance in public of the work, and by reason of such refusal the work
is withheld from the public; or
(b) has refused to allow communication to the public by  broadcast of such
work or in the case  a sound recording the work recorded in such sound recording, on
terms which the complainant considers reasonable, the Appellate Board, after giving
to the owner of the copyright in the work a reasonable opportunity of being heard and
after holding such inquiry as it may deem necessary, may, if it is satisfied that the
grounds for such refusal are not reasonable, direct the Registrar of Copyrights to
grant to the complainant a licence to republish the work, perform the work in public or
communicate the work to the public by broadcast, as the case may be, subject to
payment to the owner of the copyright of such compensation and subject to such
other terms and conditions as the Appellate Board may determine; and thereupon the
Registrar of Copyrights shall grant the licence to such person or persons who, in the
opinion of the Appellate Board, is or are qualified to do so in accordance with the
directions of the Appellate Board, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
31A. (1) Where, in the case of any unpublished work or any work published or
communicated to the public and the work is withheld from the public in India, the author is
dead or unknown or cannot be traced, or the owner of the copyright in such work cannot be
found, any person may apply to the  Appellate Board for a licence to publish or communicate
to the public such work or a translation thereof in any language.
(2) Before making an application under sub-section (1), the applicant shall publish his
proposal in one issue of a daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the
major part of the country and where the application is for the publication of a translation in
any language, also in one issue of any daily newspaper in that language.
(3) Every such application shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall
be accompanied with a copy of the advertisement issued under sub-section ( 2) and such
fee as may be prescribed.
(4) Where an application is made to the Appellate Board under this section, it may
after holding such inquiry as may be prescribed, direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant
to the applicant a licence to publish the work or a translation thereof in the language
mentioned in the application subject to the payment of such royalty and subject to such
Compulsory
licence in
works
withheld from
public.
Compulsory
licence in
unpublished or
published
works.

21
other terms and conditions as the Appellate Board may determine, and thereupon the
Registrar of Copyrights shall grant the licence to the applicant in accordance with the
direction of the Appellate Board.
(5) Where a licence is granted under this section, the Registrar of Copyrights may, by
order, direct the applicant to deposit the amount of the royalty determined by the Appellate
Board in the public account of India or in any other account specified by the Appellate
Board so as to enable the owner of the copyright or, as the case may be, his heirs, executors
or the legal representatives to claim such royalty at any time.
(6) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, in the case of a work
referred to in sub-section (1), if the original author is dead, the Central Government may, if
it considers that the publication of the work is desirable in the national interest, require the
heirs, executors or legal representatives of the author to publish such work within such
period as may be specified by it.
(7) Where any work is not published within the period specified by the Central
Government under sub-section (6), the  Appellate Board may, on an application made by
any person for permission to publish the work and after hearing the parties concerned,
permit such publication on payment of such royalty as the Appellate Board may, in the
circumstances of such case, determine in the prescribed manner.
31B. (1) Any person working for the benefit of persons with disability on a profit
basis or for business may apply to the  Appellate Board, in such form and manner and
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed, for a compulsory licence to published any
work in which copyright subsists for the benefit of such persons, in a case to which clause
(zb) of sub-section (1) of section 52 does not apply and the Appellate Board shall dispose
of such application within a period of two months from the receipt of the application.
(2) The Appellate Board may, on receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1),
inquire, or direct such inquiry as it considers necessary to establish the credentials of the
applicant and satisfy itself that the application has been made in good faith.
(3) If the Appellate Board is satisfied, after giving to the owners of rights in the work
a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after holding such inquiry as it may deem
necessary, that a compulsory licence needs to be issued to make the work available to the
disabled, it may direct the Registrar of Copyright to grant to the applicant such a licence to
publish the work.
(4) Every compulsory licence issued under this section shall specify the means and
format of publication, the period during which the compulsory licence may be exercised
and, in the case of issue of copies, the number of copies that may be issued including the
rate or royalty:
Provided that where the Appellate Board issued such a compulsory licence it may, on
a further application and after giving reasonable opportunity to the owners of rights, extend
the period of such compulsory licence and allow the issue of more copies as it may deem fit.
31C. (1) Any person desirous of making a cover version, being a sound recording in
respect of any literary, dramatic or musical work, where sound recordings of that work have
been made by or with the licence or consent of the owner of the right in the work, may do so
subject to the provisions of this section:
Provided that such sound recordings shall be in the same medium as the last recording,
unless the medium of the last recording is no longer in current commercial use.
(2) The person making the sound recordings shall give prior notice of his intention to
make the sound recordings in the manner as may be prescribed, and provide in advance
copies of all covers or labels with which the sound recordings are to be sold, and pay in
advance, to the owner of rights in each work royalties in respect of all copies to be made by
him, at the rate fixed by the  Appellate Board in this behalf:
Compulsory
licence for
benefit of
disabled.
Statutory
licence for
cover versions.

22
Provided that such sound recordings shall not be sold or issued in any form of
packaging or with any cover or label which is likely to mislead or confuse the public as to
their identity, and in particular shall not contain the name or depict in any way any performer
of an earlier sound recording of the same work or any cinematograph film in which sound
recording was incorporated and, further, shall state on the cover that it is a cover version
made under this section.
(3) The person making such sound recordings shall not make any alteration in the
literary or musical work which has not been made previously by or with the consent of the
owner of rights, or which is not technically necessary for the purpose of making the sound
recordings:
Provided that such sound recordings shall not be made until the expiration of five calendar
years after the end of the year in which the first sound recordings of the work was made.
(4) One royalty in respect of such sound recordings shall be paid for a minimum of
fifty thousand copies of each work during each calendar year in which copies of it are made:
Provided that the Appellate Board may, by general order, fix a lower minimum in
respect of works in a particular language or dialect having regard to the potential circulation
of such works.
(5) The person making such sound recordings shall maintain such registers and
books of account in respect thereof, including full details of existing stock as may be
prescribed and shall allow the owner of rights or his duly authorised agent or representative
to inspect all records and books of account relating to such sound recording:
Provided that if on a complaint brought before the  Appellate Board to the effect that
the owner of rights has not been paid in full for any sound recordings purporting to be made
in pursuance of this section, the Appellate Board is, prima facie, satisfied that the complaint
is genuine, it may pass an order ex parte directing the person making the sound recording
to cease from making further copies and, after holding such inquiry as it considers necessary,
make such further order as it may deem fit, including an order for payment of royalty.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section "cover version" means a sound
recording made in accordance with this section.
31D. (1) Any broadcasting organisation desirous of communicating to the public by
way of a broadcast or by way of performance of a literary or musical work and sound
recording which has already been published may do so subject to the provisions of this
section.
(2) The broadcasting organisation shall give prior notice, in such manner as may be
prescribed, of its intention to broadcast the work stating the duration and territorial coverage
of the broadcast, and shall pay to the owner of rights in each work royalties in the manner
and at the rate fixed by the Appellate Board.
(3) The rates of royalties for radio broadcasting shall be different from television
broadcasting and the Appellate Board shall fix separate rates for radio broadcasting and
television broadcasting.
(4) In fixing the manner and the rate of royalty under sub-section ( 2), the Appellate
Board may require the broadcasting organisation to pay an advance to the owners of rights.
(5) The names of the authors of the principal performers of the work shall, except in
case of the broadcasting organisation communicating such work by way of performance,
be announced with the broadcast.
(6) No fresh alteration to any literary or musical work, which is not technically necessary
for the purpose of broadcasting, other than shortening the work for convenience of
broadcast, shall be made without the consent of the owners of rights.
(7) The broadcasting organisation shall—
(a) maintain such records and books of account, and render to the owners of
rights such reports and accounts; and
Statutory
licence for
broadcasting
of literary and
musical works
and sound
recording.

23
(b) allow the owner of rights or his duly authorised agent or representative to
inspect all records and books of account relating to such broadcast, in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(8) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any licence issued or
any agreement entered into before the commencement of the Copyright (Amendment)
Act, 2012.
* * * * *
32. (1) Any person may apply to the Appellate Board for a licence to produce and
publish a translation of a literary or dramatic work in any language after a period of seven
years from the first publication of the work.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), any person may apply
to the Appellate Board for a licence to produce and publish a translation, in printed or
analogous forms of reproduction, of a literary or dramatic work, other than an Indian work,
in any language in general use in India after a period of three years from the first publication
of such work, if such translation is required for the purposes of teaching, scholarship or
research:
Provided that where such translation is in a language not in general use in any
developed country, such application may be made after a period of one year from such
publication.
(2) Every application under this section shall be made in such form as may be prescribed
and shall state the proposed retail price of a copy of the translation of the work.
(3) Every applicant for a licence under this section shall, along with his application,
deposit with the Registrar of Copyrights such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) Where an application is made to the Appellate Board under this section, it may,
after holding such inquiry as may be prescribed, grant to the applicant a licence, not being
an exclusive licence, to produce and publish a translation of the work in the language
mentioned in the application—
(i) subject to the condition that the applicant shall pay to the owner of the
copyright in the work royalties in respect of copies of the translation of the work sold
to the public, calculated at such rate as the Appellate Board may, in the circumstances
of each case, determine in the prescribed manner; and
(ii) where such licence is granted on an application under sub-section ( 1A),
subject also to the condition that the licence shall not extend to the export of copies
of the translation of the work outside India and every copy of such translation shall
contain a notice in the language of such translation that the copy is available for
distribution only in India:
Provided that nothing in clause (ii) shall apply to the export by Government or
any authority under the Government of copies of such translation in a language other
than English, French or Spanish or to any country if—
(1) such copies are sent to citizens of India residing outside India or to
any association of such citizens outside India; or
(2) such copies are meant to be used for purposes of teaching, scholarship
or research and not for any commercial purpose; and
(3) in either case, the permission for such export has been given by the
Government of that country:
Provided further that no licence under this section shall be granted,
unless—
(a) a translation of the work in the language mentioned in the
application has not been published by the owner of the copyright in the
27 of 2012.
Licence to
produce and
published
translations.

24
work or any person authorised by him,  within seven years or three years
or one year, as the case may be, of the first publication of the work, or if a
translation has been so published, it has been out of print;
(b) the applicant has proved to the satisfaction of the Appellate
Board that he had requested and had been denied authorisation by the
owner of the copyright to produce and publish such translation, or that
he was, after due diligence on his part, unable to find the owner of the
copyright;
(c) where the applicant was unable to find the owner of the copyright,
he had sent a copy of his request for such authorisation by registered air
mail post to the publisher whose name appears from the work, and in the
case of an application for a licence under sub-section ( 1), not less than
two months before such application;
(cc) a period of six months in the case of an application under
sub-section (1A) (not being an application under the proviso thereto), or
nine months in the case of an application under the proviso to that sub-
section, has elapsed from the date of making the request under clause (b)
of this proviso or where a copy of the request has been sent under clause
(c) of this proviso, from the date of sending of such copy, and the
translation of the work in the language mentioned in the application has
not been published by the owner of the copyright in the work or any
person authorised by him within the said period of six months or nine
months, as the case may be;
(ccc) in the case of any application made under sub-section (1A)—
(i) the name of the author and the title of the particular edition
of the work proposed to be translated are printed on all the copies
of the translation;
(ii) if the work is composed mainly of illustrations, the
provisions of section 32A are also complied with;
(d) the Appellate Board is satisfied that the applicant is competent
to produce and publish a correct translation of the work and possesses
the means to pay to the owner of the copyright the royalties payable to
him under this section;
(e) the author has not withdrawn from circulation copies of the
work; and
(f) an opportunity of being heard is given, wherever practicable, to
the owner of the copyright in the work.
(4) Any broadcasting authority may apply to the Appellate Board for a
licence to produce and publish the translation of—
(a) a work referred to in sub-section (1A) and published in printed
or analogous forms of reproduction; or
(b) any text incorporated in audio-visual fixations prepared and
published solely for the purpose of systematic instructional activities,
for broadcasting such translation for the purposes of teaching or for the
dissemination of the results of specialised, technical or scientific research to
the experts in any particular field.
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) to (4) in so far as they are relatable
to an application under sub-section (1A), shall, with the necessary modifications,

25
apply to the grant of a licence under sub-section (5) and such licence shall not
also be granted unless—
(a) the translation is made from a work lawfully acquired;
(b) the broadcast is made through the medium of sound and visual
recordings;
(c) such recording has been lawfully and exclusively made for the
purpose of broadcasting in India by the applicant or by other broadcasting
agency; and
(d) the translation and the broadcasting of such translation are not
used for any commercial purposes.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "developed country" means a country which is not a
developing country;
(b) "developing country" means a country which is for the
time being regarded as such in conformity with the practice of the
General Assembly of the United Nations;
(c) "purposes of research" does not include purposes of
industrial research, or purposes of research by bodies corporate
(not being bodies corporate owned or controlled by Government)
or other association or body of persons for commercial purposes;
(d) "purposes of teaching, research or scholarship"
includes—
(i) purposes of instructional activity at all levels in
educational, institutions, including Schools, Colleges,
Universities and tutorial institutions; and
(ii) purposes of all other types of organised educational
activity.
32A. (1) Where, after the expiration of the relevant period from the date of the first
publication of an edition of a literary, scientific or artistic work,—
(a) the copies of such edition are not made available in India; or
(b) such copies have not been put on sale in India for a period of six months,
to the public, or in connection with systematic instructional activities at a price reasonably
related to that normally charged in India for comparable works by the owner of the right of
reproduction or by any person authorised by him in this behalf, any person may apply to
the Appellate Board for a licence to reproduce and publish such work in printed or analogous
forms of reproduction at the price at which such edition is sold or at a lower price for the
purposes of systematic instructional activities.
(2) Every such application shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall
state the proposed retail price of a copy of the work to be reproduced.
(3) Every applicant for a licence under this section shall, along with his application,
deposit with the Registrar of Copyrights such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) Where an application is made to the Appellate Board under this section, it may,
after holding such inquiry as may be prescribed, grant to the applicant a licence, not being
Licence to
reproduce and
publish works
for certain
purposes.

26
an exclusive licence, to produce and publish a reproduction of the work mentioned in the
application subject to the conditions that,—
(i) the applicant shall pay to the owner of the copyright in the work royalties in
respect of copies of the reproduction of the work sold to the public, calculated at
such rate as the Appellate Board may, in the circumstances of each case, determine in
the prescribed manner;
(ii) a licence granted under this section shall not extend to the export of copies
of the reproduction of the work outside India and every copy of such reproduction
shall contain a notice that the copy is available for distribution only in India:
Provided that no such licence shall be granted unless—
(a) the applicant has proved to the satisfaction of the Appellate Board
that he had requested and had been denied authorisation by the owner of the
copyright in the work to reproduce and publish such work or that he was, after
due diligence on his part, unable to find such owner;
(b) where the applicant was unable to find the owner of the copyright, he
had sent a copy of his request for such authorisation by registered air-mail post
to the publisher whose name appears from the work not less than three months
before the application for the licence;
(c) the Appellate Board is satisfied that the applicant is competent to
reproduce and publish an accurate reproduction of the work and possesses the
means to pay the owner of the copyright the royalties payable to him under this
section;
(d) the applicant undertakes to reproduce and publish the work at such
price as may be fixed by the  Appellate Board, being a price reasonably related
to the price normally charged in India for works of the same standard on the
same or similar subjects;
(e) a period of six months in the case of an application for the reproduction
and publication of any work of natural science, physical science, mathematics
or technology, or a period of three months in the case of an application for the
reproduction and publication of any other work, has elapsed from the date of
making the request under clause ( a), or where a copy of the request has been
sent under clause (b), from the date of sending of a copy, and a reproduction of
the work has not been published by the owner of the copyright in the work or
any person authorised by him within the said period of six months or, three
months, as the case may be;
(f) the name of the author and the title of the particular edition of the work
proposed to be reproduced are printed on all the copies of the reproduction;
(g) the author has not withdrawn from circulation copies of the work; and
(h) an opportunity of being heard is given, wherever practicable, to the
owner of the copyright in the work.
(5) No licence to reproduce and publish the translation of a work shall be granted
under this section unless such translation has been published by the owner of the right of
translation or any person authorised by him and the translation is not in a language in
general use in India.
(6) The provisions of this section shall also apply to the reproduction and publication,
or translation into a language in general use in India, of any text incorporated in audio-
visual fixations prepared and published solely for the purpose of systematic instructional
activities.

27
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, "relevant period", in relation to any
work, means a period of—
(a) seven years from the date of the first publication of that work, where the
application is for the reproduction and publication of any work of, or relating to,
fiction, poetry, drama, music or art;
(b) three years from the date of the first publication of that work, where the
application is for the reproduction and publication of any work of, or relating to,
natural science, physical science, mathematics or technology; and
(c) five years from the date of the first publication of that work, in any other
case.
* * * * *
33A. (1) Every copyright society shall publish its tariff scheme in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) Any person who is aggrieved by the tariff scheme may appeal to the Appellate
Board and the Board may, it satisfied after holding such inquiry as it may consider necessary,
make such orders as may be required to remove any unreasonable element, anomaly or
inconsistency therein:
Provided that the aggrieved person shall pay to the copyright society any fee as may
be prescribed that has fallen due before making an appeal to the Appellate Board and shall
continue to pay such fee until the appeal is decided, and the Board shall not issue any order
staying the collection of such fee pending disposal of the appeal:
Provided further that the Appellate Board may after hearing the parties fix an interim
tariff and direct the aggrieved parties to make the payment according pending disposal of
the appeal.
* * * * *
50. The Appellate Board, on application of the Registrar of Copyrights or of any
person aggrieved, shall order the rectification of the Register of Copyrights by—
(a) the making of any entry wrongly omitted to be made in the register, or
(b) the expunging of any entry wrongly made in, or remaining on, the register, or
(c) the correction of any error or defect in the register.
* * * * *
53A. (1) In the case of resale for a price exceeding ten thousand rupees, of the original
copy of a painting, sculpture or drawing, or of the original manuscript of a literary or
dramatic work or musical work, the author of such work if he was the first owner of rights
under section 17 or his legal heirs shall, notwithstanding any assignment of copyright in
such work, have a right to share in the resale price of such original copy or manuscript in
accordance with the provisions of this section:
Provided that such right shall cease to exist on the expiration of the term of copyright
in the work.
(2) The share referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such as the Appellate Board may
fix and the decision of the  Appellate Board in this behalf shall be final:
Provided that the  Appellate Board may fix different shares for different classes of
work:
Provided further that in no case shall the share exceed ten percent, of the resale price.
Tariff Scheme
by  copyright
societies.
Rectification
of Register by
Appellate
Board.
Resale share
right in
original
copies.

28
(3) If any dispute arises regarding the right conferred by this section, it shall be
referred to the Appellate Board whose decision shall be final.
CHAPTER XII
CIVIL REMEDIES
54. For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
expression "owner of copyright" shall include—
(a) an exclusive licensee;
(b) in the case of an anonymous or pseudonymous literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work, the publisher of the work, until the identity of the author or, in the case
of an anonymous work of joint authorship, or a work of joint authorship published
under names all of which are pseudonyms, the identity of any of the authors, is
disclosed publicly by the author and the publisher or is otherwise establishment to
the satisfaction of the Appellate Board by that author or his legal representatives.
* * * * *
72. (1) Any person aggrieved by any final decision or order of the Registrar of
Copyrights may, within three months from the date of the order or decision, appeal to the
Appellate Board.
(2) Any person aggrieved by any final decision or order of the Appellate Board, not
being a decision or order made in an appeal under sub-section (1), may, within three months
from the date of such decision or order, appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction
the appellant actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for
gain:
Provided that no such appeal shall lie against a decision of the Appellate Board under
section 6.
(3) In calculating the period of three months provided for an appeal under this section,
the time taken in granting a certified copy of the order or record of the decision appealed
against shall be excluded.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
74. The Registrar of Copyrights and the Appellate Board shall have the powers of a
civil court when trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the
following matters, namely, —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local
limits of the jurisdiction of the Registrar of Copyrights or the Appellate Board, as the case
may be, shall be the limits of the territory of India.
Definition.
Appeals
against orders
of Registrar of
Copyrights
and  Appellate
Board.
Registrar of
Copyrights
and Appellate
Board to
possess certain
powers of civil
courts.
5 of 1908.

29
75. Every order made by the Registrar of Copyrights or the Appellate Board under
this Act for the payment of any money or by the High Court in any appeal against any such
order of the Appellate Board shall, on a certificate issued by the Registrar of Copyrights, the
Appellate Board or the Registrar of the High Court, as the case may be, be deemed to be a
decree of a civil court and shall be executable in the same manner as a decree of such court.
* * * * *
77. Every officer appointed under this Act and every member of the Appellate Board
shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.
78. (1) * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
Central Government may make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
* * * * *
(cA) the form and manner in which an organisation may apply to the Appellate
Board for compulsory licence for disabled and the fee which may accompany such
application under sub-section 31B;
* * * * *
(ccB) the fee which is to be paid before filing an appeal to the Appellate Board
under sub-section (2) of section 33A;
* * * * *
(f) the matters in respect of which the Registrar of Copyrights and the Appellate
Board shall have powers of a civil court;
* * * * *
79. (1) * * * *
(2) Where any person has, before the commencement of this Act, taken any action
whereby he has incurred any expenditure or liabilities in connection with the reproduction
or performance of any work in a manner which at the time was lawful or for the purpose of
or with a view to the reproduction or performance of a work at a time when such reproduction
or performance would, but for the coming into force of this Act, have been lawful, nothing
in this section shall diminish or prejudice any rights or interests arising from or in connection
with such action which are subsisting and valuable at the said date, unless the person who,
by virtue of this Act, becomes entitled to restrain such reproduction or performance, agrees
to pay such compensation as, failing agreement, may be determined by the  Appellate
Board.
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
* * * * *
CHAPTER VB
ADV ANCE RULINGS
28E. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
Orders for
payment of
money passed
by Registrar of
Copyrights
and Appellate
Board to be
executable as a
decree.
Certain
persons to be
public servants.
Power to
make rules.
Repeals,
savings and
transitional
provisions.
45 of 1860.
Definitions.

30
(ba) Appellate Authority means the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted
under section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
* * * * *
(f) Chairperson means the Chairperson of the Appellate Authority;
(g) Member means a Member of the Appellate Authority and includes the
Chairperson; and
* * * * *
28EA. (1) The Board may, for the purposes of giving advance rulings under this Act,
by notification, appoint an officer of the rank of Principal Commissioner of Customs or
Commissioner of Customs to function as a Customs Authority for Advance Rulings:
Provided that till the date of appointment of the Customs Authority for Advance
Rulings, the existing Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under section 245-O of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 shall continue to be the Authority for giving advance rulings for the
purposes of this Act.
* * * * *
28F. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority for Advance Rulings
constituted under section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961  shall be Appellate Authority
for deciding appeal under this Chapter and the said Appellate Authority shall exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act:
Provided that the Member from the Indian Revenue Service (Customs and Central
Excise), who is qualified to be a Member of the Board, shall be the revenue Member of the
Appellate Authority for the purposes of this Act.
* * * * *
28KA. (1) Any officer authorised by the Board, by notification, or the applicant may
file an appeal to the Appellate Authority against any ruling or order passed by the Authority,
within sixty days from the date of the communication of such ruling or order, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that where the Appellate Authority is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the appeal within the period so specified, it
may allow a further period of thirty days for filing such appeal.
(2) The provisions of sections 28-I and 28J shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the
appeal under this section.
28L. (1) The Authority or Appellate Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising
its powers regarding discovery and inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath, issuing commissions and compelling production of books of
account and other records, have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
(2) The Authority or Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of section 195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, and every proceeding before the Authority or Appellate Authority shall be
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the
purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code.
28M. (1) The Authority shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
(2) The Appellate Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have
power to regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers
and authority under this Act.
* * * * *
Customs
Authority for
Advance
Rulings.
Authority for
advance
rulings.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Appeal.
Powers of
Authority or
Appellate
Authority.
Procedure for
Authority and
Appellate
Authority.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

31
EXTRACTS FROM THE PATENTS ACT, 1970
(39 OF 1970)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Appellate Board" means the Appellate Board referred to in section 116;
* * * * *
(u) "prescribed" means,—
(A) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules
made by the High Court;
(B) in relation to proceedings before the Appellate Board, prescribed by
rules made by the Appellate Board; and
* * * * *
52. (1) Where the patent has been revoked under section 64 on the ground that the
patent was obtained wrongfully and in contravention of the rights of the petitioner or any
person under or through whom he claims, or, where in a petition for revocation, the Appellate
Board or court, instead of revoking the patent, directs the complete specification to be amended
by the exclusion of a claim or claims in consequence of a finding that the invention covered by
such claim or claims had been obtained from the petitioner, the Appellate Board or court may,
by order passed in the same proceeding, permit the grant to the petitioner of the whole or such
part of the invention which the Appellate Board or court finds has been wrongfully obtained
by the patentee, in lieu of the patent so revoked or is excluded by amendment.
(2) Where any such order is passed, the Controller shall, on request by the petitioner
made in the prescribed manner grant to him:—
(i) in cases where the Appellate Board or court permits the whole of the patent
to be granted, a new patent bearing the same date and number as the patent revoked;
(ii) in cases where the Appellate Board or court permits a part only of the patent
to be granted, a new patent for such part bearing the same date as the patent revoked
and numbered in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Controller may, as a condition of such grant, require the
petitioner to file a new and complete specification to the satisfaction of the Controller
describing and claiming that part of the invention for which the patent is to be granted.
* * * * *
58. (1) In any proceeding before the Appellate Board or the High Court for the revocation
of a patent, the Appellate Board or the High Court, as the case may be, may, subject to the
provisions contained in section 59, allow the patentee to amend his complete specification in
such manner and subject to such terms as to costs, advertisement or otherwise, as the
Appellate Board or the High Court may think fit, and if in any proceedings for revocation the
Appellate Board or the High Court decides that the patent is invalid, it may allow the
specification to be amended under this section instead of revoking the patent.
(2) Where an application for an order under this section is made to the Appellate
Board or the High Court, the applicant shall give notice of the application to the Controller,
and the Controller shall be entitled to appear and be heard, and shall appear if so directed by
the Appellate Board or the High Court.
(3) Copies of all orders of the Appellate Board or the High Court allowing the patentee
to amend the specification shall be transmitted by the Appellate Board or the High Court to
the Controller who shall, on receipt thereof, cause an entry thereof and reference thereto to
be made in the register.
59. (1) * * * *
(2) Where after the date of grant of patent any amendment of the specification or any
other documents related thereto is allowed by the Controller or by the Appellate Board or the
High Court, as the case may be,—
Definitions
and Interpre-
tation.
Grant of
patent to true
and first
inventor
where it has
been obtained
by another in
fraud of him.
Amendment of
specification
before
Appellate
Board or High
Court.
Supplemen-
tary provi-
sions as   to
amendment of
application or
specification.

32
(a) the amendment shall for all purposes be deemed to form part of the
specification along with other documents related thereto;
(b) the fact that the specification or any other documents related thereto has
been amended shall be published as expeditiously as possible; and
(c) the right of the applicant or patentee to make amendment shall not be called
in question except on the ground of fraud;
* * * * *
64. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, a patent whether granted
before or after the commencement of this Act, may, be revoked on a petition of any person
interested or of the Central Government by the Appellate Board or on a counter-claim in a
suit for infringement of the patent by the High Court on any of the following grounds, that
is to say—
* * * * *
71. (1) The Appellate Board may, on the application of any person aggrieved—
(a) by the absence or omission from the register of any entry; or
(b) by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause; or
(c) by any entry wrongly remaining on the register; or
(d) by any error or defect in any entry in the register,
make such order for the making, variation or deletion, of any entry therein as it may think fit.
(2) In any proceeding under this section the Appellate Board may decide any question
that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the rectification of the
register.
(3) Notice of any application to the Appellate Board under this section shall be given
in the prescribed manner to the Controller who shall be entitled to appear and be heard on
the application, and shall appear if so directed by the Board.
(4) Any order of the Appellate Board under this section rectifying the register shall
direct that notice of the rectification shall be served upon the Controller in the prescribed
manner who shall upon receipt of such notice rectify the register accordingly.
* * * * *
76. An officer or employee in the patent office shall not, except when required or
authorised by this Act or under a direction in writing of the Central Government or Appellate
Board or the Controller or by order of a court,—
(a) furnish information on a matter which is being, or has been, or dealt with
under this Act;
(b) prepare or assist in the preparation of a document required or permitted by
or under this Act to be lodged in the patent office; or
(c) conduct a search in the records of the patent office.
* * * * *
113. (1) If in any proceedings before the Appellate Board or a High Court for the
revocation of a patent under section 64 and section 104, as the case may be, the validity of
any claim of a specification is contested and that claim is found by the Appellate Board or
the High Court to be valid, the Appellate Board or the High Court may certify that the
validity of that claim was contested in those proceedings and was upheld.
* * * * *
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as authorising the courts or
the Appellate Board hearing appeals from decrees or orders in suits for infringement or
petitions for revocation, as the case may be, to pass orders for costs on the scale referred to
therein.
* * * * *
Revocation
of Power
patents.
Rectification
of register by
Appellate
Board.
Officers and
employees
not to furnish
information,
etc.
Certificate of
validity of
specification
and costs of
subsequent
suits for
infringement
thereof.

33
CHAPTER XIX
APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE BOARD
116. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Board established under
section 83 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 shall be the Appellate Board for the purposes of
this Act and the said Appellate Board shall exercise the jurisdiction, power and authority
conferred on it by or under this Act:
Provided that the Technical Member of the Appellate Board for the purposes of this
Act shall have the qualifications specified in sub-section ( 2).
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member for the
purposes of this Act unless he—
(a) has, at least five years, held the post of Controller under this Act or has
exercised the functions of the Controller under this Act for at least five years; or
(b) has been for at least ten years, functioned as a Registered Patent Agent and
possesses a degree in engineering or technology or a masters degree in science from
any University established under law for the time being in force or equivalent.
117. (1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Appellate Board in the discharge of its
functions under this Act and provide the Appellate Board with such officers and other
employees as it may think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the Appellate Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the Chairman of the Appellate Board in the
manner as may be prescribed.
117A. (1) * * * * *
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Appellate Board from any decision, order or direction of
the Controller of Central Government under section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18,
section 19, section 20, sub-section ( 4) of section 25, section 28, section 51, section 54,
section 57, section 60, section 61, section 63, section 66, sub-section ( 3) of section 69,
section 78, sub-sections (1) to (5) of section 84, section 85, section 88, section 91, section
92 and section 94.
* * * * *
(4) Every appeal shall be made within three months from the date of the decision,
order or direction, as the case may be, of the Controller or the Central Government or within
such further time as the Appellate Board may, in accordance with the rules made by it, allow.
117B. The provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6) of section 84, section 87, section 92,
section 95 and section 96 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, shall apply to the Appellate Board
in the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the discharge of its
functions under the Trade Marks Act, 1999.
117C. No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, exercise any jurisdiction,
powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub-section (2) of section 117A
or section 117D.
117D. (1) An application for revocation of a patent before the Appellate Board under
section 64 and an application for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board
under section 71 shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to a
patent under this Act shall be communicated to the Controller by the Board and the Controller
shall give effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so directed, amend the entries in,
or rectify, the register in accordance with such order.
117E. (1) The Controller shall have the right to appear and be heard—
(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief sought
includes alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to
the practice of the patent office is raised;
Appellate
Board.
Staff of
Appellate
Board.
Appeals to
Appellate
Board.
47 of 1999.
Procedure and
powers of
Appellate
Board.
Bar of
jurisdiction of
courts, etc.
Procedure for
application for
rectification,
etc., before
Appellate
Board.
47 of 1999.
Appearance of
Controller in
legal proceed-
ings.

34
(b) in any appeal to the Appellate Board from an order of the Controller on an
application for grant of a patent—
(i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the
Controller or is accepted by him subject to any amendments, modifications,
conditions or limitations, or
(ii) which has been opposed and the Controller considers that his
appearance is necessary in the public interest, and the Controller shall appear
in any case if so directed by the Appellate Board.
(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Controller may, in lieu of
appearing, submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he thinks
proper of the proceedings before him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any
decision given by him or of the practice of the patent office in like cases, or of other matters
relevant to the issues and within his knowledge as the Controller may deem it necessary,
and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.
117F. In all proceedings under this Act before the Appellate Board, the costs of the
Controller shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the Controller shall not be ordered to
pay the costs of any of the parties.
117G . All cases of appeals against any order or decision of the Controller and all cases
pertaining to revocation of patent other than on a counter-claim in a suit for infringement
and rectification of register pending before any High Court, shall be transferred to the
Appellate Board from such date as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette and the Appellate Board may proceed with the matter either de novo or from the
stage it was so transferred.
117H. The Appellate Board may make rules consistent with this Act as to the conduct
and procedure in respect of all proceedings before it under this Act.
* * * * *
151. (1) Every order of the High Court or the Appellate Board on a petition for
revocation, including orders granting certificates of validity of any claim, shall be transmitted
by the High Court or the Appellate Board to the Controller who shall cause an entry thereof
and reference thereto to be made in the register.
* * * * *
(3) The provisions of sub-sections ( 1) and (2) shall also apply to the court to which
appeals are preferred against decisions of the Appellate Board or the courts, as the case
may be, referred to in those sub-sections.
* * * * *
159. (1) * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government
may make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(xiia) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers
and other employees of the Appellate Board under sub-section (2) and the manner in
which the officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their
functions under sub-section ( 3) of section 117;
(xiib) the form of making an appeal, manner of verification and the fees payable
under sub-section (3) of section 117A;
(xiic) the form in which, and the particulars to be included in, the application to
the Appellate Board under sub-section (1) of section 117D;
* * * * *
Costs of
Controller in
proceedings
Before
Appellate
Board.
Transfer of
pending
proceedings to
Appellate
Board.
Power of
Appellate
Board to make
rules.
Transmission
of orders of
courts to
Controller.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

35
EXTRACTS FROM THE AIR PORT AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1994
( 55 OF 1994)
28A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(e) "Tribunal" means the Airport Appellate Tribunal established under sub-
section (1) of section 28-I;
* * * * *
28E. (1) Where any persons have been evicted from any airport premises under
section 28D, the eviction officer may, after giving ten days notice to the persons from whom
possession of the airport premises has been taken and after publishing the notice in at least
one newspaper having circulation in the locality, remove or cause to be removed or dispose
of by public auction any property remaining on such premises.
(2) Where any property is sold under sub-section (1), the sale proceeds thereof shall,
after deducting the expenses of the sale and the amount, if any, due to the Central Government
or the corporate authority on account of arrears of rent or damages or costs, be paid to such
person or persons as may appear to the eviction officer to be entitled to the same:
Provided that where the eviction officer is unable to decide as to the person or
persons to whom the balance of the amount is payable or as to the apportionment of the
same, he may refer such dispute to the Tribunal and the decision of the Tribunal thereon
shall be final.
* * * * *
28-I. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Tribunal, to be known as the Airport Appellate Tribunal, to exercise the jurisdiction,
powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act and the Control of National
Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002.
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson (hereinafter referred to in this Act, as
the Chairperson of the Tribunal).
(3) The head office of the Tribunal shall be at New Delhi:
Provided that the Tribunal may hold its sittings at other places as the Chairperson of
the Tribunal may decide, from time to time, having taken into consideration the convenience
to decide the appeals before the Tribunal.
(4) The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall be appointed by the Central Government
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
(5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairperson of the Tribunal
unless he is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court.
(6) The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall hold office as such for a term of three years
from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty-two
years, whichever is earlier.
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the Chairperson of the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson of the Tribunal shall be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.
Definitions.
Disposal of
property left
on airport
premises by
unauthorised
occupants.
Establishment
of Tribunal.
13 of 2002.

36
28J. (1) The Chairperson of the Tribunal may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson of the Tribunal shall, unless he is permitted by the
Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry
of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as
his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the
earliest.
(2) The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall not be removed from his office except by an
order made by the Central Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity
after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson had been
informed of the charges against him and given reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of those charges.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation
of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson of the Tribunal.
28JA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment,
term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson of the Tribunal appointed after the commencement
of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall be governed by the provisions of
section 184 of that Act:
Provided that the Chairperson appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of
Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance
Act, 2017 had not come into force.
28K. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the eviction officer under this Chapter
may, within fifteen days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal in such
form as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period
of fifteen days, but not after the period of thirty days from the date aforesaid, if it is satisfied
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Tribunal shall, after giving the
appellant and the eviction officer an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it
thinks fit.
(3) The Tribunal shall dispose of the appeal within thirty days from the date of filing
the appeal:
Provided that the Tribunal may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, dispose of the
appeal within a further period of fifteen days.
(4) An order of the Tribunal passed under sub-section ( 2) shall be executable as a
decree of a civil court and for executing the same the Tribunal shall send a copy thereof to
the civil court having jurisdiction which shall execute the same, as expeditiously as may be
possible, as if such order is a decree passed by that court.
(5) On and from the date from which any jurisdiction, powers and authority becomes
exercisable under this Chapter by the Tribunal in relation to any matter, no court (except the
Supreme Court under article 136 and the High Court under articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution shall have, or be entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in
relation to such matter.
28L. (1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice, and, subject to
the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, the
Tribunal shall have power to lay down and regulate its own procedure including the fixing
of places and times of its inquiry and deciding whether to sit in public or in private.
Resignation
and removal.
Qualifications,
terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson. 7 of 2017.
Appeals to
Tribunal.
7 of 2017.
Procedure and
powers of
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.

37
(2) The Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions under
this Chapter, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the
Indian Penal Code and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes
of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
28M. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made by an eviction officer or
the Tribunal under this Chapter shall be final and shall not be called in question in any suit,
application, execution or other proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court
or other authority in respect of any action taken or intended to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Chapter.
28N. (1) Whoever, unlawfully occupies any airport premises, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six years and with fine.
(2) Whoever fails to comply with any order of the eviction officer or the Tribunal
under this Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years and with fine.
(3) If any person who has been evicted from any airport premises under this Chapter
again occupies the premises without authority for such occupation, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine.
(4) The court may, while convicting a person under sub-section (3), make an order for
evicting that person summarily and he shall be liable to such eviction without prejudice to
any other action that may be taken under this Chapter.
* * * * *
33. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Authority or
any member or any officer or other employee of the Authority or the Chairperson of the
Tribunal for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of
this Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder or for any damage sustained by any
aircraft or vehicle in consequence of any defect in any of the airports, civil enclaves,
heliports, airstrips, aeronautical communication stations or other things belonging to or
under the control of the Authority.
* * * * *
41. (1) * * * *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for—
* * * * *
(gvi) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson of the Tribunal under sub-section ( 7) of section 28-I;
(gvii) the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the
Chairperson of the Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 28J;
(gviii) the form of appeal under sub-section (1) of section 28k;
(gix) any other matter under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 28L;
* * * * *
5 of 1908.
Finality of
orders.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Offences
under this
Chapter.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
make rules.

38
EXTRACTS FROM AMENDMENTS OF THE TRADE MARKS ACT, 1999
(47 OF 1999)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Appellate Board" means the Appellate Board established under
section 83;
* * * * *
(d) "Bench" means a Bench of the Appellate Board;
* * * * *
(f) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Appellate Board;
* * * * *
(k) "Judicial Member" means a Member of the Appellate Board appointed as
such under this Act, and includes the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson;
* * * * *
(n) "Member" means a Judicial Member or a Technical Member of the Appellate
Board and includes the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson;
* * * * *
(s) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(ze) "tribunal" means the Registrar or, as the case may be, the Appellate Board,
before which the proceeding concerned is pending;
(zf) "Vice-Chairperson" means a Vice-Chairperson of the Appellate Board;
10. (1) A trade mark may be limited wholly or in part to any combination of colours and
any such limitation shall be taken into consideration by the tribunal having to decide on the
distinctive character of the trade mark.
(2) So far as a trade mark is registered without limitation of colour, it shall be deemed
to be registered for all colours.
* * * * *
26. Where a trade mark has been removed from the register for failure to pay the fee
for renewal, it shall nevertheless, for the purpose of any application for the registration of
another trade mark during one year, next after the date of the removal, be deemed to be a
trade mark already on the register, unless the tribunal is satisfied either—
(a) that there has been no bona fide trade use of the trade mark which has been
removed during the two years immediately preceding its removal; or
(b) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from the use of the
trade mark which is the subject of the application for registration by reason of any
previous use of the trade mark which has been removed.
*  * * * *
46. (1) * * * * *
(3) The tribunal may, in a case to which sub-section (1) applies, require the applicant
to give security for the costs of any proceedings relating to any opposition or appeal, and
in default of such security being duly given, may treat the application as abandoned.
* * * * *
Definitions
and Interpre-
tation.
Effect of
removal from
register for
failure to pay
fee for
renewal.
Proposed use
of trade mark
by company
to be formed,
etc.
Limitation as
to colour.

39
47. (1) A registered trade mark may be taken off the register in respect of the goods or
services in respect of which it is registered on application made in the prescribed manner to
the Registrar or the Appellate Board by any person aggrieved on the ground either—
(a) * * * *
(b) * * * *
Provided that except where the applicant has been permitted under section 12 to
register an identical or nearly resembling trade mark in respect of the goods or services in
question, or where the tribunal is of opinion that he might properly be permitted so to
register such a trade mark, the tribunal may refuse an application under clause ( a) or
clause (b) in relation to any goods or services, if it is shown that there has been, before the
relevant date or during the relevant period, as the case may be, bona fide use of the trade
mark by any proprietor thereof for the time being in relation to—
(i) goods or services of the same description; or
(ii) goods or services associated with those goods or services of that description
being goods or services, as the case may be, in respect of which the trade mark is
registered.
(2) Where in relation to any goods or services in respect of which a trade mark is
registered—
(a) * * * *
(b) a person has been permitted under section 12 to register an identical or nearly
resembling trade mark in respect of those goods, under a registration extending to use
in relation to goods to be so sold, or otherwise traded in, or in relation to goods to be
so exported, or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in that place
or for use in that country, or the tribunal is of opinion that he might properly be
permitted so to register such a trade mark,
on application by that person in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the
Registrar, the tribunal may impose on the registration of the first-mentioned trade mark such
limitations as it thinks proper for securing that that registration shall cease to extend to such
use.
* * * * *
55. ( 1) Where under the provisions of this Act, use of a registered trade mark is
required to be proved for any purpose, the tribunal may, if and, so far as it shall think right,
accept use of a registered associated trade mark, or of the trade mark with additions or
alterations no substantially affecting its identity, as an equivalent for the use required to be
proved.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VII
R
ECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER
57. (1) On application made in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the
Registrar by any person aggrieved, the tribunal may make such order as it may think fit for
cancelling or varying the registration of a trade mark on the ground of any contravention, or
failure to observe a condition entered on the register in relation thereto.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any entry,
or by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly
Removal from
register and
imposition of
limitations on
ground of
non-use.
Use of one of
associated or
substantially
identical trade
marks
equivalent to
use of another.
Power to
cancel or vary
registration
and to rectify
the register.

40
remaining on the register, or by any error or defect in any entry in the register, may apply in
the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the tribunal may make
such order for making, expunging or varying the entry as it may think fit.
(3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide any question that
may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the rectification of the register.
(4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner
to the parties concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, make any
order referred to in sub-section (1) or sub section (2).
(5) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall direct that notice of
the rectification shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall upon
receipt of such notice rectify the register accordingly.
* * * * *
71. (1)* * * * *
(3) In dealing under the said provisions with an application under this section, the
tribunal shall have regard to the like considerations, so far as relevant, as if the application
were applications under section 18 and to any other considerations relevant to applications
under this section, including the desirability of securing that a certification trade mark shall
comprise some indication that it is a certification trade mark.
CHAPTER XI
A
PPELLATE B OARD
83. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an
Appellate Board to be known as the Intellectual Property Appellate Board to exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act and under the
Copyright Act, 1957.
84. (1) The Appellate Board shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
such number of other Members, as the Central Government may deem fit and, subject to the
other provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Appellate Board
may be exercised by Benches thereof.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial
Member and one Technical Member and shall sit at such place as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the  Chairperson—
(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial Member or
Technical Member of the Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the functions of
the Judicial Member or, as the case may be, the Technical Member, of any other
Bench;
(b) may transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench;
(c) may authorise the Vice-Chairperson, the Judicial Member or the Technical
Member appointed to one Bench to discharge also the functions of the Judicial
Member or the Technical Member, as the case may be, of another Bench.
(4) Where any Benches are constituted, the Central Government may, from time to
time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the Appellate
Board amongst the Benches and specify the matters which may be dealt with by each
Bench.
(5) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the purview of the
business allocated to a Bench, the decision of the Chairperson shall be final.
Establishment
of Appellate
Board.
Composition
of Appellate
Board.
47 of 1957.
Applications
for
Registeration
of certifica-
tion trade
marks.

41
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression
matter includes an appeal under section 91.
(6) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point
or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the Chairperson who shall either hear
the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or
more of the other Members and such point or points shall be decided according to the
opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, including those who first
heard it.
85. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the  Chairperson unless
he—
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) has, for at least two years, held the office of a Vice-Chairperson.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Vice-Chairperson, unless
he—
(a) has, for at least two years, held the office of a Judicial Member or a Technical
Member; or
(b) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in
Grade I of that Service or any higher post for at least five years.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member, unless he—
(a) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post in
Grade I of that Service for at least three years; or
(b) has, for at least ten years, held a civil judicial office.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member, unless he—
(a) has, for at least ten years, exercised functions of a tribunal under this Act or
under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, or both, and has held a post not
lower than the post of a Joint Registrar for at least five years; or
(b) has, for at least ten years, been an advocate of a proven specialised experience
in trade mark law.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 6), the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and every other Member shall be appointed by the President of India.
(6) No appointment of a person as the Chairperson shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
86. The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Members shall hold office as such for
a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains,—
(a) in the case of Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the age of sixty-five years;
and
(b) in the case of a Member, the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier.
87. (1) In the event of or any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by reasons of
his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairperson and in his absence the
senior-most Member shall act as Chairperson until the date on which a new Chairperson,
appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon
his office.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to his absence,
illness or any other cause, the Vice-Chairperson and in his absence the senior-most Member
shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson
resumes his duty.
Qualifications
 for
appointment
as Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson,
or other
Members.
Term of
office of
Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Vice-
Chairperson
or senior-most
Member to act
as Chairperson
or discharge
his functions
in certain
circumstances.
43 of 1958.

42
88. (1) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits), of the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson   and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person who, immediately
before the date of assuming office as the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member
was in service of Government, shall be deemed to have retired from service on the date on
which he enters upon office as the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member.
89. (1) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or any other Member may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the President of India, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or any other Member shall, unless
he is permitted by the President of India to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed
from his office except by an order made by the President of India on the ground of proved
misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member had been informed of the charges
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation
of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member referred
to in sub-section ( 2).
89A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of
office, salaries and allowances, resignations, removal and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Board
appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of chapter VI of the Finance Act 2017, shall
be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:
Provided that  the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members appointed before
the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be
governed by the provisions of this Act, and the rules made thereunder as if the provisions
of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017, had not come into force.
90. ( 1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Appellate Board in the discharge of its
functions and provide the Appellate Board with such officers and other employees as it
may think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the Appellate Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson in the manner as may be
prescribed.
91. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar under this Act,
or the rules made thereunder may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within three
months from the date on which the order or decision sought to be appealed against is
communicated to such person preferring the appeal.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period specified
under sub-section ( 1):
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period specified
therefor, if the appellant satisfies the Appellate Board that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within the specified period.
Salaries,
allowances and
other terms
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Resignation
and removal.
Staff of
Appellate
Board.
Appeals to
Appellate
Board.
Qualifications,
terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson
and member.
7 of 2017.
7 of 2017.

43
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Board shall be in the prescribed form and shall be
verified in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or
decision appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.
92. (1) The Appellate Board shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by principles of natural justice and
subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Appellate Board
shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of
its hearing.
(2) The Appellate Board shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) receiving evidence;
(b) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses;
(c) requisitioning any public record; and
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Any proceeding before the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196,
of the Indian Penal Code, and the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a civil court for all
the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
93. No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, exercise any jurisdiction,
powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 91.
94. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Members
shall not appear before the Appellate Board or the Registrar.
95. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any
other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay
or any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, an appeal unless—
(a) copies of such appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such
interim order are furnished to the party against whom such appeal is made or proposed
to be made; and
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter.
96. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after
hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion without such
notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any
other Bench.
97. (1) An application for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board
under section 57 shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to a
registered trade mark under this Act shall be communicated to the Registrar by the Board
and the Registrar shall give effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so directed,
amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in accordance with such order.
98. (1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear and be heard—
(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief
sought includes alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question
relating to the practice of the Trade Marks Registry is raised;
45 of 1860.
Procedure And
powers of
Appellate
Board.
Bar of
Jurisdiction of
courts, etc.
Bar to appear
before
Appellate
Board.
Conditions as
to making of
interim orders.
Power of
Chairperson
to transfer
cases from
one Bench to
another.
Procedure for
application for
rectification,
etc., before
Appellate
Board.
Appearance of
Registrar in
Legal
proceedings.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

44
(b) * * * * *
(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Registrar may, in lieu of appearing,
submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of
the proceedings before him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision
given by him affecting it, or of the practice of the Trade Marks Registry in like cases, or of
other matters relevant to the issues and within his knowledge as Registrar, and such statement
shall be evidence in the proceeding.
99. In all proceedings under this Act before the Appellate Board the costs of the
Registrar shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the Registrar shall not be ordered to pay
the costs of any of the parties.
100. All cases of appeals against any order or decision of the Registrar and all cases
pertaining to rectification of register, pending before any High Court, shall be transferred to
the Appellate Board from the date as notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette and the Appellate Board may proceed with the matter either de novo or from the
stage it was so transferred.
* * * * *
113. (1) Where the offence charged under section 103 or section 104 or section 105 is
in relation to a registered trade mark and the accused pleads that the registration of the trade
mark is invalid, the following procedure shall be followed:—
(a) If the court is satisfied that such defence is prima facie tenable, it shall not
proceed with the charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months from the
date on which the plea of the accused is recorded to enable the accused to file an
application before the Appellate Board under this Act, for the rectification of the
register on the ground that the registration is invalid.
(b) If the accused proves to the court that he has made such application within
the time so limited or within such further time as the court may for sufficient cause
allow, the further proceedings in the prosecution shall stand stayed till the disposal
of such application for rectification.
(c) If within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be
allowed by the court the accused fails to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification
of the register, the court shall proceed with the case as if the registration were valid.
(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in
sub-section (1), any application for the rectification of the register concerning the trade
mark in question on the ground of invalidity of the registration thereof has already been
properly made to and is pending before the tribunal, the court shall stay the further
proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal of the application aforesaid and shall
determine the charge against the accused in conformity with the result of the application for
rectification in so far as the complainant relies upon the registration of his mark.
* * * * *
123. Every person appointed under this Act and every Member of the Appellate
Board shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
124. (1) Where in any suit for infringement of a trade mark—
(a) the defendant pleads that registration of the plaintiff's trade mark is invalid;
or
(b) the defendant raises a defence under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section
Costs of
Registrar in
proceedings
Before
Appellate
Board.
Transfer of
pending
proceedings to
Appellate
Board.
Procedure
where
invalidity of
registration is
pleaded by
the accused.
Certain
persons to be
public servants.
Stay of
Proceedings
where the
validity of
registration of
the trade mark
is questioned,
etc.
45 of 1860.

45
30 and the plaintiff pleads the invalidity of registration of the defendant's trade mark,
the court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the court), shall,—
(i) if any proceedings for rectification of the register in relation to
the plaintiff's or defendant's trade mark are pending before the Registrar or
the Appellate Board, stay the suit pending the final disposal of such
proceedings;
(ii) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied that the
plea regarding the invalidity of the registration of the plaintiff's or defendant's
trade mark is prima facie tenable, raise an issue regarding the same and adjourn
the case for a period of three months from the date of the framing of the issue in
order to enable the party concerned to apply to the Appellate Board for
rectification of the register.
* * * * *
125. (1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered trade mark the validity of the
registration of the plaintiff's trade mark is questioned by the defendant or where in any such
suit the defendant raises a defence under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 30 and the
plaintiff questions the validity of the registration of the defendant's trade mark, the issue as
to the validity of the registration of the trade mark concerned shall be determined only on an
application for the rectification of the register and, notwithstanding anything contained in
section 47 or section 57, such application shall be made to the Appellate Board and not the
Registrar.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), where an application for rectification
of the register is made to the Registrar under section 47 or section 57, the Registrar may, if
he thinks fit, refer the application at any stage of the proceedings to the Appellate Board.
* * * * *
130. If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not being a proceeding
before the Appellate Board or a court) dies pending the proceeding, the Registrar may, on
request, and on proof to his satisfaction of the transmission of the interest of the deceased
person, substitute in the proceeding his successor in interest in his place, or, if the Registrar
is of opinion that the interest of the deceased person is sufficiently represented by the
surviving parties, permit the proceeding to continue without the substitution of his successor
in interest.
* * * * *
141. If in any legal proceeding for rectification of the register before the Appellate
Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor of the trade mark
on the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark, the Appellate Board may
grant a certificate to that effect, and if such a certificate is granted, then, in any subsequent
legal proceeding in which the said validity comes into question the said proprietor on
obtaining a final order or judgment in his favour affirming validity of the registration of the
trade mark shall, unless the said final order or judgment for sufficient reason directs otherwise,
be entitled to his full cost charges and expenses as between legal practitioner and client.
* * * * *
144. In any proceeding relating to a trade mark, the tribunal shall admit evidence of
the usages of the trade concerned and of any relevant trade mark or trade name or get up
legitimately used by other persons.
* * * * *
Trade usages,
etc., to be
taken into
consideration.
Death of
party to a
proceeding.
Certificate of
validity.
Application
for rectifica-
tion
of register to
be made to
Appellate
Board in
certain cases.

46
157. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(xxxi) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers
and other employees of the Appellate Board under sub-section (2), and the manner in
which the officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their
functions under sub-section (3) of section 90;
(xxxii) the form of making an appeal, the manner of verification and the fee
payable under sub-section (3) of section 91;
(xxxiii) the form in which and the particulars to be included in the application to
the Appellate Board under sub-section (1) of section 97;
————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF GOODS
(REGISTRATION AND PROTECTION) ACT, 1999
(48 OF 1999)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Appellate Board" means the Appellate Board established under section 83
of the Trade Marks Act, 1999;
* * * * *
(p) "tribunal" means the Registrar or, as the case may be, the Appellate Board
before which the proceeding concerned is pending.
* * * * *
19. Where a geographical indication has been removed from the register for failure to
pay the fee for renewal, it shall nevertheless, for the purpose of any application for the
registration of another geographical indication during one year, 11 next after the date of
removal, be deemed to be a geographical indication already on the register, unless the
tribunal is satisfied either—
(a) that there has been no bona fide trade use of the geographical indication which
has been removed within the two years immediately preceding its removal; or
(b) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from the use of the
geographical indication which is the subject of the application for registration by reason of
any previous use of the geographical indication which has been removed.
* * * * *
23. (1) In all legal proceedings relating to a geographical indication, the certificate of
registration granted in this regard by the Registrar under this Act, being a copy of the entry
in the register under the seal of the Geographical Indications Registry, shall be prima facie
evidence of the validity thereof and be admissible in all courts and before the Appellate
Board without further proof or production of the original.
* * * * *
Power to
make rules.
Definitions
and
Interpretation.
Registration
to be prima
facie evidence
of validity.
47 of 1999.
Effect of
removal from
register for
failure to pay
fee for
renewal.

47
CHAPTER VI
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER
27. (1) On application made in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the
Registrar by any person aggrieved, the tribunal may make such order as it may think fit for
cancelling or varying the registration of a geographical indication or authorised user on the
ground of any contravention, or failure to observe the condition entered on the register in
relation thereto.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any entry,
or by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly
remaining on the register, or by any error or defect in any entry in the register, may apply in
the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the tribunal may make
such order for making, expunging or varying the entry as it may think fit.
(3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide any question that
may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the rectification of the register.
(4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner
to the parties concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, make any
order referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2).
(5) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall direct that notice of
the rectification shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall upon
receipt of such notice rectify the register accordingly.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VII
A
PPEALS TO THE APPELLATE BOARD
31. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar under this Act,
or the rules made thereunder, may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within three
months from the date on which the order or decision sought to be appealed against is
communicated to such person preferring the appeal.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period specified
under sub-section ( 1):
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period specified
therefore, if the appellant satisfies the Appellate Board that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within the specified period.
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Board shall be in the prescribed form and shall be
verified in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or
decision appealed against and such fees as may be prescribed.
32. No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, exercise any jurisdiction,
powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 31.
33. The provisions of sub-sections ( 2), ( 3), (4), (5), (6) of section 84, section 87,
section 92, section 95 and section 96 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, shall apply to the
Appellate Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the
discharge of its functions under the Trade Marks Act, 1999.
34. (1) An application for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board
under section 27 shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to a
registered geographical indication under this Act shall be communicated to the Registrar by
the Appellate Board and the Registrar shall give effect to the order of the Board and shall,
when so directed, amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in accordance with such order.
Power to
cancel or vary
registration
and to rectify
the register.
Appeals to the
Appellate
Board.
Bar of
jurisdiction of
courts, etc.
Procedure of
the Appellate
Board.
Procedure for
application for
rectification,
etc., before
Appellate
Board.
47 of 1999.

48
35. (1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear and be heard—
(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief
sought includes alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question
relating to the practice of the Geographical Indications Registry is raised;
(b) in any appeal to the Board from an order of the Registrar on an application
for registration of a geographical indication or authorised user—
(i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the
Registrar or is accepted by him subject to any amendments, modifications,
conditions or limitations, or
(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers that his
appearance is necessary in the public interest, and the Registrar shall appear in
any case if so directed by the Board.
(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Registrar may, in lieu of appearing,
submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of
the proceedings before him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision
given by him affecting it, or of the practice of the Geographical Indications Registry in like
cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues and within his knowledge as Registrar, and
such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.
36. In all proceedings under this Act before the Appellate Board the costs of the
Registrar shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the Registrar shall not be ordered to pay
the costs of any of the parties.
* * * * *
48. (1) Where the offence charged under section 39 or section 40 or section 41 is in
relation to a registered geographical indication and the accused pleads that the registration
of the geographical indication is invalid, the following procedure shall be followed:—
(a) if the court is satisfied that such defence is prima facie tenable, it shall not
proceed with the charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months from the
date on which the plea of the accused is recorded to enable the accused to file an
application before the Appellate Board under this Act, for the rectification of the
register on the ground that the registration is invalid;
(b) if the accused proves to the court that he has made such application within
the time so limited or within such further time as the court may for sufficient cause
allow, the further proceedings in the prosecution shall stand stayed till the disposal of
such application for rectification;
(c) if within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be
allowed by the court the accused fails to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification
of the register, the court shall proceed with the case as if the registration were valid.
(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in
sub-section ( 1), any application for the rectification of the register concerning the
geographical indication in question on the ground of invalidity of the registration thereof
has already been properly made to and is pending before the tribunal, the court shall stay
the further proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal of the application aforesaid
and shall determine the charge against the accused in conformity with the result of the
application for rectification in so far as the complainnant relies upon teh registration of his
geographical indication.
* * * * *
Costs of
Registrar in
Proceedings
Before
Appellate
Board.
Procedure
where
invalidity of
registration is
pleaded by
the accused.
Procedure for
application for
rectification,
etc., before
Appellate
Board.

49
57. (1) Where in any suit for infringement of a geographical indication the defendant
pleads that registration of the geographical indication relating to plaintiff is invalid, the
court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the court), shall,—
(a) if any proceedings for rectification of the register to the geographical indication
relating to plaintiff or defendant are pending before the Registrar or the Appellate
Board, stay the suit pending the final disposal of such proceedings;
(b) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied that the plea
regarding the invalidity of the registration of the geographical indication relating to
plaintiff or defendant is prima facie tenable, raise an issue regarding the same and
adjourn the case for a period of three months from the date of the framing of the issue
in order to enable the party concerned to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification
of the register.
* * * * *
58. (1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered geographical indication the
validity of the registration of the geographical indication relating to plaintiff is questioned
by the defendant or where in any such suit the plaintiff questions the validity of the
registration of the geographical indication relating to defendant, the issue as to the validity
of the registration of the geographical indication concerned shall be determined only on an
application for the rectification of the register and, notwithstanding anything contained in
section 27, such application shall be made to the Appellate Board and not to the Registrar.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), where an application for rectification
of the register is made to the Registrar under section 27, the Registrar may, if he thinks fit,
refer the application at any stage of the proceedings to the Appellate Board.
* * * * *
63. If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not being a proceeding
before the Appellate Board or a court) dies pending the proceeding, the Registrar may, on
request, and on proof to his satisfaction of the transmission of the interest of the deceased
person, substitute in the proceeding his successor in interest in his place, or, if the Registrar
is of opinion that the interest of the deceased person is sufficiently represented by the
surviving parties, permit the proceeding to continue without the substitution of his successor
in interest.
* * * * *
72. If in any legal proceedings for rectification of the register before the Appellate
Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor or, as the case
may be, authorised user of the geographical indication on the issue as to the validity of the
registration of the geographical indication or the authorised user, the Appellate Board may
grant a certificate to that effect, and if such a certificate is granted, then, in any subsequent
legal proceeding in which the said validity comes into question the said proprietor or the
authorised user, as the case may be, on obtaining a final order or judgment in his favour
affirming validity of the registration of the geographical indication or the authorised user, as
the case may be, shall unless the said final order or judgment for sufficient reason directs
otherwise, be entitled to his full cost charges and expenses as between legal practitioner
and client.
* * * * *
75. In any proceeding relating to a geographical indication, the tribunal shall admit
evidence of the usages of the trade concerned and of any relevant geographical indication
legitimately used by other persons.
* * * * *
Stay of
proceedings
where the
validity of
registration
of the
geographical
indication is
questioned,
etc.
Application
for rectifica-
tion
of register to
be made to
Appellate
Board in
certain cases.
Death of
party to a
proceeding.
Certificate of
validity.
Trade usages,
etc., to be
taken into
consideration.

50
87. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(n) the form of making an appeal, the manner of verification and the fee payable
under sub-section (3) of section 31;
* * * * *
————
EXTRACTS FROM THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS' RIGHTS ACT, 2001
(53 OF 2001)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(d) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Tribunal;
* * * * *
(n) "Judicial Member" means a Member of the Tribunal appointed as such under
sub-section (1) of section 55 and includes the Chairman;
(o) "Member" means a Judicial Member or a Technical member of the Tribunal
and includes the Chairman;
* * * * *
(q) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
* * * * *
(y) "Tribunal" means the Plant Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal established
under section 54;
(z) "Technical Member" means a Member of the Tribunal who is not a Judicial
Member;
* * * * *
44. A farmer or group of farmers or village community shall not be liable to pay any
fees in any proceeding before the Authority or Registrar or the Tribunal or the High Court
under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "fees in any proceeding" includes
any fees payable for inspection of any document or for obtaining a copy of any decision or
order or document under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VIII
P
LANT VARIETIES PROTECTION APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
54. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
Tribunal to be known as the Plant V arieties Protection Appellate Tribunal to exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.
55. (1) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and such number of Judicial Members
and Technical Members as the Central Government may deem fit to appoint.
Definitions.
Exemption
from fees.
Tribunal.
Composition
of Tribunal.
Power to
make rules.

51
(2) A Judicial Member shall be a person who has for at least ten years held a judicial
office in the territory of India or who has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has
held a post in Grade-II of that Service or any equivalent or higher post for at least three
years or who has been an advocate for at least twelve years.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(i) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the
territory of India, there shall be included any period, after he has held any judicial
office, during which the person has been an advocate or has held the office of a
member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special
knowledge of law;
(ii) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate, there
shall be included any period during which the person has held judicial office or the
office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring
special knowledge of law after he became an advocate.
(3) A Technical Member shall be a person who is an eminent agricultural scientist in
the field of plant breeding and genetics and possesses an experience of at least twenty
years to deal with plant variety or seed development activity, or who has held the post in the
Central Government or a State Government dealing with plant variety or seed development
equivalent to the Joint Secretary to the Government of India for at least three years and
possesses the special knowledge in the field of plant breeding and genetics.
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a Judicial Member of the Tribunal to be the
Chairman thereof.
(5) The Central Government may appoint one of the Members of the Tribunal to be
the senior Member thereof.
(6) The senior Member or a Member shall exercise such of the powers and perform
such of the functions of the Chairman as may be delegated to him by the Chairman by a
general or special order in writing.
56. (1) An appeal shall be preferred to the Tribunal within the prescribed period from
any—
(a) order or decision of the Authority or Registrar, relating to registration of a
variety; or
(b) order or decision of the Registrar relating to registration as an agent or a
licensee of a variety; or
(c) order or decision of the Authority relating to claim for benefit sharing; or
(d) order or decision of the Authority regarding revocation of compulsory
licence or modification of compulsory licence; or
(e) order or decision of the Authority regarding payment of compensation,
made under this Act or rules made thereunder.
* * * * *
(3) The Tribunal in disposing of an appeal under this section shall have the power to
make any order which the Authority or the Registrar could make under this Act.
57. (1) The Tribunal may, after giving both the parties to the appeal an opportunity of
being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.
(2) The Tribunal may, at any time within thirty days from the date of the order, with a
view to rectifying the mistake apparent from the record, amend any order passed by it under
Orders of
Tribunal.
Appeals to
Tribunal.

52
sub-section (1), and make such amendment if the mistake is brought to its notice by the
appellant or the opposite party.
(3) In every appeal, the Tribunal may, where it is possible, hear and decide such
appeal within a period of one year from the date of filing of the appeal.
(4) The Tribunal shall send a copy of any order passed under this section to the
Registrar.
(5) The orders of the Tribunal under this Act shall be executable as a decree of a civil
court.
58. (1) The powers and functions of the Tribunal may be exercised and discharged by
Benches constituted by the Chairman of the Tribunal from among the Members thereof.
(2) A Bench shall consist of one Judicial Member and one Technical Member.
(3) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point
or points on which they differ, and the case shall be referred to the Chairman for hearing on
such point or points by one or more of the other Members and such point or points shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its
own procedure and the procedure of Benches thereof in all matters arising out of the
exercise of its powers or the discharge of its functions, including the places at which the
Benches shall holding their sittings.
(5) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of discharging its functions, have all the
powers which are vested in the Registrar under section 11, and any proceeding before the
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the measuring of sections 193
and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code, and the Tribunal shall
be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any
other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay
or any other manner) shall be made on, or in, any proceedings relating to an appeal unless—
(a) copies of such appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim
order are furnished to the party against whom such appeal is made or proposed to be made;
and
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter.
59. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, till the establishment of the
Tribunal under section 54, the Intellectual Property Appellate Board established under
section 83 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred on the Tribunal under this Act subject to the modification that in any Bench of
such Intellectual Property Appellate Board constituted for the purposes of this section, for
the Technical Member referred to in sub-section (2) of section 84 of the Trade Marks Act,
the Technical Member shall be appointed under this Act and he shall be deemed to be the
Technical Member for constituting the Bench under the said sub-section ( 2) of section 84
for the purposes of this Act.
* * * * *
89. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Authority
or the Registrar or the Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine.
* * * * *
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
47 of 1999.
Transitional
provision.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Procedure
of Tribunal.

53
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONTROL OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (LAND AND TRAFFIC) ACT, 2002
(13 OF 2003)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ''appointed day'', in relation to a Tribunal, means the date on which such
Tribunal is established under sub-section ( 1) of section 5;
* * * * *
(l) "Tribunal" means the Airport Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1) of
Section 5;
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
H
IGHW AYS ADMINISTRATION AND TRIBUNALS ETC.
* * * * *
5. (1) The Airport Appellate Tribunal established under section 28-I of the Airports
Authority of India Act, 1994 shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI
of the Finance Act, 2017, be the Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Tribunal
shall exercise the jurisdiction, power and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, the
limits of the Highway within which, or the length of Highway on which, the Tribunal may
exercise jurisdiction for entertaining and deciding the appeals field before it.
* * * * *
14. A Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, the jurisdiction, powers
and authority to entertain appeals from the orders passed or actions (except issuance or
serving of notices) taken under sections 26, 27, 28, 36, 37 and 38 by the Highway
Administration or an officer authorised on its behalf, as the case may be.
15. On and from the appointed day, no court (except the Supreme Court and a High
Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) or other authority,
except the Tribunal shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority
in relation to the matters specified in section 14.
16. (1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to
the other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the Tribunal shall have powers to regulate
its own procedure including the places at which it shall have its sittings.
(2) The appeal filed before the Tribunal under section 14 shall be dealt with by it as
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally
within four months from the date of the receipt of the appeal.
(3) The Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;
(f) dismissing an appeal or application for default or deciding it ex parte;
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any appeal or application for default or
any order passed by it ex parte; and
Jurisdiction,
powers and
authority of
Tribunal.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Establishment
of Tribunals.7 of 2017.
55 of 1994.
Procedure and
powers of
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
Definitions.

54
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(4) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Indian
Penal Code and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act or in any
other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay
or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceeding relating to, an application or
appeal unless—
(a) copies of such application or appeal and of all documents in support of
the plea for such interim order are furnished to the party against whom such application
is made or appeal  is preferred; and
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter:
Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of clauses ( a) and ( b) and
make an interim order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, that it is necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the applicant or
the appellant, as the case may be; which cannot be adequately compensated in money; but
any such interim order shall, if it is not sooner vacated, cease to have effect on the expiry of a
period of fourteen days from the date on which it is made unless the said requirements have
been complied with before the expiry of that period and the Tribunal has continued the
operation of the interim order.
18. (1) An order passed by the Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the
Tribunal as a decree of a civil court, and for this purpose, the Tribunal shall have all the
powers of the civil court.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Tribunal may transmit
any order made by it to the civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall
execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.
19. Every appeal to the Tribunal under this Act shall be preferred within a period of
sixty days from the date on which the order appealed against has been made:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the said period of sixty
days, if the appellant satisfies the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not preferring
the appeal within the specified period.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
40. A person preferring an appeal to the Tribunal under this Act may either appear in
person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to present his case before
the Tribunal.
41. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made or any action
taken by the Highway Administration or the officer authorised in this behalf by such
Administration or every order passed or decision made on appeal under this Act by the
Tribunal shall be final and shall not be called in question in any original suit, application or
execution proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in
respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under
this Act to the Highway Administration or Tribunal.
* * * * *
Conditions as
to making of
interim order.
Execution of
orders of
Tribunal.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Finality of
orders.
Right of
appellant to
take assistance
of legal
practitioner.
Limitation.

55
50. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(f) the additional matters in respect of which the Tribunal may exercise the powers
of a civil court under clause (h) of sub-section (3) of section 16;
* * * * *
————
EXTRACT FROM THE FINANCE ACT, 2017
(7 OF 2017)
* * * * *
184. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for
qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal
and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson,
Chairman, Vice-Chairman, President, Vice-President, Presiding Officer or Member of the
Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, other Authorities as specified in
column (2) of the Eighth Schedule:
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Chairman, Vice-Chairman, President,
Vice-President, Presiding Officer or Member of the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or other
Authority shall hold office for such term as specified in the rules made by the Central
Government but not exceeding five years from the date on which he enters upon his office
and shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided further that no Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Chairman, Vice-Chairman,
President, Vice-President, Presiding Officer or Member shall hold office as such after he has
attained such age as specified in the rules made by the Central Government which shall not
exceed,—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, Chairman or President, the age of seventy years;
(b) in the case of Vice-Chairperson, Vice-Chairman, Vice-President, Presiding
Officer or any other Member, the age of sixty-seven years.
(2) Neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Chairman, Vice-Chairman, President, Vice-President, Presiding
Officer or Member of the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, other Authority
may be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
* * * * *
Power to
make rules.
Qualifications,
appointment,
term and
conditions of
service, salary
and allow-
ances, etc., of
Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson
and Members,
etc., of the
Tribunal,
Appellate
Tribunal and
other
Authorities.

THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 183 and 184]
S. No. Tribunal/Appellate Tribunal/Board/Authority Acts
(1) (2) (3)
10. Airport Appellate T ribunal The Airport Authority
of India Act, 1994
(55 of 1994).
* * * * *
12. Appellate Board The Trade Marks Act,
1999  (47 of 1999).
* * * * *
14. Authority for Advance Ruling The Income-Tax Act,
1961 (43 of 1961).
* * * * *
15. Film Certification Appellate Tribunal The Cinematograph
Act, 1952 (37 of 1952).
* * * * *
56

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952, the Customs Act, 1962, the Airports
Authority of India Act, 1994, the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the Protection of Plant
V arieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001 and certain other Acts.
————
(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs)
MGIPMRND—1417LS(S3)—12-02-2021.