AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  19 of 2022
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
DR. T. SUMA THY (A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code o f Criminal Procedure (Amendment) 
 Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as
the Code),–
“(i) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:
Short title,
and
commencement.
5
Amendment of
the Section 2.

‘(ja) “malicious prosecution” means instituting the prosecution complained
of without any existing reasonable or probable cause;”; and
(ii) after clause (x), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:
‘(xa) “wrongful prosecution” means malicious prosecution or prosecution
instituted without good faith, which concluded in favour of the accused, and
includes any of the following, namely:–
(i) making or fabricating a false or incorrect record or document for
submission;
(ii) making a false declaration or statement before an officer
authorised by law to receive as evidence when legally bound to
state the truth that is to say by an oath or by a provision of law;
(iii) otherwise giving false evidence when legally bound to state the
truth that is to say by an oath or by a provision of law;
(iv) fabricating false evidence for submission;
(v) suppression or destruction of an evidence to prevent its
production;
(vi) bringing a false charge, or instituting or cause to be instituted
false proceedings against a person;
(vii) committing a person to confinement or trial acting contrary to
law;
(viii) acting in violation of any law in any other manner not specifically
covered under ( i) to (vii) above;”
3. After Chapter XXVII of the Code, the following Chapter and sections
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:–
“CHAPTER XXVIIA
Compensation to Persons Wrongfully Prosecuted.
365A. (1) An application seeking compensation for a wrongful prosecution may
be made:–
(a) by the accused person, who has sustained the injury; or
(b) by any agent duly authorised by the accused person who has sustained
the injury; or
(c) where the accused person died either before or after the termination of
the wrongful prosecution, by all or any of the heirs or the legal representatives
of the deceased:
Provided that where all the heirs or the legal representatives of the deceased
have not joined in any such application for compensation, the application shall
be deemed to have been made on behalf of and for the benefit of all the heirs and
the legal representatives of the deceased.
(2) Every application under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed, at the option of the
applicant, either in the Special Court having jurisdiction over the area in which the
wrongful prosecution occurred or the Special Court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the applicant resides, in such form containing such particulars as may be
prescribed.
(3) In case of longer incarceration exceeding six months, the Special Court may,
after providing an opportunity of being heard to the applicant and the other parties,
award interim compensation to the applicant, if so claimed, to facilitate his immediate
rehabilitation, such compensation which shall not be less than twenty five thousand
rupees but may extend upto rupees fifty thousand.
2
 5
 15
 20
25
30
35
10
40
45
Insertion of
new Chapter
XXVIIA.
Application
for compensa-
tion.

35
(4) Every application for compensation under sub-section ( 1) shall be preferred
within a period of two years from the date when acquittal attains finality:
Provided that the Special Court may entertain the application after the expiry of
the said period of two years but not later than three years, if it is satisfied that the
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application in time.
   365B. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, where an injury gives rise to a claim for compensation under this Chapter or
through any other remedy, the person entitled to compensation may claim such
compensation under any one of the remedies to the exclusion of other remedies
provided under the Code.
365C. (1) On receipt of an application for compensation made under section
365A, the Special Court shall, after giving notice of the application to the Central
Government or the concerned State Government, as the case may be, and after giving
an opportunity of being heard to all the parties, hold an inquiry into the claim or as the
case may be, into each of the claims of misconduct which lead to wrongful prosecution
and/or the misconduct during the prosecution which made it wrongful and, may make
an award determining the just and reasonable compensation, specifying the person
or persons to whom it shall be paid, and shall also specify the amount which shall be
paid by the Central or the State Government concerned, as the case may be, and may
also direct the Central or the State Government concerned to proceed against the
erring official in accordance with law.
(2) The Special Court shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties
concerned, free of cost, within fifteen days from the date of such award.
(3) The application made under section 365A shall be disposed of within a period
of one year from the date of receipt of the application:
Provided that in case the application is not disposed of within the said period, the
Court shall record the reasons in writing for not disposing of the application within
the specified period.
 365D. Where a Special Court allows a claim for compensation made under this
Code, it may direct that in addition to the amount of compensation interest shall also
be paid at the rate of six per cent per annum and from such date not earlier than the
date of making the claim as it may specify in the award.
 365E. While adjudicating the quantum of compensation or interest under section
365C or 365D, as the case may be, the Special Court shall take into consideration the
following financial and other factors, namely:
(i) seriousness of the offence; severity of the punishment; the length of
incarceration;
(ii) loss or damage to health;
(iii) loss of income or earnings;
 (iv) loss or damage to property;
(v) legal fees and other consequential expenses resulting from the wrongful
prosecution;
(vi) loss of family life;
(vii) loss of opportunities (of education, of possibilities of livelihood, future
earning abilities, skills);
(viii) stigmatization that is harm to reputation or similar damage;
(ix) psychological and emotional harm caused to accused and his family;
(x) such other factors which the Special Court considers necessary as regards
the claim in furtherance of justice.
365F. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, a person who is awarded compensation for wrongful prosecution under section
365C shall not suffer any disqualification on account of such prosecution or conviction.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Removal of
disqualification
attaching to
conviction..
3
40
45
50
Option
regarding claims
for compensa-
tion in certain
cases.
Award of the
Special Court.
Award of
interest where
any claim is
allowed.
Factors to be
taken into
account by the
Special Court.

365G . (1) For holding an inquiry under section 365C, the Special Court may, subject
to any rule to be made in this behalf, follow such summary procedures as it thinks fit.
(2) The Special Court, while adjudicating a claim under this Chapter, shall have
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any party or witness and
examining the witness on oath;
(ii) the discovery and production of any document or other material object
producible as evidence;
(iii) the reception of evidence on affidavits;
(iv) the requisitioning of the report of the concerned analysis or test from the
appropriate laboratory or from any other relevant source;
(v) issuing of any commission for the examination of any witness;
(vi) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, a Special Court shall, for the purpose
of the adjudication of a claim under this Chapter, have all the powers of a Civil Court
for the purpose of taking evidence on oath and of enforcing the attendance of
witnesses and of compelling the discovery and production of documents and material
objects and for such other purposes as may be prescribed and shall adjudicate upon
such a claim as if it were a Civil Court.
       365H. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), any person aggrieved by
an award of a Special Court may, within a period of ninety days from the date of the
award, prefer an appeal to the High Court.
(2) No appeal by the person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of such
award, shall be entertained by the High Court, unless he has deposited with it twenty-
five thousand rupees or fifty per cent of the amount so awarded, whichever is higher,
in the manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of
ninety days, if it is satisfied that the  appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from
preferring the appeal in time.
(4) No appeal shall lie against an award of a Special Court if the amount awarded
is less than fifty thousand rupees.
    365I. ( 1) The Central Government or as the case may be the concerned
State Government, by notification, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the
purposes of this Chapter.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(a) the form of making application for claims for compensation and the
particulars it may contain, to be paid in respect of such applications under
sub-section (2) of 365A;
(b) the procedure to be followed by a Special Court in holding an inquiry
under sub-section ( 1) and the powers vested in a Civil Court which may be
exercised by a Special Court under clause (vi) of  sub-section (2) of section 365G;
(c) the form and the manner of the payment of amount for preferring an
appeal against an award of a Special Court under sub-section ( 2) of section
365H;
(d) any other matter which is considered necessary.
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this section shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Explanation 1.– For the purpose of section 365A and 365B, “injury” means any
harm caused to any accused, of body, mind, reputation or property, actual or as a
probable result of the wrongful prosecution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4
Procedure and
powers of
Special Court.
Appeals.
Power to
make rules.
40
45
50

Explanation 2.– For the purpose of sections 365A, 365B, 365C, 365D, 365E, 365F
and 365I, “compensation” includes pecuniary or non-pecuniary compensation, or
both; whereas the non-pecuniary compensation includes counselling services,
mental health services, vocational or employment skills development, and such other
services or assistance that the accused may require to facilitate re-integration into
society.”.
5
5

6
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The National Crime Records Bureau’s (NCRB) annual statistical report called the
“Prison Statistics India” 2015, there were 4,19,623 prisoners across the country.  Out
of which, 67.2 per cent. i.e. 2,82,076 were undertrials (i.e. people who have
been committed to judicial custody pending investigation or trial by a competent
authority) being substantially higher than the convicted population i.e. 1,34,168
(32.0 per cent.).
Such large number of undertrials (more than the number of convicts) year after
year and their long detention periods show that undertrials spent a substantial period
of time awaiting trials or judicial determination of their case.  The delay and waiting
becomes a graver miscarriaage of justice when the person is wrongfully accused and
incarcerated pending trial/proceedings, which he should not have been subjected to
in the first place.
One of the gravest instances of miscarriage of justice resulting in an extremely
long wrongful incarceration was in the case of Mohd. Jalees Ansari & Ors. Vs.
Central Bureau of Investigation, where the accused was booked under the Terrorist
and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA) for bomb blasts in five
trains in Mumbai (December 1993).  Subsequently, after a “confession,” he was sent
to a prison, where he spent the next twenty-three years.  In 2016, the matter reached
the Supreme Court, where the Apex court, overturning the TADA courts decision,
ruled that the confession  which was taken in police custody  and formed the basis of
the conviction did not have legal sanction and was inadmissible.  And, after suffering
through twenty-three long years of wrongful incarceration, he was exonerated of
all charges.
Article 14(6) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)
read with the General Comment 32 of the United Nations Human Rights Committee,
dealing with miscarriage of justice, requires that the victims of proven cases of such
miscarriage to be compensated “according to law”. Many countries including the
United Kingdom, the United States, and Germany have converted this commitment
into law, where the State has assumed statutory responsibility for compensating the
victims of such miscarriage of justice.  India has ratified ICCPR in the year 1968 (with
certain reservations) but is yet to comply with its obligations and enact a legislation
laying down the law for compensation of the victims of this miscarriage of justice.
However, by virtue of judicial decisions, compensation was recognised as a remedy
for redressal of miscarriage of justice resulting in violation of right to life and personal
liberty including wrongful prosecution; albeit under public law as a claim of
constitutional tort against the State, to be filed in the Constitutional Courts i.e. the
Supreme Court and the High Courts.
Despite the above, under the current set of remedies, claim and grant of
compensation for the said miscarriage of justice still remains complex and uncertain.
Under public law, a violation of fundamental rights due to police and prosecutorial
misconduct can invoke State liability but the amount and payment of compensation
remains arbitrary and lacks transparency.
In Babloo Chauhan @ Dabloo Vs. State Government of NCT of Delhi, the High
Court of Delhi, vide its order dated 30 November 2017, specifically called for the Law
Commission of India to undertake a comprehensive examination of issue of  “relief
and rehabilitation to victims of wrongful prosecution, and incarceration”.  The Law
Commission in its 277th Report recommended specific legal provision for redressal of
cases of miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful prosecution—covering both the
substantive and procedural aspects.

The proposed Bill, therefore, seeks to provide a legislative framework for redressal
of harms inflicted by wrongful prosecution arises on many counts one of the most
important being that the injustice caused to the innocents needs to be redressed
within the framework of rights and not ex-gratia by the State.  The Bill also seeks to
establish a legislative process to provide a transparent, uniform efficacious, affordable
and timely remedy for the loss and harms inflicted on the victims on account of
wrongful prosecution.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;        T. SUMA THY (A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN
January 21, 2021 
  
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDA TION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND 117(3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
——
[Copy of Letter No. 8/3/2021-Judl. Cell-I dated 26 March, 2021 from Shri G . Kishan
Reddy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Secretary General,
Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2021* (Amendment of section 2, etc.) by Dr. T. Sumathy
(A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P., recommends under articles 117(1) and 117(3)
of the Constitution for introduction and consideration of the Bill, respectively, in
Lok Sabha.
[* As the Bill has been tabled in the year 2021, the requisite recommendation of the
President had been conveyed in the year 2021.  However, the Bill becomes due for introduction
in the year 2022.  Accordingly, the year of the title of the Bill and enacting formula thereto has
been changed to the year 2022 and ‘Seventy-third year of Republic of India’, respectively.]
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 365C provides for award of compensation
to persons convicted of wrongful prosecution by the Special Court which shall be
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
  No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 365I provides for the Central Government
or the State Government to make rules regarding the form of making application for
claims of compensation and the particulars it may contain, procedure to be followed
by a Special Court in holding an inquiry and the form and the manner of the payment
of amount for preferring an appeal against an award of a Special Court, etc. As the
rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of power is of a normal character.
9

ANNEXURE
(THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ACT, 1973)
[ACT NO. 2 OF 1974]
* * * * *
2. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “bailable offence” means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First
Schedule, or which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and
“non-bailable offence” means any other offence;
* * * * *
(j) “local jurisdiction”, in relation to a Court or Magistrate, means the local area
within which the Court or Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his powers under
this Code 1 [and such local area may comprise the whole of the State, or any part of
the State, as the State Government may, by notification, specify];
* * * * *
(x) “warrant-case” means a case relating to an offence punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years;
* * * * *
Definitions.
10

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
.
————
(Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P .)