THE CHILD WELFARE  BILL, 2007
By
SHRI RAMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of children and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child W elfare Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, 'Child' means a person who has
not completed the age of fifteen years.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
child shall be employed by any person for any work in any form.
4. (1) The Central Government shall establish adequate number of juvenile homes
with all basic amenities for the welfare of children in every district of the country.
(2) Any child who is abandoned, orphan, destitute, neglected or engaged in any job,
occupation or begging shall be admitted to the juvenile homes set up under sub-section (1).
Short title
and extent.
Bill No.  19 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Establishment
of juvenile
homes.
Definition.
Prohibition
of child
employment.
5
10

2
Facilities
provided to
the children
in juvenile
homes.
Provision for
reservation in
posts and
services under
Central
Government.
5. Every child who is admitted into the juvenile home shall be entitled to the following
facilities free of cost,—
(a) accommodation, food and clothing;
(b) education including higher and technical education;
(c) medical assistance; and
(d) any other facility which is necessary for the all-round development of the
child.
6. The Central Government shall make provisions of reservation in posts and services
under its control for children admitted to juvenile homes on attaining the age of eighteen
years.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A large number of children are forced by their parents to do menial labour, in order to
sustain their livelihood. Due to lack of proper diet and health care, these children become
victims of a number of diseases. Some of them even succumb to premature death. Many of
these children are highly talented. But due to lack of proper education and other opportunities,
their talent goes waste.
Children are the future of a country. It is, therefore, the responsibility of the Government
to provide opportunities of all-round development to every child and also to provide protection
against exploitation. Thus, it is proposed to bring in a legislation for the welfare and protection
of children against exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMDAS  ATHAWALE
December 15, 2006.
3
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \ 218LS.PM65

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for setting up of adequate number of juvenile homes with
all basic amenities for the welfare of children in every district of the country by the Central
Government. Clause 5 provides for free of cost food, accommodation, clothing, education
and medical facilities to the children in juvenile homes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crores is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crores is also  likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of children and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—218LS(S-3)—14.02.2007.