As wrnopuce | EEO

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
‘Sur ANANT GANGARAM 0088, M.P,
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.

2, Inarticle 298 of the Constitution, after the existing proviso, the following provisos
shall be inserted, namely:—

"Provided further that the said executive power of each State shall extend to
making of contract for the purpose of export of any commodity from that State to any
foreign country:

Provided also that such power shall be subject to any law made by Parliament in
this behalf.",

3. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List-II State List, after entry '26' the
following entry shall be inserted, namely:—

"26A. Export of products to foreign countries subject to any law made by Parliament."

Short title

Amendment
of article 298

Amendment
of Seventh
Schedule


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

In many States, various products are grown in excess of their demand. Sometimes, it
so happens that even after transportation of the goods to other States, the products are
available in plenty. Since they are in excess, they do not fetch a good price in the domestic
market,

‘The storage facility is either not available or if available, it is not proper. The goods are
therefore perished or lost/damaged in transit to storage places.

Such products can be put to best use by the States by exporting them to foreign
countries. It will not only fetch a good price for growers but also precious foreign exchange.
Growers will also be encouraged to grow more products.

Of course, a State Government should not be allowed a blanket permission to export
products lest the excess products may not be supplied to other States where there is a heavy
demand

Therefore, some restriction on the part of the Central Government may be appropriate.
‘The Bill accordingly seeks to amend the Constitution.

New Devin; ANANT GANGARAM GE!
June 22,2004


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
. . . * . . *

298. The executive power of the Union and of each State shall extend to the Power to carry

| on of any trade or business and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of 9” "ade. ete
property and the making of contracts for any purpose:

Provided that—

(a) the said executive power of the Union shall, in so far as such trade or
business or such purpose is not one with respect which Parliament may make
laws. be subject in each State to legislation by the State; and

(b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so far as such trade or
business or such purpose is not one with respect to which the State Legislature
may make laws, be subject to legislation by Parliament,

+ * * . * . *
SEVENTH SCHEDULE

List Il —State List

+ . * . - हर *

Within the State subject to the provisions of entry 33 of
List HL


a

LOK SABHA,

A

BILL.

fufther to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Anant Gangaram Geete, MP)

MGIPMRNO—827LS—26.06.2004.