1
THE BIHAR REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Bihar Reorganisation (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force from the Twenty-fifth day of
August, 2000.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000, in paragraph 4, for the
words ‘‘in the ratio of number of employees of each successor State’’, the words ‘‘in the ratio
of population of each successor State’’ shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 19 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
the Eighth
Schedule.
30 of 2000.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Eighth Schedule to the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 deals with apportionment
of pension between two successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand. It provides for
apportionment of pension liability in the ratio of number of employees. However, this provision
is causing loss to the exchequer of the Government of Jharkhand. It may be pointed out that
the reorganisation of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh happened in the same year 2000
along with the reorganisation of the State of Bihar. In the case of reorganisation of the
erstwhile States of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, the basis for apportionment of
pension liability of successor States was the ratio of population. However, in the case of
reorganisation of the erstwhile State of Bihar, the apportionment of pension liability of
successor States was not provided on the basis of ratio of population.
While the formula of population ratio has been adopted in the case of all new States
created ever since 1956, it is not clear why a deviation was made only in case of successor
State of Jharkhand, which was a nascent State trying to get on its feet after years of
backwardness and neglect. This provision has put an extra annual burden of nearly two
thousand two hundred crore rupees, which the State has been paying over the last ten years.
The proposed amendment to the Eighth Schedule aims to provide that the pension liability,
which is presently being calculated on the basis of ratio of number of employees, will be
calculated on the basis of ratio of population, with retrospective effect, i.e., from 15 November,
2000, the date of notification of the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 so that the State of
Jharkhand is able to recoup the losses it had suffered unjustifiably.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
June 5, 2014.
2

ANNEXURE
(EXTRACTS FROM THE BIHAR REORGANISATION ACT, 2000)
(30 OF 2000)
*******
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE (SEE SECTION 53)
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000, in paragraph 4, for
the words ‘‘in the ratio of number of employees of each successor State’’, the words ‘‘in
the ratio of population of each successor State’’ shall be substituted.
APPORTIONMENT  OF  LIABILITY  IN  RESPECT  OF  PENSIONS
AND  OTHER  RETIREMENT  BENEFITS
*******
4. There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed day
and ending on the 31 st day of March of that financial year and in respect of each subsequent
financial year, the total payments made in all the successor States in respect of pensions and
other retirement benefits referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. The total representing the liability
of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pensions and other retirement benefits shall be
apportioned between the successor States in the ratio of number of employees of each
successor State and any successor State paying more than its due share shall be reimbursed
the excess amount by the successor State or State paying less.
*******
Amendment
of the Eighth
Schedule.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—699LS—27.06.2014.