1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BAIJAYANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In article 148 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely :—
“Provided that every appointment under this clause shall be made after obtaining
the recommendation of a Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister — Chairperson;
Short title.
Bill No.  1  of  2015
Amendment
of article
148.
5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) the Speaker of the House of the People — Member;
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the — Member;
People
(d) the Leader of Opposition in the Council of — Member;
States
(e) the incumbent Comptroller and Auditor- — Member.
General of India
Provided further that the Committee shall recommend the name of the person to
be appointed under this article by a majority of votes of all the members of the
Committee.”.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India (CAG), first constituted in
1850, is one of the oldest institutions in the country. The basic role of the institution remains
the same today, as when first constituted, i.e., to undertake audit of expenditure of public
money.
In the recent past, CAG reports have been credited with highlighting grave
discrepancies in expenditure of public money and policies. In particular, the reports on the
XIXth Commonwealth Games and the reports on the allocation of 2G spectrum and coal
blocks gained a lot of traction among the people. This led to demands for strict action against
erring officials, politicians and businessmen.
The CAG acts as the custodian of the public purse and provides Parliament with
information to ensure accountability and scrutiny of the Government. The CAG can do
justice to this role only if he is competent and also independent. In order to be truly
independent, the CAG must be free from both the control of the Government and also from
political bias.
Under the present scheme prescribed under the Constitution, the President while
acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers appoints the CAG for a fixed term of six
years. Therefore, it is the prerogative of the Government to select a suitable CAG. This has
raised the concern about a 'compromised' appointment process. The CAG is a watchdog that
assists Parliament in keeping the Government in check. Therefore, any Government which is
at the receiving end of the CAG's riveting scrutiny is likely to appoint an ineffective, pliant
and biased person as CAG.
In order to ensure that the competence and the independence of the CAG does not
depend on the righteousness of the Government in power, it is important to amend the
Constitution to prescribe an appointment procedure that safeguards this important
constitutional office from undue interference. Accordingly, this Bill proposes that the CAG
should be appointed on the recommendation of a Committee consisting of:
(a) the Prime Minister;
(b) the Speaker of the Lok Sabha;
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha;
(d) the Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha; and
(e) the incumbent Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
The Committee has been mandated to take a decision by simple majority.
The architect of our Constitution, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar believed that the CAG is "probably
the most important officer under the Constitution of India". If this functionary is to carry out
the duties of his office effectively, without fear or favour, we must ensure his independence.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
November 11, 2014.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
CHAPTER V—COMPTROLLER AND  AUDITOR-GENERAL OF  INDIA
148. (1) There shall be a Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who shall be
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be removed
from office in like manner and on the like grounds as the Judge of the Supreme Court.
* * * * * * *
4
Comptroller
and Auditor-
General of
India.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4152LS(S3)—04-02-2015.