1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE MAINTENANCE OF FOOD, POTABLE WATER AND FODDER
SUPPLIES IN DROUGHT AFFECTED AREAS BILL, 2020
By
SMT. RANJEETA KOLI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory maintenance of food and potable water supplies
for human consumption and fodder for the livestock of the farmers in
drought affected areas by the Union Government in consultation
with the Government of the State concerned and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance of Food, Potable Water and Fodder
Supplies in Drought Affected Areas Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. 1  of  2020
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "drought affected area" means any area situated in any part of the country
which has got below normal rainfall in any season of a calendar year and which in the
opinion of the Central Government has been affected by drought and declared, by
notification in the Official Gazette, to be a drought affected area for such period as may
be specified in the notification;
(c) "food" includes cereals such as wheat, maize, barley,  rice, pulses and edible
oils and fuel for cooking;
(d) "fodder" includes the dry and green fodder generally fed to the livestock by
the farmers and others; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Government in whose
jurisdiction the drought affected area falls, maintain uninterrupted food supplies in such
area for the inhabitants in such manner and for such time as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall maintain adequate supply of potable water through
tankers or through other means as it may consider appropriate in the drought affected area
for such period as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall maintain adequate supplies of fodder in a drought
affected area by procuring fodder from other States in such manner and for such period as
may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide, from time to time, adequate funds for carrying out the purpose of this
Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect,  as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
N
EW D ELHI; RANJEETA KOLI
November 7, 2019.
Definitions.
5
10
Compulsory
maintenance
of food
supplies in
drought
affected areas.
Appropriate
Government
to maintain
supply of
potable water
in drought
affected areas.
Appropriate
Compulsory
maintenance
of fodder
supply in
drought
affected areas.
Funds to be
provided by
the Central
Government.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Drought in India has resulted in millions of deaths over the course of the 18th, 19th and
20th centuries. Indian agriculture is heavily dependent on the climate e.g. a favourable
south-west summer monsoon is critical in securing water for irrigation of crops. In some
parts of the country, the failure of the monsoons result in water shortage thereby causing
below-average crop yields. This is evident in major drought-prone regions such as southern
and eastern Maharashtra, northern Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Gujarat, Telangana,
Rajasthan, Bihar and Jharkhand which play as havoc in such areas.
The Palamu division in Bihar and Kalahandi in Odisha have become synonymous with
drought. It has been observed that during the drought period the inhabitants do not have
food to eat and water to drink for their survival resulting in their exodus. In many areas
starvation deaths also occur. The worst sufferers in such time are the mute livestock. People
leave them stray to fend for themselves and without fodder and water they ultimately die.
The Governments at the Centre and State provide some sort of relief to the people of such
areas but the mute animals remain uncared for. It is, therefore, necessary that the supply of
food and potable water and also the fodder be maintained on priority and it should remain
uninterrupted so that the people do not leave such places and the livestock too get its fodder
and water for its survival.
Hence this Bill.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall maintain uninterrupted
food supplies in drought affected areas. Clause 4 provides that appropriate Government
shall maintain adequate supply of potable water in drought affected areas. Clause 5 provides
that appropriate Government shall provide adequate supplies of fodder in drought affected
areas. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the
implementation of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
one thousand crores would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crores is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory maintenance of food and potable water supplies for
human consumption and fodder for the livestock of the farmers in drought affected
areas by the Union Government in consultation with the Government of the  State
concerned  and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Ranjeeta Koli, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4394LS(S3)—13-01-2020.