Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
2.  After article 45 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘45A. The State shall take steps to ensure that no child is subjected to corporal
punishment in any form by any person.
Explanation: For the purpose of this article, ‘‘child’’ means any person below
the age of eighteen years.’’.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  1 of 2008.
5
Insertion of
new article
45A.
Protection of
children from
corporal
punishment.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
‘‘We reaffirm our obligation to take action to promote and protect the right of each
child—every human living below the age of 18 years, including the adolescents. We are
determined to respect the dignity and to secure the well-being of all children.’’ These are the
words from the Declaration adopted by the Special Session on children of the U.N. General
Assembly, which met in New York on May, 2002 and attended by 190 countries from all over
the world.
The UN General Assembly urged upon Governments to take all possible steps as part
of achieving Millennium Development Goals, to provide children affection, love and care so
that the future generation would grow in a friendly and healthy atmosphere where they will
develop their personality in an atmosphere of dignity.
In this context, it is very important that children are protected from all forms of corporal
punishments by anyone, including the parents and teachers.
By amending the Constitution, India ensures that the dignity of children will be given
utmost respect and  contributes greatly in achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
Hence this amendment.
N
EW DELHI;
December 10, 2007 C.K. CHANDRAPPAN.
2

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—154LS(S5)—06-02-2008.