As InTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

११ war Dt

Bill No. 1 of 2002.

| PAYMENT OF UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE BILL, 2002
By
‘Suni Bir Sich Mauro, M.P.

A

BILL
provide for the payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed persons and
for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
1. (J) This Act may be called the Payment of Unemployment Allowance Act, 2002. पंथ ॥
(2) It extends to the whole of India. i
‘ment
3 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
jn the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different
and Union territories. ,
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
(@ “allowance" means the monthly payment to be made to af unemployed
_ person under this Act;


Payment of

allowance to
unemployed
persons.

Expenditure
on unemploy-
ment
allowance to
be shared by
Central and
State
Governments.

Expenditure.
Rebate.

Power to make
rules.

2

(8) “unemployed person” means any adult person who has no ostensible means
of livelihood and whose name is registered in an employment exchange; and

(© “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (7) Every unemployed person shall be entitled to the payment of a monthly
allowance at a rate and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed after consult-
ing the Governments of the States and Union territories by the Central Government.

(2) While fixing the rates of allowance under sub-section (1), educational
qualifications, skill, experience and other relevant conditions of the unemployed person
shall be taken into consideration:

Provided that such unemployment allowance shall be paid only to one person.
ina family. न

Provided further that payment of unemployment allowance shall be stopped
forthwith once an unemployed person gets employment.

4, (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund, namely, Unemployment
Allowance Fund.

(2) The Central Government shall bear seventy five per cent. of the total expen-
diture incurred on the payment of unemployment allowance under this Act and twenty
five per cent. of the expenditure shall be met by the respective State Governments.

5. The expenditure relating to implementing of the provision of this Act shall be met
‘out of the unemployment allowance fund constituted under sub-section (1) of section 4.

6. ‘Any person who contributes to the fund shall be given tax rebate in such manner
as may be prescribed by law made by Parliament.

7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters namely,—

(@ the maximum and minimum amount of allowance payable under section 3
depending on the qualification and other relevant conditions of the applicant;

(0) manner of making application for payment of allowance;

(c) requirements for an applicant for being eligible for receiving allowance
such as educational qualifications, skill, experience, etc.; and

(@ such other matters which may be necessary to prescribe for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House ‘of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rules
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The problem of unemployment has assumed menacing proportion in our country.
Lack of opportunity of employment in the country is also leading to brain drain and exodus
of large number of skilled and unskilled persons abroad. This has caused and is causing
aggravated frustration amongst younger generation. Their energy is not being utilised for
building the Nation. They, driven to extreme desperation and deprivation, take to the path
of violence and crime. Empty sermons of morality, ethics, nationalism, religious dis-
courses and pious assurances of social, political and religious leaders are unable to check
the trend of youth taking to violence and criminality. It is time that concerted efforts are
made by the State to assure employment to the citizens of the country. For this purpose,
Government should set up the Unemployment Allowance Fund to provide relief to the
unemployed persons till they get employment.

New DELHI; BIR SINGH MAHATO
October 31, 2001.

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICES 117 AND 274
OF THE CONSTITUTION

[Copy of letter No. DGET-H-11019/4/2001-MP(G), dated 28 November, 2001
from Shri Sharad Yadav, Minister of Labour to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Payment of
Unemployment Allowance Bill, 2002 by Shri Bir Singh Mahato, Member of Parliament,
recommends the introduction under articles 117(1) and 274(1) and consideration of
the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for unemployment allowance to all unemployed
persons, Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of unemployment allowance fund
and the Central Government shall bear seventy five percent. expenditure incurred on
payment of unemployment allowance. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India on account of unemployment allowance to be paid to the
unemployed persons. It is, however, difficult to estimate accurately, at this stage, the
likely expenditure involved. On a rough estimate, the recurring expenditure per annum
will be to the tune of rupees two thousand crore. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to
be incurred.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
5 The delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


क्र

A
BILL
to provide for the payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed persons
for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Bir Singh Mahato, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—LS—31.01.2002,- 32.09 [LE