Short title
and
commencement.
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called  the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 1 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Amendment
of section 4.
2. In the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), section 4 shall be renumbered as section 4 ( 1) thereof
and—
(a)   in sub-section (1) as so renumbered, for the words "seven years",  the
words "ten years" shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(2) Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child below
sixteen years of age shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of natural life of
that person, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) The fine imposed under sub-section ( 1) shall be just and reasonable
and paid to the victim to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of
such victim.".
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(I) in clause ( j),—
(A) in sub-clause ( i), the word "or" occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
(B) in sub-clause ( iii), the word "or" occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
(C) after sub-clause ( iii), the following sub-clause shall  be inserted,
namely:—
"(iv) causes death of child; or";
(II) in clause ( s), for the words "sectarian violence", the words "sectarian
violence or during a situation of natural calamity" shall be substituted.
4. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"6.(1) Whoever commits aggravated penetrative sexual assault shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty
years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of natural life of that person, and shall also be
liable to fine, or with death.
(2) The fine imposed under sub-section ( 1) shall be just and reasonable and
paid to the victim to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of such victim.".
5. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(i ) in clause ( d), for the words "such jail or remand home or protection
home or observation home or other place of custody or care and protection", the
words "such jail or remand home or protection home or observation home or
other place of custody or care and protection or causes sexual assault, by giving
any payment or benefits to the child or to any other person exercising control
over the child, or by receiving any payment or benefits for the said purpose"
shall be substituted;
(ii ) in clause ( s), for the words "sectarian violance", the words "sectarian
violence or during a situation of natural calamity" shall be substituted;
32 of 2012.
Amendment
of section 5.
Punishment
for aggravated
penetrative
sexual assault.
Substitution
of new section
for section 6.
Amendment
of section 9.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iii ) after clause ( u), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(v) whoever gives, or administers, or causes to be given, or
administered, any hormone or any chemical substance, to a child with the
intent that such child attains early sexual maturity for the purpose of
penetrating sexual assault,".
6. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"14. ( 1) Whoever uses a child or children for pornographic purposes shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years
and shall also be liable to fine, and in the event of second or subsequent conviction
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years and also be
liable to fine.
(2) Whoever using a child or children for pornographic purposes under
sub-section ( 1), commits an offence referred to in section 3 or section 5 or section
7 or section 9 by directly participating in such pornographic acts, shall be punished
for the said offences also under section 4, section 6, section 8 and section 10,
respectively, in addition to the punishment provided in sub-section ( 1).".
7. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
''15.  ( 1) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material in any
form involving a child but fails to delete or destroy or report the same to the
designated authority as may be prescribed, shall be liable to fine not less than
one thousand rupees, and in the event of second or subsequent offence, with fine
which shall not be less than five thousand rupees.
(2) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material in any form
involving a child for transmitting or propagating or distributing in any manner at
any time except for the purpose of reporting, as may be prescribed, or for use as
evidence in court, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material in any form
involving a child for commercial pupose shall be punished on the first conviction
with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three years
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both, and in the event of
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description which
shall not be less than five years which may extend to seven years and shall also
be liable to fine.".
8. In section 42 of the principal Act, for the figures, letter and words "376E or
section 509 of the Indian Penal Code", the figures, letters and words, "376E,
section 509 of the Indian Penal Code or section 67B of the Information Technology
Act, 2000" shall be substituted.
9. In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), clause ( a) shall be
re-lettered as clause ( ab) and before clause ( ab) as so re-lettered, the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(a) the manner of deleting or destroying or reporting about pornographic
material in any form involving a child to the designated authority under
sub-section ( 1) of section 15;
(aa) the manner of reporting about pornographic material in any form
involving a child under sub-section ( 2) of section 15;”.
Punishment
for using
child for
pornographic
purposes.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 14.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 15.
Punishment for
storage of
pornographic
material
involving child.
Amendment of
section 42.45 of 1860.
21 of 2000.
Amendment of
section 45.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (the said Act) has been
enacted to protect children from offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and
pornography and provide for establishment of Special Courts for trial of such offences and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The said Act is gender neutral and regards the best interests and welfare of the child
as matter of paramount importance at every stage so as to ensure the healthy physical,
emotional, intellectual and social development of the child.
3. However, in the recent past incidences of child sexual abuse cases demonstrating
the inhumane mind-set of the abusers who have been barbaric in their approach towards
young victims is rising in the country. Children are becoming easy prey because of their
tender age, physical vulnerabilities and inexperience of life and society. The unequal
balance of power leading to the gruesome act may also detriment the mind of the child to
believe that might is right and reported studies establish that children who have been victims
of sexual violence in their childhood become more abusive later in their life. The report of
the National Crime Records Bureau for the year 2016 indicate increase in the number of
cases registered under the said Act from 44.7 per cent. in 2013 over 2012 and 178.6
per cent. in 2014 over 2013 and no decline in the number of cases thereafter.
4. The Supreme Court, in the matter of Machhi Singh vs. State of Punjab
[1983 (3) SCC 470], held that when the community feels that for the sake of self-preservation
the killer has to be killed, the community may well withdraw the protection by sanctioning
the death penalty. But the community will not do so in every case. It may do so in rarest of
rare cases when its collective conscience is so shocked that it will expect the holders of the
judicial power centre to inflict death penalty irrespective of their personal opinion as
regards desirability or otherwise of retaining death penalty. The same analogy has been
reiterated by the Supreme Court in the matter of  Devender Pal Singh vs. State (NCT of Delhi)
[AIR 2002 SC 1661] wherein it was held that when the collective conscience of the community
is so shocked, the court must award death sentence.
5. In the above backdrop, as there is a strong need to take stringent measures to deter
the rising trend of child sex abuse in the country, the proposed amendments to the said Act
make provisions for enhancement of punishments for various offences so as to deter the
perpetrators and ensure safety, security and dignified childhood for a child. It also
empowers the Central Government to make rules for the manner of deleting or destroying or
reporting about pornographic material in any form involving a child to the designated
authority.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; VIRENDRA  KUMAR
The 1st  January, 2019.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause  9  of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 45 of the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 so as to empower the Central Government to
make rules to provide for the manner of deleting or destroying or reporting about
pornographic material in any form involving a child to the designated authority under
sub-section (1) of section 15 and the manner of reporting about pornographic material in
any form involving a child under sub-section (2) of the said section.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government are
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE PROTECTION  OF CHILDREN  FROM
 SEXUAL OFFENCES  ACT, 2012
(32 OF 2012)
* * * * *
4.  Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
B.—AGGRA VATED PENETRATIVE SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT
THEREFOR
5. (a) Whoever, being a police officer, commits penetrative sexual assault on a
child—
* * * * *
(j) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child, which—
(i)  physically incapacitates the child or causes the child to become
mentally ill as defined under clause ( b) of section 2 of the Mental Health
Act, 1987 or causes impairment of any kind so as to render the child unable
to perform regular tasks, temporarily or permanently; or
* * * * *
(iii) inflicts the child with Human Immunodeficiency Virus or any
other life threatening disease or Infection which may either temporarily or
permanently impair the child by rendering him physically incapacitated, or
mentally ill to perform regular tasks; or
*              *                *                      *              *
(s) whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child in the course of
communal or sectarian violence; or
*              *                *                      *              *
6. Whoever, commits aggravated penetrative sexual assault, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
*              *                *                      *              *
D.—AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PUNISHMENT THEREFOR
9. (a) Whoever, being a police officer, commits sexual assault on a child—
*              *                *                      *              *
(d) whoever being on the management or on the staff of a jail, or remand
home or protection home or observation home, or other place of custody or care
and protection established by or under any law for the time being in force commits
sexual assault on a child being inmate of such jail or remand home or protection
home or observation home or other place of custody or care and protection; or
Punishment
for penetrative
sexual assault.
Aggravated
penetrative
sexual assault.
14 of 1987.
Punishment
for aggravated
penetrative
sexual assault.
Aggravated
sexual assault.
6

7
Punishment
for using child
for
pornographic
purposes.
Punishment
for storage of
pornographic
material
involving
child.
Alternate
punishment.
*              *                *                      *              *
(s) whoever commits sexual assault on a child in the course of communal or
sectarian violence; or
*              *                *                      *              *
14. (1)  Whoever, uses a child or children for pornographic purposes shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend to five years and
shall also be liable to fine and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and
also be liable to fine.
 (2) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes commits an offence
referred to in section 3, by directly participating in pornographic acts, he shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable
to fine.
 (3) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes commits an offence
referred to in section 5, by directly participating in pornographic acts, he shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
 (4) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes commits an offence
referred to in section 7, by directly participating in pornographic acts, he shall be
punished with  imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than six years but which may extend to eight years, and shall also be liable to fine.
 (5) If the person using the child for pornographic purposes commits an offence
referred to in section 9, by directly participating in pornographic acts, he shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than eight years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
15. Any person, who stores, for commercial purposes any pornographic material
in any form involving a child shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
*              *                *                      *              *
42. Where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act
and also under sections 166A, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D, 370, 370A, 375, 376, 376A,
376C, 376D, 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code, then, notwithstanding
anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the offender found guilty of
such offence shall be liable to punishment only under this Act or under the Indian
Penal Code as provides for punishment which is greater in degree.
* * * * *
45. (1)* * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the qualifications and experience of, and the fees payable to a
translator or an interpreter, a special educator or any person familiar
with the matter of communication of the child or an expert in that field,
under sub-section ( 4) of section 19; sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 26 and
section 38;
* * * * *
45 of 1860.
Power to make
rules.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
—————
(Shri Virendra Kumar Minister of State, Women and Child Development and
Minority Affairs)
MGIPMRND—3001LS(S3)—02-01-2019.