As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 1 of 2006 No. 1 of 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By

Suri C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL .
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.

2. In article 148 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the words “by warrant under his
hand and seal” the following words shall be inserted, namely:—

“on the recommendatidn of a Committee consisting of the Chairman of the
Council of States, the Speaker of the House of the People and the Chairman of the
Public Accounts Committee from amongst a panel of three persons having sufficient
knowledge of finance, accounting and auditing system or having practical experience
lo of working in the finance department or has worked as Accountant General.”

Short title.

Amendment
of article 148.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India embodies an institution of
great importance and is a high Constitutional office. However, the Constitution of India does
not lay down any qualification for the Comptroller and Auditor-General nor the manner of his
selection.

Due to this, of late, it has been observed that this post is being held by retired bureaucrats
who have no knowledge and experience in the matter of public finance, auditing and
accounting.

In the countries like United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and United States this high
office is held by eminent personalities of impeccable character with deep knowledge in the
matters of public finance, accounting and auditing.

The office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General is expected to critically review the
spending of public money by the Government and to ensure that the spending is done
according to allocation of funds made in the budget. This office guarantees that in relation to
public spending the Government is accountable to Parliament.

The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide for qualifications and
manner of appointment of the Comptroller and Auditor General by the President so that
suitably skilled persons with right experience can be appointed to the office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General. The Bill will go a long way to restore the high standard and esteem of
this important office.

New Devi; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
December 14,2005


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * *

148. (1) There shall be a Comptroller and Auditor General of India who shall be appointed — Comptroller
by the President by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be removed from office in and Auditor-
like manner and on the like grounds as a judge of the Supreme Court. General of

India.
* * * . * *


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL”
further to amend the Constitution of India.

’

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—5081LS(S-3)—08.02.2006.