| As iTRopuceD IN Lok SABHA

2519:

Bill No. 1 of 2000

THE ABOLITION OF BEGGING BILL, 2000
By
Suri Ram Das ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL

10 provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

Be. it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Begging Act, 2000. Short title and
extent.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(७) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government:

(b) "beggar" means a person who indulges in begging;


Abolition of
begging,
Punishment
for forced
egeing.

bogging, ete,

Beggars’
Weifare Fund.

Formulation
of schemes

and plans for
beggars, ete.

Power to make

rales,

ma

(©) "Begging" means-

(@ soliciting alms in a public place, including railways, bus-stops, road
sides and public transport, by invoking compassion; and

(i) entering in any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or
receiving alms; 5

(@ "receiving centre means a centre established under section 5, where any
Person taken into custody on the ground of begging shall be kept till the time he is
rehabilitated.

3. Begging by any person in any manner is hereby abolished.
'

4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, custody 10
or charge, for begging or whoever uses any person as an exhibit for the purpose of begging,
shall, in the first instance, be warned of indulging in such activities and Dunished with a
fine of rupees five hundred if he indulges inspite of the warning given to him.

5. (7) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the Police,

(2) Any person so arrested shall be sent to a receiving centre, to be established 15
in every district by the appropriate Governthent, wherein such person shall be provided
with facilities for his rehabilitation.

6. (7) The Central Government shall constitute 2 Fund to be called the Beggars’
Welfare Fund for the welfare of the beggars.

(2) The fund shall be utilised for the welfare and Tehabilitation of beggars. 20

7. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate such schemes, work out
such plans, including plans for provision of education, and create suitable
infrastructure in every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs for
earning livelihood.

(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes for providing 25
food, shelter and protec tion, to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons so as to
discourage them from indulging in begging.

8. The Central Government may, notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Despite all efforts made and welfare measures taken by the Central Government
the State Governments, the practice of begging continues unabated all over the country,
especially in the metropolitan cities and urban centres. there are organised gangs who
exploit innocent children and force them into begging not for the sustenance of these boys
and girls but for gathering alms for the gang leaders and organisers. Some’ people have
made forcing children into begging a business. ‘They kidnap children and force them to go

for begging and collect huge amount. .

As per 1971 census the number of beggars in the couniry was 10 lakhs and the
number has considerably increased during subsequent years,

Prevention of begging has to go alongwith programmes for education, training and
rehabilitation of the children, women and men found engaged in begging. Some alternative
source of livelihood have to he found for the beggars.

Therefore, it is high time that a law for prevention of begging is brought forward, -

Hence this Bill.

New Devnt, RAMDAS ATHAWALE
November 30, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of "receiving centres" in every district
by the appropriate Government. Clause 6 provides for setting up of Beggars’ Welfare
Fund. Clause 7 provides for formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure
by appropriate Government in every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable
jobs. It further provides for setting up of destitute homes by the appropriate Government.
‘The Central Government would have to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India for establishment of receiving centres, destitute homes, formulating schemes, creating
suitable infrastructure in respect of Union territories and shall also have to contribute
monies into Beggars’ Welfare Fund. As far as establishment of receiving centres, destitute
homes, formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure in the States are
concerned, the concerned State Governments will incur expenditure from their Consolidated
Funds, though the Central Government may have to extend some financial assistance to
State for implementing the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 115 likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakhs is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
| of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

BILL

to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto,

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.)

APPEL MAND~ Brgy ५५ . 19.4. nee,