THE  RIGHT TO WORK BILL,  2007
By
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the right to work and  for allowance till such time as  appropriate work is
provided to any citizen, for establishment of Right to Work Fund, for creation of Right to
Work Insurance and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Right to Work  Act, 2007.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "employment exchange" means an employment exchange set up by the
Government of a State or Union territory;
(b) "Fund" means the “Right to Work Fund” established under sub-section (1)
of section 9;
(c) "Government" means the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No.  1 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
Right to
work.
(d) “notification” means a notification published in the official Gazette by the
Central Government; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Subject to the provisions contained in sections 7 and 13, every citizen who has
attained the age of eighteen years and who, being unemployed, is registered at an employ-
ment exchange shall have the right to appropriate work to be provided by the Government.
4. The work to be provided by the Government under section 3 shall be suited to the
age and qualification of the citizen concerned.
5. Till such time as work is provided to a citizen under section 3, he or she shall be
entitled to an allowance, not being less than rupees two hundred per week, as may be
prescribed.
6. If a citizen secures any work or job subsequent to his registration with the employ-
ment exchange, either on his own or otherwise, he shall inform the employment exchange
immediately and his name shall be removed by the employment exchange with effect from
the date of his having secured the job or work.
7. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any citizen,—
(a) who has an income, through any source, not being less than the amount of
allowance fixed under section 5;
(b) who is covered under any scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent in
a State or Union territory.
8. Where a citizen, being unemployed, registers himself with an employment
exchange under section 3, but has an income of his own through any source, the amount of
allowance to which he may be entitled under section 5 shall be reduced by the amount of his
such income.
9. (1) The Government shall establish a Fund to be called “Right to Work Fund” for
the grant of allowance under this Act.
(2) The Government shall, from time to time, make such grants to the Fund as may
be required for the purpose of this Act.
(3) These shall be credited to the Fund,—
(a) all grants made by the Government under sub-section (2);
(b) all voluntary donations made to the Fund;
(c) all contributions in respect of the Right to Work Insurance Policy under
section 10;
(d) all sums collected under section 12; and
(e) any interest or dividend or other return on any investment made out of any
part of the Fund.
(4) All amounts due and payable under the Act and all expenditures relating to the
management and administration of the Fund shall be paid out of the Fund.
10. The Government shall frame a Right to Work Insurance Policy to cover whole or
any part of such grants of allowances as may be payable under this Act.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income Tax Act, 1961, all voluntary
donations made to the Fund shall qualify for such rebate or deductions from the income-tax
payable by the donors, as may be prescribed.
12. Every citizen who receives work or allowance under this Act shall contribute to the
fund for a prescribed period immediately after his securing any work or job, whether provided
by the Government under this Act or on his own, at such rate as may be prescribed.
Act not to
apply to
certain
citizens.
Reduction of
allowance under
section 5.
Contribution
to the Fund
5
10
25
30
35
40
Nature of
Work to be
provided.
Grant of
Allowance.
Removal of
name by
Employment
Exchange.
Establishment
of 'Right to
Work Fund'.
Right to
Work
Insurance
Policy.
Rebate or
deductions
from Income-
Tax.
15
20
45
43 of 1961

3
13. The Government may, in its endeavour to provide work under this Act, categorise
citizens by notification on the basis of their qualification or any other basis as may be
prescribed and make citizens of such categories entitled to right to work under section 3:
Provided that the Government shall provide the right to work to all eligible citizens
within ten years from the commencement of this Act.
14. As soon as may be, after the close of a financial year, the Government shall cause
an annual report on the working and administration of the Fund and the implementation of
this Act during that year, to be prepared and laid before each House of Parliament, and every
such report shall be in such form and shall contain such matters as may be prescribed.
15. (1) The Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the rate of allowance referred to in section 5 and different rates may be
prescribed on the basis of qualification and skills;
(b) the necessary details relating to the Right to Work Insurance referred to in
section 10;
(c) rebate or deductions from income-tax under section 11;
(d) the rate of contribution to the Fund under section 12;
(e) the basis of categorisation of citizens under section 13;
(f) the form and content of the annual report mentioned in section 14;
(g) the procedure to regulate all payments under this Act; and
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
16. Every rule made under this Act by the Government and every notification issued
under section 13, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or
notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or notification.
Categorising
of citizens
entitled to
Right to
work.
Annual report
by
Government.
Power to
make rules.
Rules and
notifications
to be laid
before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Indian Constitution guarantees to every citizen the fundamental right to life. The
Supreme Court has observed that the right to life, in order to be meaningful, assumes the
availability of necessary means to a decent livelihood. On the other hand, the problem of
unemployment has assumed menacing proportions. Even the educated citizens are rendered
indigent. Lack of opportunity of employment in the country is also leading to brain drain and
exodus of a large number of skilled and unskilled persons abroad.
It is time that concerted efforts are made by the State to assure work to citizens. The Bill
grants every citizen the legal right to work. Till such time as work is provided to a citizen, he
or she shall be entitled to an allowance.
The Bill also provides for the establishment by the Government of a 'Right to Work
Fund'. The Fund will receive grants made by the Government, voluntary donations which
shall qualify for rebate or deductions from income-tax payable by the donor, contributions at
prescribed rate and for a specified period from citizens who secure work after registration,
etc. There is also a provision to promote Right to Work Insurance to raise finances.
The Bill is realistic, in so far as it provides for even a gradual introduction of the right
to work. To begin with, the Government may categorise citizens on the basis of their
qualification or any other basis and make citizens of such categories entitled to the right to
work; so, however, that gradually all the citizens secure the right to work within a period of
ten years from the commencement of the Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
July  25, 2006
—————
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLES  117(1),  274(1)
AND  117(3)  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION
—————
[Copy of letter No. DGE&T-H-11019/3/2006-MP(G), dated 18 December, 2006 from
Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of State of the Ministry of Labour and Employment to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Right to Work Bill, 2007
by Shri Mohan Singh, Member of Parliament, recommends its introduction under articles
117(1) and 274(1) and consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha.
—————
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide allowance to a citizen who has attained the age of
eighteen years and who, being unemployed, is registered at an Employment Exchange. Till
such time as work is provided to such a citizen, he or she shall be entitled to such allowance
not being less than two hundred rupees per week, as may be prescribed. Clause 9 of the Bill
provides for the establishment of a 'Right to Work Fund' for the grant of allowance under this
Act. It is difficult to make an exact estimate of the recurring expenditure that may be involved
on this count. Nevertheless, the provisions of the Bill may be expected to involve recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of
India. The recurring expenditure is expected to reduce substantially as employment situation
improves, and as voluntary donations and contributions from citizens who secure work and
contributions from the Right to Work Insurance are received.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.  These rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the right to work and for allowance till such time as appropriate work is
provided to any citizen, for establishment of Right to Work Fund, for creation of
Right to Work Insurance and for matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2729LS (S-5)—04.01.2007.