Short title and
commencement.
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF PUNJAB
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RA VNEET SINGH,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Punjab for providing impetus
to the financial and economic capabilities of State administration to carry out schemes
for welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Other Backward Classes, farmers and
agricultural labourers so that fruits of development reach the
poorest and most disadvantaged citizens of State and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Punjab
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 1 of  2017
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every
year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Punjab to meet the cost of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of Union Government for the purposes of—
(i) promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and the Other Backward
Classes, including providing scholarships and pensions;
(ii) implementing welfare measures with a view to improve the conditions of
agricultural labourers and to protect their rights;
(iii) providing financial assistance to small and marginal farmers; and
(iv) effective development, exploitation and proper utilisation of resources in
the State.
3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with provisions of this
Act, which appear to him to be necessary or expedient for removing difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in derogation of any other law
for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Punjab.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The State of Punjab has been at the forefront of the green revolution in the country
and has been pioneer in country’s journey to achieve food security. Hardwork of Punjab’s
farmers have made it the bread basket of the nation. But in last decade, stagnation of growth
in agricultural sector has adversely affected the whole State. Farmers, who form the
backbone of State’s economy have suffered the most, along with agricultural labourers who
belong to the Dalit and marginalized sections of society. Moreover, mis-management of State
finances by the Government has resulted in a massive public debt over the State. Through its
own ill devised policies, State Government has hamstrung itself and is not able to take up the
schemes for welfare of the Scheduled Castes, farmers, agricultural labourers and the Other
Backward Classes of State.
In such a situation, most marginalized and most vulnerable citizens of Punjab need an
immediate help from the Union Government to alleviate their distress. The Bill seeks to
ensure that appropriate financial resources are allocated to people of  State of  Punjab and
would go a long way in building a more powerful nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAVNEET SINGH
November 9, 2016.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sum of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament  may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Punjab. To meet the cost of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State Government with the approval of
Government of India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Punjab. As the sum of
moneys which will be given to the State of Punjab as special financial assistance by
appropriation made by Parliament by law will be known only after the welfare schemes to be
implemented by the State Government with the Government of India are identified, it is not
possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the
Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Punjab for providing impetus to
the financial and economic capabilities of State administration to carry out schemes
for welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Other Backward Classes, farmers and
agricultural labourers so that fruits of development reach the
poorest and most disadvantaged citizens of State and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ravneet Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3370LS(S3)—10-01-2017.
————