1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK' , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 1 of  2016
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2.  After Part IVA of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART IVB
PROHIBITIONS
51B. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “ the State” has the same
meaning as in Part III.
51C. There shall be a total prohibitions on the following acts by any person including
owner, lessee or occupant of a residential or a commercial establishment, whether private or
public,—
(a) littering;
(b) dumping or disposal of garbage or electronic waste in a manner not authorised
by the State;
(c) urinating, defecating or spitting in a public place;
(d) dirty frontage or surroundings of any building;
(e) stacking of garbage outside residence or establishment; and
( f ) obstruction by placing any dilapidated appliances or vehicles or by disposing
any merchandise or illegal structure along side walk.
51 D. The State shall, within six months of coming into force of this Act, take all such
steps, including enactment of laws, as may be necessary, for enforcement of prohibitions
referred to in article 51C.”.
Definition.
Prohibitions.
Enforcement
of
prohibitions.
5
10
15
Insertion of
new Part IVB.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, public health, sanitation and public convenience services are primary
responsibilities of the institutions of local self-Government and the State Governments.
These subject matters are of paramount importance as health of common man has direct
relation to practice of sanitation and facilities of public convenience provided by the
State Governments. However, it has been observed that the State Governments including
institutions of local self-Government  i.e.,  Municipal Corporations, Boards or Councils at
local level have miserably failed to address the issues of sanitation and public convenience
in a proper manner. Recently, the Union Government has initiated ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’
to instill a sense of cleanliness and health consciousness among public and sensitise the
local bodies to provide sanitation and public services effectively.
To make ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ a success story, it is urgently required that the
citizens also play a positive role in maintaining cleanliness in public places and abjure
hazardous practice of littering, spitting, urinating or dumping of garbage in public places.
Therefore, it is necessary that relevant provisions be inserted in the Constitution so that the
Central Government, the State Governments including institutions of self-Government and
citizens can play their due role to achieve the objectives of ‘ Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ in a
time bound manner.
The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to insert a new Part IVB providing
for a total prohibition on littering, dumping, spitting, urinating, etc. in public places by
citizens so as to ensure the cleanliness in our surroundings to promote pollution free
environment.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’
December 23, 2015.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank', M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4123LS(S3)—09.02.2016.