Bill No. 1 of 2012
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS BILL, 2012
By
SHRI BISHNU PADA RAY, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
PART I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions
PART II
LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY
3. Legislative Assembly and its composition.
4. Qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly.
5. Duration of Legislative Assembly.
6. Session of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.
7. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.
8. Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from
office is under consideration.
9. Right of Lieutenant Governor to address and send message to Legislative Assembly.
10. Special address by the Lieutenant Governor.
11. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly.
12. Oath or  affirmation by members.
13. Voting in Legislative Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies
and quorum.
14. Vacation of seats.
15. Disqualifications for membership.
16. Disqualification on ground of defection.
17. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or when not qualified
or when disqualified.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
18. Powers, privileges, etc. of members.
19. Salaries and allowances of members.
20. Exemption of property of the Union from taxation.
21. Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with respect to certain matters.
22. Special provisions as to financial Bills.
23. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.
24. Assent to Bills.
25. Bills reserved for consideration.
26. Requirements as to sanction, etc.
27. Annual financial statement.
28. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates.
29. Appropriation Bills.
30. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
31. V otes on accounts.
32. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative Assembly.
33. Rules of procedure.
34. Official language or languages of the Union territory and language or languages to
be used in Legislative Assembly.
35. Language to be used for Bills, Act, etc.
36. Restriction on discussion in the Legislative Assembly.
37. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative Assembly.
PART III
D
ELIMITA TION OF CONSTITUENCIES
38. Election Commission to delimit constituencies.
39. Power of  Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders upto date.
40. Elections to the Legislative Assembly.
PART IV
C
ERTAIN PROVISIONS RELA TING TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS
41. Matters in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion.
42. Advice by Ministers.
43. Other provisions as to Ministers.
44. Conduct of business.
45. Duties of Chief Ministers as respects the furnishing of information, etc. to the
Lieutenant Governor.
PART V
M
ISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
46. Consolidated Fund of the Union territory.
47. Contingency Fund of the Union territory.
48. Audit reports.
49. Relation of Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers to President.
50. Period of order made under article and approval thereof by Parliament.
51. Authorisation of expenditure by President.
52. Contracts and suits.
53. Power of President to remove difficulties.
54. Laying of Rules before Legislative Assembly.
55. Amendments to the Constitution.
56. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.
(ii)

Bill No. 1 of 2012
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF
ANDAMANAND NICOBAR ISLANDS BILL, 2012
By
SHRI BISHNU PADA RAY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the creation of a Legislative Assembly for the Union territory of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third year of the Republic of India as follows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "article" means an article of the Constitution;
Short title and
commencement.5
10
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "Assembly constituency" means a constituency provided under this Act for
the purpose of election to the Legislative Assembly;
(c) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission referred to in article 324;
(d) "Legislative Assembly" means the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(e) "Scheduled Castes" in relation to the Union territory means such castes, races
or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under
article 341 of the Constitution to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that Union territory;
(f) "Scheduled Tribes" in relation to the Union territory means such tribes, races
or parts of the groups within such tribes or races as are deemed under article 342 to be
Scheduled Tribes in relation to the Union territory; and
(g) "Union territory" means the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
PART II
L
EGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
3. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled by persons
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies shall be thirty.
(2) For  the purposes of election to the Legislative Assembly, the Union territory shall
be divided into single-member assembly constituencies in accordance with the provisions
of Part III in such manner that the population of each of the constituencies shall, so far as
practicable, be the same throughout the Union territory.
(3) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly, and
the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the
total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the
Union territory bears to the total population of the Union territory and the provisions of
article 334 shall apply to such reservation.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression "population," means the population as
ascertained in the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that where such figures have not been published, then for the purposes of
elections for the constitution of the first Legislative  Assembly under this Act, the provisional
figures of the population of the Union territory as published in relation to the 2011 census
shall be deemed to be the population of the Union territory.
4. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly
unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person authorised
in that behalf by the Election Commission on oath or affirmation according to the form
set out for the purpose in the Schedule;
(b) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and
(c) possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or
under any law made by Parliament.
5. The Legislative Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said
period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency issued under
clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, be extended by the President by order for a period  not
exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months
after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
Legislative
Assembly and
its
composition.
Qualifications
for member-
ship of
Legislative
Assembly.
Duration of
Legislative
Assembly.
5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall, from time to time, summon the Legislative
Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next
session.
(2) The Lieutenant Governor may, from time to time,—
(a) prorogue the Assembly;
(b) dissolve the Assembly.
7. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the
Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as  the office
of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member
to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;
(b) may, at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the
Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the
Speaker resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly passed by a
majority of all the then members of the Assembly:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless atleast
fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:
Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker shall not
vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the
dissolution.
(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant the duties of the office shall be performed by
the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the
Assembly as may  be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.
(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly, the Deputy
Speaker, or if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure
of the Assembly, or if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by
the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.
(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislative
Assembly by law and until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances
as the Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.
8. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the removal
of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution for
the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker,
shall not, though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub-section ( 4) of section 7
shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which
the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Deputy Speaker is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office is
under consideration in the Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 13, be
entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during
such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.
Session of
Legislative
Assembly,
prorogation
and
dissolution.
Speaker or
Deputy
Speaker of
Legislative
Assembly.
Speaker or
Deputy
Speaker not
to preside
while a
resolution
for his
removal
from office
is under
consideration.
  5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

4
9. (1) The Lieutenant Governor may address the Legislative Assembly and for that
purpose require the attendance of members.
(2) The Lieutenant Governor may send message to the Assembly whether with respect
to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or otherwise and when a message is so sent, the
Assembly shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the message to
be taken into consideration.
10. (1) At the commencement of the first session after each general  election to the
Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Lieutenant
Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform it of the causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by rules to be made by the Assembly regulating its
procedure for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such address.
11. Every Minister shall have the right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly and to speak in and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of any committee of the Legislative Assembly of which he may be named a
member, but shall not by virtue of this section be entitled to vote.
12. Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before taking his seat, make and
subscribe before the Lieutenant Governor, or some person appointed in that behalf by him,
an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule.
13. (1) Save as otherwise provided in the act, question at any sitting of the Legislative
Assembly shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting
other than the Speaker or person acting as such.
(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall
have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in
the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall be valid
notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled
so to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
 (4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative Assembly shall be one-third
of the total number of members of the Assembly.
(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quorum. It
shall be the duty of the Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn  the Assembly or
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.
14. (1) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of the Legislative
 Assembly and if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such Assembly, then
at the expiration of such period as is specified  in or under the Representation of People
 Act, 1951, and the rules made by the President under clause (2) of article 101 and clause
(2) of article 190, that person's seat in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he had
previously resigned his seat in the Legislative Assembly.
(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly—
(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in section 15 or section
16 for membership of the Assembly, or
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker and his
resignation is accepted by the Speaker, his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to clause (b), if from the information
received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker is satisfied
that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine he shall not accept such resignation.
Right of
Lieutenant
Governor to
address and
send message
to Legislative
Assembly.
Special address
by the
Lieutenant
Governor.
Rights of
Ministers as
respects
Legislative
Assembly.
Oath or
affirmation by
member.
V oting in
Legislative
Assembly,
power of
Assembly to
act
notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.
V acation of
seats.
5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45
43 of 1951

5
(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is without
permission of the Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may declare his
seat vacant:
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no  account shall be taken of
any period during which the Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four
consecutive days.
15. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
the Legislative Assembly—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State or the Government of any Union territory other than an office
declared by law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of any State or by the
Legislative Assembly of any other Union territory not to disqualify its holder; or.
(b) if he is for the time being disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a
member of either House of Parliament under the provisions of sub-clause (b), sub-
clause (c) or sub-clause (d) of clause (1) of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance
of that article.
(2) For the purpose of the section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of
profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or the Government of
any Union territory by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State
or Union territory.
(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the Legislative Assembly has
become disqualified for being such a member under the provisions of sub-section (1), the
question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.
(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.
16. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall, subject to the
necessary modifications (including modifications for construing reference therein to the
Legislative Assembly of a State, article 188, article 194 and article 212 as references,
respectively, to the Legislative Assembly, section 12, section 18 and section 37 of this Act),
apply to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly as they apply to and in
relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State and accordingly—
(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed to form part of this
Act; and
(b) a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly
if he is so disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.
17. If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly before he has
complied with the requirements of section 12 or when he knows that he is not qualified or that
he is disqualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which
he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the
Union.
18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and standing orders
regulating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly; there shall be freedom of speech in the
Legislative Assembly.
 (2) No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any proceedings in any
court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Assembly or any Committee
thereof and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority
of such Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
Disqualification
for
membership.
Disqualification
on ground of
defection.
Penalty for
sitting and
voting before
making oath
of affirmation
or when not
qualified or
when
disqualified.
Powers.
privileges,
etc. of
members.
  5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

6
 (3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly
and of the members and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the time being
enjoyed by the House of the people and its members and committees.
 (4) The provisions of sub-sections  (1),  (2) and  (3) shall apply in relation to persons
who by virtue of this Act have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply, in relation
to members of that Assembly.
19. Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive such salaries
and allowances as may from time to time be determined by the Legislative Assembly by law
and until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as the Lieutenant
Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.
20. The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise
provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any law made by the Legislative
Assembly or by or under any other law in force in the Union territory:
Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides,
prevent any authority within the Union territory from levying any tax on any property of the
Union to which such property was immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
liable or treated as liable, so long as the tax continues to be levied in the Union territory.
21.  (1) The provisions of article 286, article 287 and article 288 shall apply in relation
to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to
in those articles as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with
respect to those matters.
 (2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modification, apply in
relation to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters
referred to in that article as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a
State with respect to those matters.
22.  (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved in, the Legislative
Assembly except on the recommendation of the Lieutenant Governor if such Bill or amendment
makes provision for any of the following matters, namely:—
 (a) the imposition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
 (b) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken
or to be undertaken by the Government of the Union territory;
(c) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory;
(d) the declaring of any expenditure to the expenditure charged on the Consolidated
Fund of the Union territory or the  increasing of the amount of any such expenditure;
(e) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory or the custody of such money:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this sub-section for the
moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be passed by the Legislative
Assembly unless the Lieutenant Governor has recommended to that Assembly the
consideration of the Bill.
Salaries and
allowances of
members.
Exemption of
property of
the Union
from
taxation.
Restrictions
on laws passed
by Legislative
Assembly
with respect
to certain
matters.
Special
provisions as
to financial
Bills.
 5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

7
23. (1) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Assembly.
(2) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly shall lapse on a dissolution of
the Assembly.
24. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly it shall be presented to
the Lieutenant Governor and the Lieutenant Governor shall declare either that he assents to
the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration
of the President:
Provided that the Lieutenant Governor may, as soon as possible after the
presentation of the Bill to him for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together
with a message requesting that the Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified
provisions thereof, and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any
such amendments as he may recommend in his message, and, when a Bill is so returned,
the Assembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again with or
without amendment and presented to the Lieutenant Governor for assent, the Lieutenant
Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he reserves the Bill for
the consideration of the President.
Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for
the consideration of the President, any Bill which:—
(a) in the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor would if it became law so derogate
from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by
the Constitution designed to fill; or
(b) the President may, by order direct to be reserved for his consideration; or
(c) relates to a matter referred to in sub-section (5) of section 7 or section 19 or
section 34 or sub-section  (3) of section 43.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 25, a Bill shall be deemed
to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters
specified in sub-section (1) of section 22 or any matter incidental to any of those matters and
in either case, there is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.
25. When a Bill is reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the
President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds
assent therefrom:
Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the Lieutenant
Governor to return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a message as is
mentioned in the first proviso to section 24 and when a Bill is so returned the Assembly shall
reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such
message and if it is again passed by the Assembly with or without amendment it shall be
presented again to the President for his consideration.
26. No Act of the Legislative Assembly and no provision in any such Act shall be
invalid by reason only that some previous sanction or recommendation required by this Act
was not given if assent to that Act was given by the Lieutenant Governor or on being
reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the President, by the President.
27. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to be
laid before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, a statement
of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Union territory for that year, in this Part
referred to as the "annual financial statement".
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall
show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Act as expenditure
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory; and
Procedure as
to lapsing of
Bills.
Assent to
Bills.
Bills reserved
for
consideration.
Requirements
as to
sanction, etc.
Annual
financial
statement.
  5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45
      50

8
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue
account from other expenditure.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory:
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Lieutenant Governor and other
expenditure relating to his office as determined by the President by general or special
order;
(b) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the Union territory from
the Consolidated Fund of India including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption
charges and other expenditure connected therewith;
(c) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly;
(d) any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any court or
arbitral tribunal;
(e) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by law made by
Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly to be so charged.
28. ( 1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative
Assembly, but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing the discussion
in the Legislative Assembly of any of those estimates.
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in
the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly
shall have power to assent or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand
subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the Lieutenant
Governor.
29. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have been made by the
Legislative Assembly there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of all moneys required to meet—
(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory but
not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before
the Assembly.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative Assembly
which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so
made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the
Union territory and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is
inadmissible under this sub-section shall be final.
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall be withdrawn from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory except under appropriation made by law passed in
accordance with provisions of this section.
30. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall,—
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions
of section 29 to be expanded for a particular service for the current financial year is
found to be insufficient for purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the
current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new
service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for the year, or
Procedure in
Legislative
Assembly
with respect
to estimates.
Appropriation
Bills.
Supplementary,
addition or
excess grants.
 5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

9
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess
of the amount granted for that service and for that year, cause to be laid before the
Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, another statement
showing the estimated amount of that expenditre or cause to be presented to the
Legislative Assembly with such previous sanction a demand for such excess, as the
case may be.
(2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to any such
statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such
expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the
annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant
and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or grant.
31. (1)  Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the
Legislative Assembly shall have power to make any grant in advance in respect of the
estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure
prescribed in section 28 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the Law in accordance
with the provisions of section 29 in relation to that expenditure and the Legislative Assembly
shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund
of the Union territory for the purposes for which the said grant in made.
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to the making
of any grant under sub-section (1) or to any law to be made under that sub-section as
they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure
mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation
of appropriation of moneys, out of the Consolidated Fund of  the Union territory to meet
such expenditure.
32. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Lieutenant
Governor may authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory
as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the date of
the constitution of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, pending the sanction such
expenditure by the Legislative Assembly.
33. (1) The Legislative Assembly may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions
of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:
Provided that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly and with the approval of the President, make rules—
(a) for securing the timely completion of financial business;
(b) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the Legislative
Assembly in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory;
(c) for prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matter
which affects the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as he
is required by or under this Act or any law to act in his discretion.
(2) Until rules are made under sub-section (1), the rules of procedure and standing
orders with respect to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh in force
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall have effect in relation to the Legislative
Assembly subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the
Lieutenant Governor.
Votes on
account.
Authorisation
of expenditure
pending its
sanction by
Legislative
Assembly.
Rules of
procedure.
  5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

10
34. (1) The Legislative Assembly may by law adopt any one or more of the languages
in use in the Union territory or Hindi as the official language or languages to be used for all
or any of the official purposes of the Union territory:
Provided that the President may by order direct—
(i) that the official language of the Union shall be adopted for such of the official
purposes of the Union territory as may be specified in the order.
(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted throughout the Union territory
or such part thereof for such of the official purposes of the Union territory as may be
specified in the order, if the President is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the
population of the Union territory desires the use of that other language for all or any of
such purposes.
(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly shall be transacted in the official
language or languages of the Union territory or in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Speaker or the Legislative Assembly or the person acting as such, as
the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of
the languages aforesaid, to address the Assembly in his mother-tongue.
35. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, the authoritative texts—
(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in the
Legislative Assembly;
(b) of all Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly; and
(c) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under any law made by
the Legislative Assembly,
shall be in English language:
Provided that where the Legislative Assembly has prescribed any language other than
the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly
or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-law issued under any law made by the Legislative
Assembly, a translation of the same in the English language published under the authority of
the Lieutenant Governor in the official Gazette shall be deemed to be the authoritative text
thereof in the English language.
36. No discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly with respect to the
conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of duties.
37. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall not be called
in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers are vested by or
under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order
in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the
exercise by him of those powers.
Official
language or
languages of
the Union
territory and
language or
languages to be
used in
Legislative
Assembly.
Language to
be used for
Bills, Acts,
etc.
Restrictions
on discussion
in the
Legislative
Assembly.
Courts not to
inquire into
proceedings
of Legislative
Assembly.
 5
10
20
15
25
30
35

11
PART III
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES
38. (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute the
seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly under section 3 to single-member territorial
constituencies and delimit them having regard to the following provisions, namely:—
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be delimited in such manner
that the ratio between the population of each of such constituencies and the total
population of the Union territory is the same; and
(b) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes/Tribes
shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their population
to the total population is comparatively large.
(2) The Election Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in the Official
Gazette and also in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together
with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals and
specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be further considered by it;
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it
before the date so specified;
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been
received by it before the date so specified, finalise delimitation of constituencies and
cause such order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such
publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called
in question in any court.
39. The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Official
Gazette,—
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 38 or any error
arising therein from inadversent slip or omission; and
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any
such order are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for bringing such order uptodate.
40. (1) For the purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly, a general election
will be held as soon as may be after the delimitation of all the assembly constituencies under
section 38.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Lieutenant Governor shall, by one or more
notifications published in the Official Gazette, call upon all the said assembly constituencies to
elect members in accordance with the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
and of the rules and orders made or issued thereunder as applicable under sub-section (3).
(3) The Representation of the People Act, 1950, the Representation of the People Act,
1951 the rules and orders made or issued under the said Acts and all other laws for the time
being in force relating to the elections shall apply with necessary modifications (including
modifications for construing references therein to a State, State Government and Governor
as including references to the Union territory, Government of the Union territory and
Lieutenant Governor, respectively) to, and in relation to, the general election referred to in
sub-section (1) .
Election
Commission
to delimit
constituencies.
Power of
Election
Commission
to maintain
delimitations
orders upto
date.
Election to
the
Legislative
Assembly.
43 of 1951.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
  5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40

12
PART IV
CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS
41. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall act in his discretion in a matter—
(i) which falls outside the purview of the powers conferred on the Legislative
Assembly but in respect of which powers or functions are entrusted or delegated to
him by the President, or
(ii) in which he is required by or under any law to act in his discretion or to
exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions.
(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the  Lieutenant Governor is by or under any law required to act in his discretion, the
decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.
(3) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Lieutenant Governor is required by any law to exercise any judicial or
quasi-judicial functions, the decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.
42. The question whether any, and if so, what, advise was tendered by Ministers to the
Lieutenant Governor shall not be inquired into any court.
 43.(1) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Lieutenant Governor shall administer
to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the
Schedule.
(2) A Minister who, for any period of six consecutive months, is not a member of the
Legislative Assembly, at the expiration of that period, shall cease to be a Minister.
(3) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislative Assembly
may from time to time by law determine and until the Legislative Assembly so determines,
shall be determined by the Lieutenant Governor with the approval of the President.
44. (1) The President shall make rules—
(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers in so far as it is business with
respect to which the Lieutenant Governor is required to act on the aid and advise of his
Council of Ministers; and
(b) for the more convenient transaction of business with the Ministers, including
the procedure to be adopted in the case of a difference of opinion between the Lieutenant
Governor and the Council of Ministers or a Minister.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive action of the Lieutenant
Governor whether taken on the advise of his Ministers or otherwise shall be expressed to be
taken in the name of the Lieutenant Governor.
(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Lieutenant
Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified  in rules to be made by
the Lieutenant Governor and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated
shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or
executed by the Lieutenant Governor.
45. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister—
(a) to communicate to the Lieutenant Governor all decisions of Council of
Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union territory and proposals
for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the
Union territory and proposals for legislation as Lieutenant Governor may call for; and
(c) if the Lieutenant Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but
which has not been considered by the Council.
Matters in
which
Lieutenant
Governor to
act in his
discretion.
Advice by
Ministers.
Other
provisions as
to Ministers.
Conduct of
business.
Duties of
Chief Minister
as respects the
furnishing of
information,
etc. to the
Lieutenant
Governor.
5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

PART V
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
46. (1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues received in the Union territory by
the Government of India or the Lieutenant Governor in relation to any matter with
respect to which the  Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, and all grants
made and all loans advanced to the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of
India and all moneys received by the Union territory in repayment of loans shall form
one Consolidated Fund to be entitled "the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands" (referred to in  this Act as the Consolidated Fund of
the Union territory).
(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall be
appointed except in accordance  with and for the purposes and in the manner provided
in this Act.
(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, the payment of
moneys into such Fund, the withdrawal of money therefrom and all other matters connected
with or ancillary to those matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Lieutenant Governor
with the approval of the President.
47. (1) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be
entitled "the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands" into
which shall be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory such sums
as may, from time to time be determined by law made by the Legislative Assembly; and the
said Fund shall be held by the Lieutenant Governor to enable advances to be made by him
out of such Fund.
(2) No advances shall  be made out of  the Contingency Fund referred to in sub-
section (1) except for the purposes of meeting unforseen expenditure pending authorisation
of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly  under appropriation made by law.
(3) The Lieutenant Governor may make rules regulating all matters connected with or
ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys into and the withdrawal of moneys from
the aforesaid Contingency Fund.
48. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts
of the Union territory for any period subsequent to the date referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 46 shall be submitted to the Lieutenant Governor who shall cause them to be laid
before the Legislative Assembly.
49. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Lieutenant Governor and his Council of
Ministers shall be under the general control of, and comply with such particular directions,
if  any, as may from time to time be given by the President.
50. (1) Every order made by the President under article 239AB shall expire at the end
of one year from the date of issue of the order and the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of
article 356 shall, so far as may be, apply to such order as they apply to a Proclamation issued
under clause (1) of article 356.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the President may extend
the duration of the aforesaid order for a further period not exceeding two years from the date
of expiry of the order under sub-section (1) subject to the condition that every extension of
the said order for any period beyond the expiration of  one year shall be approved by
resolutions of both Houses of Parliament.
Consolidated
Fund of the
Union
territory.
Contingency
Fund of the
Union
territory.
Audit reports.
Relation of
Lieutenant
Governor and
his Ministers
to President.
Period of
order made
under article
239AB and
approval
thereof by
Parliament.
13
  5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

51. Where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved or its functioning as such Assembly
remains suspended, on account of an order made by the President under article 239AB, it
shall be competent for the President to authorise when the House of the People is not in
session expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory pending the sanction
of such expenditure by Parliament.
52. For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that—
(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of the  Union territory are
contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union; and
(b) all suits and proceedings in connection with the administration of the Union
territory shall be instituted  by or against the Government of India.
53. (1) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transaction from the provisions of any
law repealed by the Act or in giving effect to the provisions of this Act and in particular in
relation to the constitution of the Legislative Assembly, the President may by order do
anything not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution  or of this Act which
appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order under the sub-section (1) shall be made after the expiry of three
years from the date of constitution of the first Legislative Assembly.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
54. Every rule made by the Lieutenant Governor under this Act shall be laid as soon as
it is made, before the Legislative Assembly.
55. On and from the appointed day—
(a) after article 239AA, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"239AAA. (1) As from the date of commencement of the  Government of Union
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Act, 2012 the administrator of the Union
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands appointed under article 239 shall be designated
as the Lieutenant Governor.
(2) The provisions of articles 239AA and 239AB shall, so far as may be apply mutatis
mutandis in relation to the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lieutenant
Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation to the National Capital
Territory of Delhi and its Legislature, respectively.";
(b) in article 240, in clause (1) for the existing proviso, the following provisos
shall be substituted namely:—
"Provided that when any body is created under article 239A or 239AAA to
function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Pondicherry or Union territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as the case may be, the President shall not make any
regulation for the peace, progress and good Government of that Union territory with
effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature:
Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the
Union Territory of Pondicherry or Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as the case may be,
is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature remains suspended
on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of
article 239A or 239AB, as the case may be, the President may, during the period of such
dissolution or suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good
Government of that Union territory."
Authorisation
of expenditure
by President.
Contracts and
suits.
Power of
President to
remove
difficulties.
Laying of
Rules before
Legislative
Assembly.
Amendments
to the
Constitution.
Special
Provision with
respect to
Andaman and
Nicobar
Islands.
14
5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40

15
(c)  in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table—
(a) Entries 29 and 30 shall be re-numbered as entries 30 and 31, respectively,
and before entry 30 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"29  Andaman and Nicobar Islands…1";
(b) for the figures "233", the figures "234" shall be substituted.
56. In section 27A of the Representation of People Act, 1950, after sub-section (4), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(5) The electoral college for the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
shall consist of the elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for the
territory under the Government of Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Act, 2012’’.
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 4, 12 and 43)
FORMS OF OA TH OR AFFIRMATIONS
I
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to the Legislative
Assembly:—
"I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative
Assembly, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India."
II
Form of Oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislative Assembly:—
"I, A.B., having been elected a member of the Legislative Assembly, do swear in
the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will uphold the sovereignty and
integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to
enter."
III
Form of Oath of office of a member of the Council of Ministers:—
"I, A. B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that  I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge
my duties as a Minister, and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance
with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will."
IV
Form of Oath of Secrecy for a member of the Council of Ministers:—
"I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister except as
may be required for the due discharge of any duties as such Minister."
Amendment
of section 27A
of Act 43 of
1950.
43 of 1950.
  5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after sixty-four years of Independence, the Union territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands has not been provided with a democratic set-up with a Legislative Assembly
for the governance of the affairs of the Union territory Administration. All powers are vested
in the Lieutenant Governor and the bureaucracy continues to reign supreme. In the absence
of a Legislative Assembly with devolution of powers, the people of the Islands are not
enabled to have a sense of belonging and involvement in the developmental activities of the
Islands and do not have a say in the utilisation of the funds provided by the Central
Government, in proper perspective.
The type of Pradesh Council provided to the Union territory with members indirectly
elected from panchayats and a single municipality with no powers is not at all befitting to a
democratic set-up and devolution of powers. However, the functioning of the Pradesh Council
since its formation in the year 1981 has set the background for constitution of a Legislative
Assembly on the pattern of Puducherry or Delhi. The population of the Union territory has
crossed three-lakh mark and the literacy percentage is more than 81 per cent. and heading
towards achieving cent per cent. literacy as per norms prescribed by the Government of
India.
There have been series of demands from the people of the Union territory for providing
a Legislative Assembly at least with limited powers. The Island Development Authority had
agreed in principle to constitute a Legislative Assembly for the Islands. The Estimates
Committee of the Parliament had also recommended for the constitution of a Legislative
Assembly for the Union territory. Now, since a three-tier Panchayati Raj system is also in the
offing in pursuance of the Constitution (Seventy-third) Amendment Act with the idea of
devolution of powers at panchayat, block and district levels, it is high time that a Legislative
Assembly is provided to set the tone and direction for the governance of the Union territory
Administration on democratic norms.
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; BISHNU PADA RAY
November 28, 2011
16

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Legislative Assembly for the Union
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Clauses 7(5), 19 and 43 (3) related to payment of
salaries and allowances to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, Members of the Legislature and
the Ministers. The expenditure on such salaries and allowances and other expenditure of
incidental nature such as on the additional staff in the Legislative Assembly and Council of
Ministers will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.
Clause 38 provides for the delimitation of thirty single member territorial constituencies
for the proposed Assembly of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Clause 55 provides that Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands will be represented
by one member in the Council of States. For this purpose, a non-recurring expenditure of
about rupees fifty lakhs is likely to be incurred. This expenditure will be met from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
The Bill does not involve any other expenditure either of a recurring or non-recurring
nature.
17

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands to make rules, subject to the provisions of this Bill, for
regulating its procedure and conduct of its business. It also provides that the Lieutenant
Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and with the
approval of the President make rules for securing the completion of the financial business,
regulating the procedure and conduct of business in the Legislative Assembly in relation to
any financial matter or to any Bill for appropriation of monies out of the Consolidated Fund
of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and for prohibiting the discussion of
or asking any question which affect the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor
in so far as he is required to act in his discretion.
Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the President to make rules regarding allocation of
business to Ministers and transaction of such business. It further empowers the Lieutenant
Governor to make rules prohibiting the manner of authenticating the orders issued in his
name.
Clauses 46 (3) and 47(3) of the Bill provide that the Lieutenant Governor may make
rules regarding the custody, etc., of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands and the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.
Clause 53 of the Bill empowers the President to issue orders for removing any difficulty
in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill and in particular in relation to the Constitution of
the Legislative Assembly.
The matters mentioned above are of a procedural nature and it is difficult to provide for
them in detail in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
18

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
240. (1) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress and good
government of the Union territory of —
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(b) Lakshadweep;
(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;
(d) Daman and Diu;
(e) Puducherry;
Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function as a Legislature
for the Union territory of Puducherry the President shall not make any regulation for the
peace, progress and good government of that Union  territory with effect  from the date
appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature:
Provided further  that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the Union
territory of Puducherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature
remains suspended on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in
clause (1) of article 239A, the President may, during the period of such dissolution or
suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that Union
territory.
(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any
other law, which is for the time being applicable to the Union territory and, when promulgated
by the President, shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies
to that territory.
* * * * * *
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)]
Allocation of Seats in the Council of States
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of the following table,
there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the second column thereof opposite
to the State or that Union territory, as the case may be.
TABLE
* * * * * *
29.       Delhi 3
30.     Puducherry 1
TOTAL: 233
* * * * * *
E
XTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950
(43 of 1950)
* * * * * *
19
Power of
President to
make
regulations for
certain Union
territories.

20
27A. (1) For the purpose of filling any seat or seats in the Council of States allotted to any
Union territory in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution there shall be an electoral college
for each such territory.
* * * * * *
(4) The electoral college of the Union territory of Puducherry shall consist of the
elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territory under the
Government of Union territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)
* * * * * *
Constitution
of electoral
colleges for
the filling of
seats in the
Council of
States allotted
to Union
territories.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the creation of a Legislative Assembly for  the Union territory of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bishnu Pada Ray, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3944LS—22.02.2012.