5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 1 of 2025
THE FODDER WAREHOUSE BOARD BILL, 2025
By
Shri Lumba Ram, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Fodder Warehouse Board for making available 
fodder and water to animals in places affected by natural calamities  
like  famine, drought or flood and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Fodder Warehouse Board Act, 2025. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
 ( a)  “animal” means domestic animals which consume fodder; 
(b)  “Board” means Fodder Warehouse Board established under section 3; 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “warehouse” means any premise (including any protected place) used for 
storage of fodder under controlled conditions of temperature and humidity.
3. (1)  The Central Government  shall, within a period of three months from the 
date of coming into force of this Act, establish a Board to be known as the Fodder 
Warehouse Board with its headquarters at Jalore in the State of Rajasthan.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and four other members to be 
appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The Board shall manage the affairs of the Fodder Warehouses.
(4) The Central Government shall establish a branch of the  Board in every district 
of the country.
(5) Every branch of the Board shall consists of a General Manager and such other 
officers and staff as may be required.
(6) The terms and conditions of service and appointment, salaries and allowances of 
Chairperson, members and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall–
(i) establish fodder warehouses in every district;
(ii) purchase fodder  from farmers at such rate, as it may deem fit;
(iii) provide facility for transportation  of fodder from the fodder store house 
to places affected by famine, drought, flood or any other natural calamities;
(iv) acquire land,  in consultation with the State Government, for cultivation 
of fodder in order to enhance the availability of fodder in famine, drought or flood 
prone areas; and
(v) ensure availability of fodder and drinking water for animals free of cost in 
places affected by famine, drought, flood or any other natural calamities;
(vi) encourage research in collaboration with agricultural research institutions 
and universities for cultivation of better quality of fodder; and
(vii) collect data of animals reared in every village and prepare exigency plan 
to supply fodder and drinking water to animals in places affected by famine, 
drought, flood or any other natural calamities.
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Fund to be known as the Fodder Fund with an initial corpus of rupees one 
thousand crore. 
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the 
Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Fodder Warehouse Board constituted 
under section 3.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized to produce, procure or collect and store fodder and to 
provide fodder and drinking water to animals in places affected by natural calamities.
6.  ( 1) Any person who requires fodder shall inform the branch office of the Fodder 
Warehouse Board in the district about the requirement of fodder, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed.
5
10
15
20
Definitions.
Establishment 
of the Fodder 
Warehouse 
Board.
Functions 
of Fodder 
Warehouse 
Board.
Constitution of 
Fodder Fund.
Supply of fodder.
2
25
30
35
40
45

(2) The branch office concerned shall, on receipt of requirement under sub-section (1),  
supply the requisite quantity of fodder to such person within a period of two days.  
7.  The Central Government shall give wide publicity to the provisions of this Act 
in such manner as may be prescribed.
8.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Publicity to the 
provisions of the 
Act.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
3

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Natural calamities such as famine, drought and floods result in heavy loss of human 
lives and property including loss of livestock. Due to the priority given to save the lives 
of people, it becomes very difficult to save lives of animals.  In such situations, to save the 
livestock and make available sufficient fodder for animals become the main requirements.  
However, the transportation of fodder and drinking water to the affected areas is not an easy 
task.  Therefore, it is necessary to evolve a mechanism so that fodder and water is made 
available in places affected by natural calamities. 
Due to increase in the population of the country, the area under  agriculture is decreasing.  
The availability of fodder is also continuously decreasing due to harvesting of new varieties 
of crops in place of traditional crops.  There is a need for intervention on the part of the State 
to take cognizance of shortage of fodder and drinking water for animals particularly during 
natural calamities and to address the problem being faced by lakhs of farmers and others in 
rural areas across the country on this account.
In the absence of any exigency plan to meet the demands of fodder and drinking water 
during natural calamities, the farmers and animal rearers are compelled to sell their livestock 
at throw away prices to meat-vendors which results in mental agony and heavy financial 
loss to them.
The Bill, therefore,  seeks to provide for establishment of a Fodder Warehouse Board to 
produce, procure, collect and store and distribute fodder and drinking water for animals in 
places affected by natural calamities.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   L U M B A  R A M  
November 7, 2024.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Fodder Warehouse Board.  
Clause 4 provides for establishment of fodder warehouses, facilities of transportation of 
fodder and drinking water for animals during natural calamities, collection of data of animals 
and preparation of exigency plan, etc.  by the Fodder Warehouse Board.  Clause 5 provides 
for constitution of a Fodder Fund with initial corpus of rupees one thousand crore.  Clause 7 
provides for giving wide publicity to the provisions of the Act.    
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India.  It is likely to involve recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand five 
hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Fodder Warehouse Board for making available fodder 
and water to animals in places affected by natural calamities  
like  famine, drought or flood and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Lumba Ram, M.P .) 