1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF FINANCIAL EDUCATION
IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of financial education in all educational institutions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Financial Education in
Educational Institutions  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Advisory Council” means the Advisory Council for Financial Education
constituted under section 6;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. 200 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) “educational institution” means a middle or a secondary or a senior second-
ary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name such institution is
called, but does not include a minority educational institution;
(d) “financial education” includes imparting knowledge and understanding of
basic financial matters to enable individual to make informed financial decisions; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the financial education shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all
educational institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central
Government on the recommendation of the Advisory Council.
4.  The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of financial education in all
educational institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such matters, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching financial education in educational institutions.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
the Compulsory Teaching of Financial Education in Educational Institutions Act, 2015,  by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for financial education.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such numbers of persons, having special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of financial education, as the Central
Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of financial education for
each class upto senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the
financial education is to be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching financial education;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in financial education for the purpose of their
appointment in educational institutions; and
(e) coordinate with the appropriate Government and educational institutions
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize an educational institution which do
not comply with the provisions of section 4 after giving such institution a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
Compulsory
teaching of
financial
education in
educational
institutions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
financial
education in
all educational
institutions.
Appointment
of teachers for
financial
education.
Constitution
of Advisory
Council for
financial
education.
Functions of
the Advisory
Council.
Derecognition
of educational
institutions
for non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Financial education is important not just for investors but also for an average family
trying to decide how to balance its budget, buy a home, fund the children's education and
ensure an income when the parents retire and other such financial decisions. Increasing
range and complexity of financial products has made it every difficult for an ordinary person
to take an informed decision. Individuals often get exploited by money lenders who trap
innocent citizens in exploitative financial schemes and charge them exorbitant interest rate.
This is mainly due to lack of knowledge among citizens on the importance of formal banking.
Financial education is an important life skill. In our country, there are many students
who do not get opportunity to study beyond school level. This is truer in case of girl
students. One must keep it in mind that for such students, this could be the last opportunity
in life to get formal inputs on Financial Education. It is even more important in India as we are
an agrarian economy and primarily dependant on monsoon (nature's mercy). Knowledge of
saving, crop insurance and future commodity market can help farmers to reap maximum
benefits of his crop.
School Curriculum in our educational system needs to be equipped to impart financial
education to the student post primary level and make it compulsory to impart some basic
financial education. The Central Board of Secondary  Education has agreed, in principle, to
introduce it in an integral manner in school education (Post Primary Level) and to facilitate
the process of financial inclusion. But implementation is poor.
There are many government initiatives to make formal banking available to citizens but
to make citizens respond to the various initiatives, it is imperative that financial education is
imparted to the young minds of the nation. Financial education can lead to multiplier effects
in the economy. A well-educated household would resort to regular savings, which in turn
would lead to investment in right channels and income generation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA SULE
June 29, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for imparting financial educa-
tion in educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of an Advisory Council
for financial education by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of ad-
equate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore will
be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of financial education in all educational institutions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule , M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1395LS(S3)—21.07.2015.