5

As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

2:3 FES 209

Bill No. 200 of 2000

| DOMESTIC WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 2000
By
Dr. V. 5400७, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the fixation of wages of domestic workers and for the improvement of
their working conditions.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Domestic Workers (Conditions of Service) Bill,
2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

(4) It shall apply to every individual employing one or more workers for domestic
work in his house.

Short title,
extent,
commence-
‘ment and
application,


Definitions.

Application of
the provisions
of the
Industrial
Disputes Act,
1947

Payment of
हाफ to
workers.

Fixation of
wages by the
Government,

Right to wages,

Hours of work,

Period of rest.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “domestic work” includes cooking, house-cleaning and attending to all
other odd jobs connected with the house-hold chore:

(b) “Government” means the Central Government; and

(c) “worker” means any person empioyed for domestic work

3. (1) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as in force for the time
being, shall, so far as applicable and subject to the modification specified in sub-section
(2), apply 10, or in relation to workers as they apply to; or in relation 10 workmen within
the meaning of that Act.

(2) Section 25F of the aforesaid Act, in its application to workers shall be construed
as if in clause (a) thereof, for period of notice referred 10 therein in relation to the
retrenchment of a workman, the following periods of notice in relation to the retrenchment
of a worker had been substituted, namely:—

(a) three months in case of workers who have been in continuous. service fora
period of not less than two years; and

(७) two months in case of other workers.

4. Where any worker has been in continous service, whether before or after the
commencement of this Act, for not less than one year, and—

(i) his services are terminated by the employer for any reasons whatsover, or
(ii) he voluntarily resigns from service, or
(iii) he dies while he is in service,

the worker or, in the case of his death, his nominee or if there is no nomination in
force at the time of the death of the worker, his heirs, as*the case may be, shall without
Prejudice to any benefits or rights accruing under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, be
Paid, on such termination, resignation or death, by the employer gratuity which shall be
equivalent to fifteen days’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part
thereof in excess of six months.

5. (1) The Government may, in consultation with the representatives of the workers
from amongst the Unions or Associations of the Workers, by order,—

(a) fix rates of wages in respect of workers; and

(b) revise, from time to time, at such intervals as it may think fit, the rates of
wages fixed under this section.

(2) The rates of wages may be fixed or revised by the Government in respect of
workers for time work and for piece work.

6. Every worker shall be entitled to be paid by his employer wages at the rates
which shall in no case be less than the rate of wages specified in the order referred to in
section 5.

7. No worker shall be required or allowed to work for more than cight hours during
the day exclusive of the time for meals and leisure,

8. Every worker shall be allowed during a period of seven consecutive days, a rest
for a period of not less than twenty-four consecutive hours.

15

20

14of

25

30

40


25

9. Every worker, who has put in a service for a period of not less than six months,
shall be entitled every year to the following leave, namely:—

Casual leave—I2 days;
Sick leave—21 days;
Earned leave—I/11th of the number of days spent on duty.

10. Every employer of domestic workers shall prepare and maintain such registers,
records and muster-rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed.

11. (J) The State Governments or the Union territory Administrations, as the
case may be, may, by notification in the Offical Gazette, appoint such persons as they
think fit to be Inspectors for the purpose of this Act and may define the local limits
within which they shall exercise their powers.

(2) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
the Indian Penal Code.

12. An Inspector may,—

(a) require any person to produce any register, muster-roll or other documents
relating to the employment of workers by him and examine such documents;

(8) take, on the spot or otherwise, the evidence of any persons for the purpose
of ascertaining whether the provisions of this Act or any other Act made applicable
to the domestic workers are complied with notwithstanding any other authority who
may be empowered with same powers or any part thereof.

13. If any employer contravenes the provisions of this Act, he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees notwithstanding any other punishment
to which he may be liable for the contravention of any other law for the time being in
force governing the domestic workers.

14. The Government may, by notification in the Offical Gazette, make rules for
carring out the purposes of this Act.

Leave
entitlement,

Maintenance
of registers
and records.

Appointment
of Inspectors.

Power of
Inspectors.

Punishment.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Recently in Maharashtra, a legislation for welfare of domestic workers was enacted,
There are millions of domestic servants working as maid-servants or mal -servants to
attend to household and other personal work. The working conditions of these domestic
Servants are miserable and primitive, They are required to work for almost 18 hours aday.
‘There is no protection for these workers under any statute. They are neither paid reasonable
wages nor their hours of service are determined. They are not given any rest or leisure
during the day. They are also not provided any benefits such as gratuity, provident fund,
bonus, leave with wages, holidays, etc. Their services can also be terminated at any time
without notice and without any compensation by their masters.

The domestic servants have bee:
the country, It is, therefore,

Hence this Bill.

1 agitating for better service conditions throughout
essential to regulate their service conditions.

New Devut;

V. SAROJA.
November 22, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 11 of the Bill provides that the State Governments or the Union territory
Administrations, as the case may be, may appoint such persons as they think fit to be
Inspectors for the purposes of this Act. Some persons might have to be recruited as Inspectors
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. The State Governments will incur expenditure
from their respective consolidated funds for payment of salaries and allowances, etc, to
the Inspectors and the Central Government would have to incur expenditure in respect of
Inspectors appointed by the Union territory administrations from the Consolidated Fund
of India.

It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakhs is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.

Itis also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central
out the purpose of this Bill. Since the rules will relat
on legislative power is of a normal character.

Government to make rules for carrying
९ to matters of detail only, the delegation


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the fixation of wages of domestic workers and for the
improvement of their working conditions.

(Dr. V. Saroja, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5255LS—6-12-2000.