THE PHYSIOTHERAPY CENTRAL COUNCIL BILL, 2017
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE CENTRAL COUNCIL AND THEIR COMMITTEES
3. Constitution of Central Council.
4. Term of office and casual vacancy.
5. Cessation of membership.
6. Resignation by member.
7. Removal and vacation of membership.
8. Meetings of Central Council.
9. V acancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Council.
10. Power to associate persons with Central Council for particular purposes.
11. Committees of Central Council.
12. Functions of Central Council.
13. Appointment of Secretary, officers and other employees of Central Council.
14. Secretary to act as Chief Executive Officer of Central Council.
15. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Central Council.
16. Approval of Central Government for imparting education.
17. Recognition of education.
18. Scheme of reciprocity for recognition of foreign qualifications.
19. Minimum standards of education.
20. Furnishing of information by University of institution to Central Council regarding
education.
21. Appointment of inspectors.
22. Withdrawal of recognition.
CHAPTER III
T
HE REGISTER
23. Register of physiotherapist.
24. Entry of name in register.
25. Professional conduct and removal of names from register.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 200 of  2017

26. Procedure in inquiries relating to misconduct.
27. Re-entry in register.
28. Appeal against order made by Central Council.
CHAPTER IV
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
29. Payment by Central Government.
30. Fund of Central Council.
31. Budget.
32. Annual report.
33. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
34. Prohibition in employment as physiotherapist by clinical establishment.
35. Penalty for violation of provisions of this Act.
36. Penalty for practicing as professional by non-professional.
37. Punishment for dishonest use of certificates, etc.
38. Cognizance of offences.
39. Directions by Central Government.
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.
41. Power to make rules.
42. Power to make regulations.
43. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
44. Power to remove difficulties.
C
LAUSES
(ii)

1
THE PHYSIOTHERAPY CENTRAL COUNCIL BILL, 2017
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Central Council of the Physiotherapy, the
co-ordinated development in the education of phsiotherapy with a view to
regulating and maintaining standards of such education, maintenance
of Register of Physiotherapists and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Physiotherapy Central Council Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for constitution of different
Central Councils and for different provisions of this Act.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No. 200 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Central Council" means the Central Council of Physiotherapy, consti-
tuted under section 3;
(b) "education" means programmes of education, research or training or
such other programmes or areas as the Central Government may, in consultation
with the Central Council, by notification, declare in the discipline of physiotherapy;
(c) "Fund" means the physiotherapy Central Council fund constituted under
section 30;
(d) "institution" means any institution, by whatever name called, established
by law for imparting education under this Act;
(e) "member" means a member of the Central Council and includes its
Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson;
(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(g) "physiotherapist" means a person whose name has been entered in the
register of the Central Council;
(h) "physiotheraphy" means medically directed therapy through physical
agents including heat, cold, light, water, massage, electricity or manual exercise
to persons with the aim of preventing or correcting any disability includes occu-
pational therapy;
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) "register" means the register maintained under sub-section ( 1) of
section 23;
(k) "regulations" means regulations made under this Act;
(l) "University" means a University defined under clause ( f) of section 2 of
the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and includes an institution declared
to be a deemed University under section 3 of the said Act.
(2) Any reference in this Act of a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the
corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.
CHAPTER II
T
HE CENTRAL  COUNCIL  AND ITS COMMITTEES
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Central Council
to be known as the Central Council of Physiotherapy, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The Central Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said names
sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Central Council shall be at such place as may be
determined, by notification, by the Central Government and the Central Council may,
with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish regional offices at
other places in India.
(4) The Central Council shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
the members of the Central Council;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst the members of the Central Council;
Definitions.
Constitution of
Central Council
of
Physiotherapy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Term of
office and
casual
vacancy.
(c) one officer not below the rank of an Assistant Director General of the
Directorate General of Health Services in the Union Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare dealing with the physiotherapy;
(d) one officer of the Ministry or the Department of the Central Government
having administrative control of health not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary
to the Government of India, dealing with the physiotherapy;
(e) one member to below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government
of India to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Union Ministry
of Finance;
(f) one member not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government
of India to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Union Ministry
of Science and Technology;
(g) one member not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government
of India to be appointed by the Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services
to represent the Ministry of Defence;
(h) two members not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government
of India to be appointed by the Central Government to represent,—
(i) the Central Board of Secondary Education; and
(ii) the University Grants Commission;
(i) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
the teachers of the recognized institutions imparting education in physiotherapy;
(j) not less than three members to be appointed by the Central Government
by rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the States and one member to
represent the Union territories:
Provided that an appointment under this clause shall be made on the
recommendation of the Government of the State, or as the case may be, the
Union territory concerned; and
(k) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from the
organizations representing the interest of physiotherapy.
4. (1) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other member of the Central Council
shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of his appointment.
(2) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other member shall be deemed to have
vacated his office, if, in the opinion of the Central Council, he is absent without sufficient
excuse, from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the Central Council, or he ceases
to be a member under section 5.
(3) A casual vacancy in the Central Council shall be filled by fresh appointment
and the person so appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder
of the term of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other member in whose place he
has been appointed.
(4) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other member of the Central Council
shall be eligible for reappointment.
5. ( 1) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other member appointed by the
Central Government under clauses ( c) to (i) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3 shall cease to
be a member of the Central Council on his cessation to the service by virtue of which he
was appointed as a member of the Central Council.
Cessation of
membership.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
6. The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members appointed by the Central
Government under clauses (a), (b) and (h) to (k) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3 may at
anytime resign his membership by writing under his hand addressed to the Central
Government:
Provided that a members who has submitted his registration under this section
shall continue to hold office of the Central Council until his resignation has been
accepted by the Central Government.
7. (1) The Central Council may, without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2),
by a majority of its total membership and a majority of not less than two-thirds of its members
present and voting, at any time recommend removal of a member to the Central Government,
if it is satisfied that for any reason the continuance of that member in that Council is not in the
public interest or is prejudicial to the interest of said Council and the decision of the Central
Government in this regard shall be final.
(2) The Central Government shall remove the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other
members of the Central Council, if he—
(a) has been convicted for an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(b) is declared an undischarged insolvent by the competent court; or
(c) becomes of unsound mind and is declared so by the competent court; or
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting as a member; or
(e) has absented without intimation for three consecutive meetings of the Council; or
(f) has abused the position of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson or a member,
as the case may be, as to render his or her continuance in the office detrimental to the
public interest: Provided that no person shall be removed under clauses ( a), (d), (e)
and (f) unless she has been given an opportunity of being heard.
8. (1) The Central Council shall meet at such time and place, and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including the
quorum at such meetings, as may be determined by regulations: Provided that the Central
Council shall meet at least once every year.
(2) The Chairperson and in his absence the Vice-Chairperson shall preside at the
meetings of the Central Council.
(3) If for any reason the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson both are unable to
attend any meeting of the Central Council, any other member chosen by the members present
at the meeting shall preside over the sittings of that meeting.
(4) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Central Council shall be
decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an
equality of votes, the person presiding shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
9. No act or proceeding of the Central Council shall be invalidated merely by of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, said Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of said Council; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of that Central Council not affecting the
merits of the case.
10. (1) The Central Council may associate with itself, in such manner and for such
purposes as may be determined by regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it
may require in carrying out any of the provisions of this Act.
(2) A person associated with the Central Council under sub-section (1) for any purpose
Resignation by
member.
Removal and
vacation of
membership.
Meetings of
Central
Council.
Vacancy, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Central
Council.
Power to
associate
persons with
Central
Council for
particular
purposes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
shall have a right to take part in the discussion relevant to that purpose, but shall have no
right to vote at a meeting of said Council, and shall not be a member for any other purpose.
11. (1) The Central Council shall, as soon as may be, constitute from among its mem-
bers an Executive Committee, Disciplinary Committee, or any other Committee as may be
determined by regulations, for such general or specific purposes as it consider necessary, for
carrying out its functions under this Act.
(2) The composition, tenure and fucntions of a Committee shall be such as may be
determined by regulations.
(3) Every Committee constituted under this section shall chose its own Chairperson:
Provided that—
(a) where the Chairperson is a member of such Committee, he shall be the
Chairperson of such Committee, and in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson, if he is a
member of such Committee, shall be its Chairperson; and in the absence of both, any
member chosen by the members of that Committee shall be its Chairperson;
(b) where the Chairperson is not a member of such Committee but the Vice-
Chairperson is a member, he shall be its Chairperson, and in his absence any member
chosen by the members of the Committee shall be its Chairperson.
12. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Council to take such steps as it may think fit
for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of its
standards.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
functions of the Central Council shall include—
(a) entry, removal or re-entry of names in the register;
(b) maintenance of a register of persons qualified to practice in the physiotherapy
discipline;
(c) determination of standardards of education, training, research, professional
conduct or ethics of physiotherapists.
(d) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central Government
or a State Government and to receive bequests, donations and transfer of movable or
immovable properties from testators, donors or transferors, as the case maybe;
(e) exercise of disciplinary powers conferred by this Act; and
(f) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the
attainment of all or any of the objects of the Council.
13. (1) For the purpose of discharging its functions efficiently undue this Act, The
Central Council shall, subject to such regulations as may be made in this behalf, appoint a
Secretary, officers and other employees, as it may consider necessary:
Provided that the first Secretary of the Central Council shall be appointed by
the Central Government on such terms and conditions as that Government may deem
fit and the Secretary shall hold office for a period of three years.
(2) The Secretary, officers, or other employees appointed by the Central Council
shall be subject to such conditions of services and entitled to such remunerations as may be
determined by regulations.
14. The Secretary appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 13 shall be the Chief
Executive Officer of the Central Council.
Committees
of Central
Council.
Functions of
Central
Council.
Appointment
of Secretary,
officers and
other
employees of
Central
Council.
Secretary to
act as Chief
Executive
Officer at
Central
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
15. All orders and decisions of the Central Council shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Chairperson, or any other member authorised by the Council in this behalf,
and all other instruments issued by the Council shall be authenticated by the signature of the
Chief Executive Officer or any other officer of the Council authorised by the Council in this
behalf.
16. On and from the date specified in the notification, as may be issued by Central
Government, no University or institution shall impart education for the purposes of this Act
without seeking prior approval of the said Government.
17. (1) The Central Government, after consulting the Central Council, may, by
notification, from time to time, declare the education granted by any University or institution
to be the recognized qualifications for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The University or institution whose education has not been notified by the Central
Government under sub-section (1), may apply to the said Government for reviewing its decision:
Provided that the Central Government may reject the application made under
sub-section (2) for reasons to be recorded in writing.
(3) The Central Government, after consulting the Central Council, may, by notification,
relax education for persons who are practising as physiotherapist, on or before the date
specified under section 16.
18. The Central Government, after consulting the Central Council, may, by notification
make a scheme of reciprocity for the purpose of recognition of foreign qualifications in the
relevant discipline for the purposes of this Act.
19. The Central Council may, determine by regulations, the minimum standards of
education required for granting recognized qualifications by the Universities or institutions.
20. Any University or institution imparting education shall furnish information to the
central Council regarding course of study, duration of course, scheme of examination and
other eligibility conditions as the Central Council may, from time to time require.
21. (1) The Central Council may appoint such number of inspectors as it may deem fit
deal with recognition of its education in any University or institution.
(2) An inspector may—
(a) inspect any University or institution which imparts education;
(b) attend at any approved examination; and
(c) inspect any University or institution which has applied for the recognition of
its course of study or examination under this Act, and attend at any examination of
such University or institution.
(3) An inspector while performing his functions under sub-section (2) shall not interfere
with the conduct of the examination but he shall report to the Central Council on the adequacy
of standards of education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other
facilities for giving such education or the sufficiency of every examination which heat tends
and on any of the matters in regard to which the said Council may require him to report.
(4) The Central Council shall for ward a copy of every such report to the University or
institution, as the case may be, and shall also forward a copy together with any comments
there on which the said University or institution may have made, to the Central
Government.
Authentication
of orders and
other
instruments
of Central
Council.
Approval of
Central
Government
for imparting
education.
Recognition
of education.
Scheme of
reciprocity for
recognition of
foreign
qualifications.
Minimum
standards of
education.
Furnishing of
information
by University
or institution
to Central
Council
regarding
education.
Appointment
of Inspectors.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
22. (1) Where the Central Council reports to the Central Government that an approved
course of study or an approved examination does not continue to be in conformity with the
regulations, the Central Government shall give notice to the concerned University or institution
of its intention to take into consideration the question of withdrawing of recognition accorded
to the course of study or examination, as the case may be, and the said University or
instituion, as the case may be, shall within three months from the receipt of such notice
forward to the Central Government such representation in the matter as it may deem proper.
CHAPTER III
T
HE REGISTER
23. (1) The Central Council shall maintain a register and enter names in it of
physiotherapists, in the manner determined by regulations.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, any person possessing education as
notified by the Central Government under section 17 or section 18, shall be eligible to have
his name entered in the register of the Central Council and to obtain certificate of practice
from it.
(3) No person shall been titled to practice under this Act unless his name sintered in
the register of Central Council:
Provided that the name of any person possessing the education as notified
under section 17 by the Central Government shall be deemed to have been entered in
the register from the date of such notification if he has made an application for entering
his name in the register within six months from the coming into force of such notification
or till his application is disposed of by the Council.
24. (1) the Central Council may, on receipt of an application made by any person in the
manner and on payment of such fee, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as may be determined
by regulations, enter his name in the register if the said Council is satisfied that such person
possesses the require qualification.
(2) Any person whose name has been entered in the register shall be entitled to be
called the physiotherapist.
(3) The Central Council may refuse to enter the name of any person in the register for
reasons to be recorded in writing and in the manner determined by regulations.
25. (1) The Central Council shall determine by regulations the standards of professional
conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for the practitioners under this Act.
(2) The regulations made by the Central Council under sub-section (1) may specify as
to which violations thereof shall constitute professional misconduct, and such provisions
shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force.
(3) The Central Council may by order remove the name of a person from the register,
maintained under sub-section (1) of section 23, where it is satisfied, after giving that person
a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and after such further inquiry, if any, as it may deem
fit make,—
(i)  that his name has been entered in the register by error or on account of
misrepresentation or suppression of a material fact;
(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence or has been guilty of misconduct
in any professional respect, or has violated the standards of professional conduct and
etiquette or the code of ethics determined under sub-section (1) which, in the opinion
of the said Council, renders him unfit to be kept in the register.
Withdrawal of
recognition.
Register of
physiotherapist.
Entry of name
in register.
Professional
conduct and
removal of
names from
register.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(4) An order under sub-section (3) may specify that any person whose name is ordered
to be removed from the register shall be in eligible for registration under this Act either
permanently or for such period, as may be specified.
26. (1) Where on receipt of information by, or on a complaint made to it, the Central
Council is prima facie of opinion that any physiotherapist has been guilty of any professional
or other misconduct, the said Council shall refer the case to the Disciplinary Committee
constituted under section 11, and the Dsiciplinary Committee shall thereupon hold such
inquiry and in such manner as may be determined by regulations and shall report the result
of its inquiry to the said Council.
(2) If on receipt of such report, the Central Council finds that a physiotherapist is not
guilty of any professional or other misconduct, it shall record its finding accordingly and direct
that the proceedings shall be filed, or the complaint shall be dismissed, as the case may be.
(3) If on receipt of such report the Central Council finds that a physiotherapist, is
guilty of any misconduct in any professional respect or has violated the standards of
professional conduct and etiquette or the code of ethics prescribed under this Act, it shall
proceed against such person in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) and (4) of
section 25.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "physiotherapist" includes the
person who was a physiotherpist on the date of the alleged misconduct, although he
has ceased to be so at the time of inquiry.
(4) For the purposes of any inquiry under this section, the Central Council and its
Disciplinary Committee shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) Summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits.
27. The Central Council may re-enter the name of a person whose name has not been
removed permanently from the register under sub-section (4) of section 25, by an order, in
such manner and on payment of such fee, not exceeding one thousand rupees, and after
satisfying such conditions and requirement as may be determined by regulations.
28. (1) Where a Central Council under this Act, has,—
(a) refused to enter the name of any person in the register; or
(b) ordered to remove the name of any person from the register, such person may
appeal to the Central Government within thirty days from the date of receipt of the
order of the said Council by him in the manner as may be prescribed: Provided that the
Central Government may entertain such appeal after the expiry of said period of thirty
days if it is satisfied that for sufficient reasons such person coult not file the appeal.
(2) The Central Government shall dispose of the appeal preferred under
 sub-section (1) according to procedure as may be prescribed.
(3) The decision of the Central Government under sub-section (2)  shall be final.
CHAPTER IV
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
29. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by the Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to Central Council in each financial year such sums as may be
considered necessary for the performance of functions of the Central Council.
Procedure in
inquiries
relating to
misconduct.
Re-entry in
register.
Appeal
against order
made by
Central
Council.
Payment by
Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
30. (1) The Central Council shall by notification in the Official Gazette constitute a
Fund to be known as the Central Physiotherapy Central Council Fund to which shall be
credited, and all sums which may, from time to time, be paid to it by the Central Government
and all the receipts of a Central Council, State Government or any other authority or person
and all payments by a Central Council shall be made there from.
(2) All money belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in
such manner as may, subject to the approval of the Central Government, be decided by the
Central Council.
(3) The Central Council may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the fund of the
Central Council.
31. The Central Council shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may
be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated
receipts and expenditure, and copies there of shall before awarded to the Central Government.
32. The Central Council shall prepare once every year, in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the
previous year and copies there of shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that
Government shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of parliament.
33. (1) The Central Council shall cause to be maintained such books of account and
other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed.
(2) The Central Council shall, as soon as may be, after closing its annual accounts
prepare a statement of accounts in such form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India by such date, as the Central Government may, in consultation with
the Comptroller and Auditor-General, determine.
(3) The accounts of the Cental Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such times and in such manner as he thinks fit.
(4) The accounts of the Central Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf to get her with the audit
report there on shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government
shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of parliament.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
34. No clinical establishment, such as hospital, nursing home and other institutions of
healthcare, shall appoint any person as physiotherapist unless his name has been entered in
the register of the Central Council.
35. Any person who acts in contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rules or
regulations made there under, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
36. Any person whose name has not been entered or whose name is not deemed to
have been entered in the register of the Central Council under this Act and is practicing as
physiotherapist, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six
months, or with fine which may extend upto twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
37. Any person—
(i) who dishonestly makes use of his entry in the register under the provisions of
this Act; or
Fund of Central
Council.
Budget.
Annual Report.
Accounts and
audit.
Prohibition in
employment
as
physiotherapist
by clinical
establishment.
Penalty for
violation of
provisions of
this Act.
Penalty for
practicing as
professional
by non-
professional.
Punishment
for dishonest
use of
certificates,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(ii) who dishonestly attempts to practice under provisions of this Act by making
or producing or causing to be made or produced any false or fraudulent declaration or
representation whether in writing or otherwise; or
(iii) who willfully makes false representation in any matter relating to the register
under the provisions of this Act; or
(iv) whose name has been removed from the register willfully practices as a
physiotherapist,
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to two years, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or both; and for any subsequent
offence, with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
38. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act unless upon complaint
made by order of, or under authority from the Central Government or the Central Council.
39. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such directions to a
Central Council as in the opinion of said Government are conducive for the fulfillment of the
objects of this Act and in the discharge of its functions, that Central Council shall be bound
to carry out any such directions.
(2) Directions issued under sub-section (1) may include directions to a Central Council
to make any regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made.
(3) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Central Council has persistently
committed default in giving effect to the directions issued under this section, the Central
Government may after giving an opportunity to the Central Council to state its case, by order,
dissolve the Central Council where after a new Central Council shall be constituted in
accordance with the provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be notified by
the Central Government.
(4) Where the Central Government passes an order under sub-section ( 3) dissolving
the Central Council, it may, pending the constitution of a new Central Council in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, authorize any person or body of persons to take over the
management of the affairs of the said Council and to exercise such functions as may be
specified in this behalf by the Central Government.
40. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government, Central Council, or the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, members, Secretary or
any officer or other employees of the Central Council in respect of anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
41. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore going power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of filing an appeal under sub-section (1) of section 28;
(b) the procedure to dispose of appeal under sub-section (2) of section 28;
(c) the form and the time for preparation of budget of the Central Council under
section 31;
(d) the form and the time for preparation of annual report of the Central Council
under section 32;
(e) the form and the manner of maintenance of books of account under section
33; and
(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
Cognizance of
offences.
Directions by
the Central
Government.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
42. (1) The Central Council may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) The time, place, procedure and quorum of the meeting of the Central Council
under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(b) the manner and purpose for associating persons with the Central Council
under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(c) the composition, tenure and function of committees under section 11;
(d) the appointment, conditions of service and remuneration of the Secretary,
officer and other employees under section 13;
(e) the minimum standards of education required for granting recognized
qualifications under section 19;
(f) the maintenance of register under sub-section (1) of section 23;
(g) the manner and payment for fee for entry of name in the register under sub-
section (1) of section 24;
(h) the manner for refusing to enter the name in the register under sub-section
(3) of section 24;
(i) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics under
sub-section (1) of section 25;
(j) the manner to hold inquiry by the Disciplinary Committee under sub-section
(1) of section 26; and
(k) the manner, payment of fee, conditions and requirement of re-entry of the
name in the register under section 27.
43. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, be for each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation,
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
44. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, may makes provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear it to be necessary for removing
the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
a period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Power to
make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS
In order to keep pace with the advancement of medical science and development of
new diagnostic and therapeutic techniques, there has been a quantum jump in the demand
for physiotherapists. This has resulted in the establishment of a large number of institutions
and centres for the training of these professionals, which are run without any supervision
and control as to the quality and standard of education.
Maintenance of proper standards in the training and education of physiotherapist
professions is considered essential as these personnel play an inevitable role in healthcare
delivery. With a view to regulating these professions, it is considered necessary to set up
Council on the lines already existing for pharmacy, nursing, dental, medical etc. To begin
with, it is proposed to set up separate Council for Physiotherapists. This Council will be
responsible, inter alia, for maintenance of uniform standards of education in the physiotherapy
disciplines and registration of qualified personnel for practicing the profession.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
July 24, 2017
12

13
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the Central Council
of Physiotherapy.
Clause 13 provides for appointment of Secretaries, Officers and other employees of
the Central Council.
Clause 21 provides for appointment of Inspectors for the Central Council.
Clause 30 provides for establishment of Fund of the Central Council.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees one crore and ninety lakhs will be involved
as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Council to make regulations to provide for
the time, place, procedure and quorum for the meeting of the Central Council.
Clause 10 empowers the Central Council to make regulations to provide for the manner
and the purposes for associating persons with itself whose assistance or advice it may
require.
Clause 11 empowers Central Council to make regulations to provide for the constitu-
tion of Committees. It empowers each Central Council to provide for the composition, tenure
and functions of each such Committee.
Clause 13 empowers the Central Council to make regulations to provide for the ap-
pointment of a Secretary, officers and other employees and to determine the conditions of
service and entitlement to remuneration of the Secretary, officer and other employees.
Clause 19 empowers the Central Council to determine by regulations the minimum
standards of education required for granting recognized qualifications by the Universities or
Institutions.
Clause 23 empowers the Central Council to make regulations to provide for the manner
of maintaining and entering the names in the Register of Central Council.
Clause 24 empowers the Central Council to make regulations to provide for the manner
of, and the fee for, making application for entering the name in the register. Sub-clause (3)
thereof also empowers the Central Council to determine the manner of refusing to enter the
name in the Register.
Clause 25 empowers the Central Council to determine by regulations the standards of
professional conduct and etiquette and the code of ethics for the practitioners.
Clause 26 empowers the Central Council to determine by regulations the manner of
holding inquiry by the Disciplinary Committee.
Clause 27 empowers the Central Council to make regulation to provide for the manner
of, the fee for, and the conditions and requirement for, re-entering the name in the Central
Register.
Clause 28 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for the manner of
filing appeal from the order of the Central Council relating to refusal to enter the name in, or
removal of the name from, the Register. It also empowers the Central Government to provide
for the procedure for disposal of such appeal.
Clause 31 empowers the Cetntral Government to make rules to provide for the form and
the time for preparation of the Annual Budget of each Central Council.
Clause 32 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for the form and
the time for preparation of annual report of each Central Council.
Clause 33 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for the form and
the manner of maintenance of books of accounts of the Central Council. As the matters for
which the rules and regulations may be made pertain to matters of procedure or detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.
14

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Central Council of the Physiotherapy, the
co-ordinated development in the education of physiotherapy with a view to
regulating and maintaining standards of such education, maintenance
of Register of Physiotherapists and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P . )
GMGIPMRND—2422LS(S3)—06-11-2017.