 
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 200 of 2022
THE HOUSING FACILITY FOR DESTITUTE SENIOR 
CITIZENS, WIDOWS AND ORPHAN 
CHILDREN BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. T. Sඎආൺඍඁඒ (A) Tඁൺආංඓඁൺർඁං Tඁൺඇ඀ൺඉൺඇൽංൺඇ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for housing facility to destitute senior citizens, widows and orphan 
children and for matters connected therewith.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Housing Facility For Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows 
and Orphan Children Act, 2022. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in other cases, the Central Government; 
5
Short title, extent 
and
commencement..
Deﬁnitions.

(b)  "destitute senior citizen" means any person who has attained the age of sixty years 
and has no facility for shelter or has no relative to take care of and provide shelter to him; 
(c) “Fund" means the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and Orphan Children Welfare 
Fund constituted under section 9;
(d)  "orphan" means a child who is below fourteen years of age and has no parents or 
willing and capable legal guardian or other relatives to take care of him; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(f) "widow" means any woman who has not remarried after the death of her husband 
and who does not have any facility for shelter.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, frame a national policy for providing housing facilities to the destitute senior 
citizens, widows and orphans.
4. (1)  The appropriate Government shall establish residential centres for the destitute 
senior citizens, widows and orphans. 
(2) Every residential centre shall have the capacity of minimum eighty and maximum 
two hundred persons to live in at a time. 
(3) Every residential centre shall be arranged in such a way to accommodate two 
orphans, one senior citizen and one widow in one unit. 
5. The appropriate Government shall—
 ( a) provide housing, food, water, medicine, security and the minimum 
resources necessary to lead a balanced and healthy life in every residential centre;  
(b) ensure utilization of Government schemes running in the area for necessary 
resources, education, health and food in every residential centre;
(c) ensure easy access to every person eligible person to reside in the residential 
centre;
(d) make efforts to develop mutually dependent relation for residents living 
in residential centre to lead a mutually humanitarian, emotional, safe and happy 
life; and
(e) formulate policy for setting up domestic production unit for employment 
generation in every residential centre.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Managing Committee to monitor, supervise and coordinate the functioning 
of the residential centres established under section 4. 
(2) The Management Committee shall consist of— 
(i) the Chairperson of the local body, ex-officio, Chairperson; 
(ii) a public servant, ex-officio, member; 
(iii) a senior-most senior citizen from the residential centre, member; 
(iv) an oldest widow from the residential centre, member; and
(v) an eminent social worker, member; 
to be nominated by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of staff for the 
residential centres as may be prescribed, from time to time.
National Policy for housing for destitute senior citizens, widows and orphans.
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
Eﬆablishment 
of residential 
centres.
2
Residential 
centres to have 
proper facilities 
for the 
beneﬁciaries.
Constitution of 
Management 
Committee.

(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other term and conditions of service 
of Chairperson, members other than ex-officio and staff of the Managing Committee 
and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of its functions shall be such as may 
be prescribed.   
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national policy 
formulated under section 3.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and 
Orphan Children Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the 
Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be utilized for providing facilities to the residents of residential 
centres.
9. The appropriate Government shall review the quality and progress of residential 
centres established under section 4 in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the 
implementation of the provisions of the Act. 
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this 
Act.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notiﬁcation in the Oﬃcial Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modiﬁcation in the rule or both the Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have eﬀect only in such 
modiﬁed form or be of no eﬀect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modiﬁcation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
3
Implementation of the policy by theappropriate Government.
10
5
25
20
30
15
Central Government to provide requisite funds.Act not in derogation of any other law.
Power to make 
rules.
Constitution of Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and Orphan Children Welfare Fund.Appropriate Government to review the quality and progress of residential centres.
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
During the last one decade the old age population in India has risen by 39.3 per cent. 
This segment of population is expected to rise by 45-50 per cent. in the coming decades. 
Because of continuous replacing of joint families by nuclear families due to ongoing trend 
and  continuous migration the old aged persons have to suffer from several problems 
including loneliness. There are more than a thousand old age homes but their situations 
and problems could not be improved and sorted out permanently. In similar ways, there are 
a large number of widows in the country who face discrimination not only on family front 
but on social front also. In a number of cases, they do not have shelter and other necessary 
assistance to lead a dignified life. Now-a-days there is a need to create a total and conducive 
environment whereby they could spend rest of their life in a productive and happy manner. 
In addition to this, there is a large section of population of orphan kids who do not have any 
shelter and  are living a destitute life. Most of these kids are engaged as child labour or have 
fallen prey to drug addiction, some are addicted to drugs, some are involved in flesh trade 
or illegal trafficking. 
There is  need to provide an integrated provision in this regard so that these three 
socially neglected classes could be brought under one roof where these three can line as one 
family. Widow shall play role of mother to orphan kids and neglected old age person play 
a role of guardian to these two. By this, a familial environment will be provided for these 
three classes.
The Bill seeks to establish residential centres for destitute senior citizens, widows and 
orphans along with shelter, food, clothes and other basic facilities of life to lead a dignified 
humanitarian, emotional, safe and happy life based on mutually supported relation. The 
most important objective behind the establishment of the centre is that the widow house, 
senior citizen house and orphanage established with different methods in the country shall 
be brought under one roof.
 Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                          T. SUMATHY (A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN  
06 ,  2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of the residential centres all over the 
country for use of the destitute senior citizens, widows and orphans. Clause 5 provides that 
appropriate Government shall ensure residential centres to have proper basic facilities to 
the beneficiaries. Clause 6 provides for constitution of Management Committee to monitor, 
supervise and coordinate the functioning of the residential centres. Clause 8 provides for 
constitution of a Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and Orphan Children Welfare Fund.     
Clause 10 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may 
involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
to provide for housing facility to destitute senior citizens, widows and orphan 
children and for matters connected therewith
_______
( )