AI!. INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA ON' 
.1 0 fiE - :395 
Bm No. ZOO of 1885 
THE SPICES BOARD BILL, 1_ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAP1'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CI ... Usr.s .. 
"", 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Defi.nitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE SPICES BoARD 
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board. 
4. Secretary and other officers. 
5. Advisory committees. 
. ,. 
6. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Cardamom Board anti 
the Spices Export Promotion Council to t'he Board. 
7. Functions of the Board. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION OF OWNERS OF CARDAMOM ESTATIS 
8. Registration of owners of cardamom estates. 
9. Power of State Government to make rules. 
10. Returns to be made by registered owners. 
CHAPTER IV 
CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF SPICES 
11.· No person to export spices without certificate. 
12. Grant of certificate. 
13. Cancellation, suspension. etc., of certificate. 
14. APPE'al. 
15. Power to permit export without certificate. 
CHAPTER V 
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GoVERNMENT 
16. Power to control price and distribution of cardamom. 
17. Power to prohibit or control import of cardamom. 
18. Power of the Central Government to issue directions. 
." 
19. Power of the C~l'ltral Government to supersede the Board. 

.... _ ... r .... ,. ••• 
ii 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
CLAUSBS 
20. Grants and loans by the 'Central GoVermnent. 
21. Board Fund. 
22. Budget. 
23. Annual report. 
~4. Accounts and audit. 
25. Annual repo.rt and auditor's report to be laid before Parliament. 
CHAPl'ER VII 
J4ISCI'.l.LANEOUS 
26. Penalty for making false retUrns. 
27. Pena1ties for obstructing an ofB.cer Or member of the Board in 
the discharge of his duties and for failure to produce books 
and records. 
28. Peonalty for contravention of order relating to control of price, 
etc. 
29. Penalties for contravention of section 11 ,or any order made under 
section 17. 
30. Other penalties. 
31. Offences by companies. 
32. Provisions of Act 52 of 1962 to apply to export of spices and 
import or cardamom. 
33. Previous sanction of Central "Government. 
34. Delegation. 
35. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public 
servants. 
36. Protection of action taken in good faith. . 
37. Power to enter. 
38. Power to make rules. 
39. Power to make regulations. 
40. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
41. Power to remove diftlculties . 
. 42. Repeal and savings. 
THE SCHEDuLE -, 

~.J 
~ 
OJ 
I~ 
~ 
S l-
t"" 
~ r. ....... 
-~ ..... o-J :.1 ... 16 0 . ... 0 , .. 
~ t:i 
iJl C) 
~ . : 
~ t6 I ! 
\, ; (j) 
t}. H 
;;.~ ..... ~ ~ E 
~ c+ c+ w e :z: :-"! Ii P 
~ 
(j) 0 ;J ~ a. 
?E H c: t:1 0 0 :7. 
~ 
'7 /I) (I) !' I 
~= 0.. H 
I' ..... t"" :v 
I~ 
~ 
I' l-
e \Q 
:;0;- eD 
(I) 
(JI 
~. 
~ OJ 
~ 
rf' 
::J" 
~ 
OJ 
-~ 
Cll 
c: :.xt 
c: 
t"' ,.. 
~ a 

• 
8m No. %00 of less 
.)( .. 1 
THE SPICES BOARD BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
to pTovide 10'1' the constitut1iDn of a Board for the development of ezport 
of spices. atJ4 fOt' the CO;Uro', Qj. CArMmom iaciusWy imcludmg the 
control of cultivation of cardamom and m4~S connected therewith. 
B& it enacted by. Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of· the Republlc 
of India as followa:-
CHAPTER I 
~.uy 
5 1. (J) This Act ma~ be called, the. Spices Board A.d;, 1M. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short 
tftle,ex-
tent and 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government commen_ 
may, by notif1catien in the OfBeial a_tie, appoint. cemen,t. . 
10 
It In this Act. unl.- the aontQt otherwise requirel,-
(4) "Board" means the Spices Board constituted under sub-section 
(~~, of seet~. a; . 
(b) "c~rp.olll"IQeanli. the fruit of c~4wn,~~ plAAt 8l).di~~ 
green cnrdamom, bleached cardamom, bleachable white card~OIP" 
iun-dried cardamom, cardamom seeds, powdered cardamom and oil 
15 extracted from cardamom; 
(.et). '~cfM'~l1,1,~ pJM.t~' m~~, ~ABII\ CARDA)dOMUM 
MATON. AMONIuM SALUTATION ROXB and any other plant which 
Deftn1. 
tions. 

Constitu-
tion and 
incorpo-
ration PI 
the 
Board. 
2 
the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be 
a cardamom plant for the purposes of this Act; 
(d) "certificate" me~s a certificate granted under section 12; 
(e) "defiler" means a dealer in spices; 
(f) "estate" means the area administered as one unit which con- 5 
tains Jand planted with cardamom plants; 
(g) ."export" and "import" means+ respectively, taking out of or 
bringing into India by land, sea and. air;, 
(h) "manufactu,rer" means a manufacturer of spices; 
(i) "member" means a member of the Board appointed under 10 
suD-section (3) of section 3; 
(j) "owner", in relation to any land planted with cardamom 
plants, includes-
(i) any agent of the owner; and 
(ii) a mortgagee, lessee or other person in actual possession 15 
of the land; 
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(l) "registeted estate" means an estate in respect of which an 
owner is registered under sub-section (1) of section 8 and includes 
any estate in respect of which an owner is reqUired to be registered iO 
under the provisions of that sub-section; 
(m) "refi,stered owner" means an owner of a registered estate 
which has been or is registered or is required to be registered under 
SUb-section (1) of section 8; and 
(n) "spices" means the spices specified in the Schedule: is 
Provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied that it 
is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, add any other spice to the Schedule or 
omit any spice therefrom. 
CHAPTERm 
THE SPICES BOARD 
3. (1) TIle Central Govemmeat shall, by notiftcation in the Odicial 
G.-tte, CODBtitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called 
the Spiees Board, 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having 35 
perpetual succession and, a common seal with power, subject to the pro-
visions of this Act, to Contract and shJll, by the said name, sue and be 
sued. 
(3) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exeeedinc 
thirty-two, u may be preaeribecI, and: unlen the rules made III this behalf 40 
ofbenrise provkle, the Board 811 consist of the foUowiD, members 
namel,.:-
(4) a Chairman; 
(b) tbree Members of Parliament, of whom two shaD be eleeted 
'y the BOWIe of the People and one by the· CouDeO of Statel; 45 

5 
10 
15 
r" ,. 
i..... •. _~,_ .. :'; 
.~ . ~ 
(c) three members to I'epreaent respectively the MiiUsten of 
the Central Gover.DJDellt dealinl' with-
(i) Commerce; 
(ii) Agriculture; and 
(iii) Finance; 
(d) six members to represent the growers of spices; 
(e) eleven members to represent the exporters of spi~; 
(1) three members to represent major spice produein, States; 
(g) five members, one each to repreaent-
(i) Directorate of Cocoa, AreCUlut and Spices Development, 
Calicut; 
(ii) the India Institute of Packaging, Bombay; 
(iii) the Central Food Technological and Research IlIBtitute, 
Mysore; 
(iv) the Regional Research Laboratory, Trivandrum; and 
(v) the Central Plantation Corps Researeh. ~itute, 
Kasargode. 
(4) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder 
for being chosen' as, Or for being, a member of either House at Parlia-
~o ment. 
(5) The term of oJllce of the members' and! other conditions of service 
of the members shaD be such as may be prescribed. 
(6) The Chairman shall, in addition to presiding over the meetfnp of 
the Board, exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board 
!l5 as may be delegated to biro by the Board and such other powers and 
duties as may be prescribed. 
(7) The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice-Chairman 
who shall exercise such of the powers, and perform such of the functions 
of the Chainnan as may be prescribed Or as may be delegated to him 
30 by the Chairman. 
(8) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by 
reasOn of-
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
Board; 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a pe~on acting as a member 
35 of the Board; 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting 
the merits of the case. 
f. (1) The Board may appoint the Secretary and such other oftkers 
and employees as it considers necessary "'1' the eftleient diseharp of its 
.(.0' faD.etionl under this Aet. 
(2) The terms ad eonditions of service of the Secretary and other 
oIIcen ad employeel of the Board shall be lueh as may be determined 
Ity NJUI ...... 
SecretUF 
and other 
oftIcerl . 

Advisory 
com-
mittees. 
Transfer 
of assets 
and lia-
bilities of 
the Car-
damom 
Board 
and the 
Spices 
Export 
Promotion 
Council 
to ~he 
Board. 
Func-
tiona of 
the 
Boar4. 
4 
S·. (J) Subjeet to 8l'1)' rules made in this behalf, the &ard ··maI •. ~ 
time to time, constitute such committees as may be necessary for the 
efticient discharge of its functions. 
(2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (l) shall consist 
of such number of persons as the Board may deem fit. 5 
6. (1) On and from the commencement of this Act,-
(a) all properties and other assets vested in the Cardamom Boal'd 
aDd t.be Spices :mtport· Promotion Council' immediately before such 
commencement shall vest i14 the Board; 
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities. i~(re<i, all contracts 10 
entered into and all matters and things enga:ged to be clone . by, with, 
01' for the Cardamom Board Or the Spices Export Promotion Coundl 
immediately before such commencement for or in connection with 
the purposes of the GaJ;damom Beard a. 1ha ,Spi~ea Expon Promotion 
Council shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered· into and 15 
engaged to be done by, with, or for the Board; 
(c) 011 sums of money due to the Cardamom. Board or the Spices 
Export Promotion Council immediately before such commencement 
shall be deemed to be due to the Board~ 
(d) aU· suits and other legal proceeding.~ instituted or which 20 
could hnve ·been instituted by or against the Cardamom Board or the 
Spices Export Promotion Council immediately) before such com-
mencement may be continued or instituted by or ag~nst the Board; 
and 
(e) every employee holding any ofBce under the Cardamom Board 25 
or . the Spices EXfK'rt Promotion COUllcil immediately before such 
commenoement shall on such commencement hold his ofBce or 
serviee uDder the Board with the same rights and prlvUeges 
as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have 
been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting; 30 
land shall continue to do so unlels and until his employment. 
under the Board is duly terminated or Wltil his remuneration and 
other conditions of service are duly altered by the :aoard~ 
(2) Notwithstanding anyth,ing contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 or in a!ly other law for the time being in force, the absOl'J)tioD 35 
of any employee by the Board in its regplar service under this section 
shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that ~ or 
other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal 
or any other authority. 
7. (1) The Board may-
(i) develop, promote and re,uIate Rpori of· .piees; 
(ii) grant certifleate for export of spices and reliat. bro¥n ........ ' . . , 
( .... ), undertldte Pl'OlJ'ammel and p~ojeets fw Rl'RPI.,jiQa. of. ~ 
of IPicell; , 45 
<w> auist and e .. cour.,e ItwUes end ~ch fA,. iJ!Qtfttv. .. _t, 
of pro-;eilllnl, quality, techniques of gradiD, and paclJa&iq ~ .• aw.~ 
(!') strive 'towards .tabiliaatioD of prices of spices of esports; 

5 
If) 
20 
5 
(vi) ~volve suitahle, quality standards and itttroduce certifitation 
of q~.aldy through "Quality Markillg" for spices for export; 
(vn) control quality of spiees for export; 
(viii) gi~e .I:eeeees, · .. bjeet to such terma and conditions a!llmRY 
be prescribed, to the manuiaeturers of spices for export; . 
(ir) marlcet ··anyspiee, 'if, it 'eon8iders necessary in the interest 
of promotion of· export; , 
(x) provtdewarehousing facllit:es abroad for spices; 
(xi) collect statistics with regard to spices for compilation and 
publication; 
(xii) import, with the previous approval of the Central Govern-
ment, any spice for sale; and 
(xiii) advise the Central Government on matters relating to 
import· and export o.f spices. 
(2) The Board may also-
(i) promote co-operative efforts among growers of cardamom; 
(ii) ensure remunerative returns to growers of cardamom: 
(iii) provide financial' or other assistance for improved method" 
Of culttwt;on aDd 'proeessing of carda....n, for replanthlg· cardaMom 
aad for extension of "nrdamom growing 'areas; 
(iv) regulate the 'uleof cardalOom -aDd stabi1isation of prices of 
cardamom; 
(v) pl'8videtrliiningin eardamGlll testmg arid fixiDg grade 'stan. 
'dards ~f tant81ftOlD; 
25 (vi) increase the consump~on of cardamom and carry on pro-
paganda for that purpose; 
(vii) register and licence borkers (indudlnu auctione'l'fl) of 
cardamom And persons engaged in tbe lbU9ines!l or ca1'dllJllom: 
(viii) ·improve the marketing of cardamom: 
30 (ix) collect statistics from 2'rowen, dealers and such othp.r :per-
sons as may be prescribed on any matter relatin~ to the cardamom 
industry: publish statistics So col~d dr· fIOi"thm~ thereof' ftr 't!IJr-
tradstherefrom.; 
(x) secure better workin2' conditions and the provision and 
35 improvement of amenities and incentives for workers: and 
(xi) undertake, assist or encourage scientific, techno1~c.1 And 
economic research. 
CHAPl'ER III 
Rl!:GISTRATION OF OWNERS OF cAJU)AMOM ESTA'l'ES 
40 R. (n Everv owner of land plantedwi~ rardamom plants. whether Registra-
\l:uch land is comprised in one estllte o~ more than ,one e,qtat~ l'Ihall. bf'- tion of h owners of 
fore the expiration of one month from the date on which P. first became cardamom 
owner of !lueh estate or Pl'Itates. anplv to the rectisterlnd offi(,P,1" I1nnoint- estates. 
-ed in this behalf bv the State Government to be 're'r{istered lie; 'an owner 
"tn respect of each estate owned by him: 
Provided th::l.t thp State' Gov~mment may, 'for suMcient rea.ms. ex-
tend the time-limit for registration by such period fl\ll it thinks fit. 

Power of 
State 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
Returns 
to be 
maae by 
registered 
owners. 
No person 
to expo~ 
spices 
without 
certitlcate. 
Grant of 
certificate. 
Cance-
llation, 
8uspen-
Ilion etc, 
of certi. 
fteate. 
'. .. - 6 
(2) Registration once made shall continue to be in force until it is 
c~ncelled by the registering officer. 
9. (1) The State Government may,by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry into effect the provisions of section 8. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing Rower, such 
rules may prescribe the form of the application for registration and 
for cancellation of registration, the fee payable on such application'S, the 
particulaJ's to be included in such application, the procedure to be fol-
lowed in granting, and cancelling registration, the registers to be kept 
5 
by registering officers and the supply by registering officers of informa- 10 
tion to the Board. ' 
10. (1) A registerefl owner shall furnish returns to the Board in ," 
'Such form, at such times and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Board may authorise an officer to visit any estate at any 
time to verify the accuracy of any return made under this section ,or to 15 
ascertain the productive capacity of the estate. 
CHAPrER IV 
CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF SPICES 
11. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall, ~fter 
the commencement of this Act, commence or carryon the busiliess of 20 
export of any spice except under and in accordance with a certificate: 
Provided that a person carrying on the business of export of spices 
,immediately before the commencement of this Act, may ,continue to do 
so for a period of three months from such commencement; and if he has 
made an applieation for such certificate within the said period of three g5 
months till the disposal of such application. 
Exp14nation.-The reference in this sectil)n to the commencement 
of this Act shall be construed in relation to any spice added to the 
Schedule by notification under, the proviso to clause (n) of section 2 as 
reference to the date with effect from which such spice is added to the 30 
Schedule. 
12. (1) An application for grant of certificate shall be made to the 
Board; in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be pres-
cribed and shall be accompanied by a receipt eVidencing the payment of 
the prescribed fee. 
(2) On receipt of such application, the Board, shall,-
(0.) if the application is not in the prescribed form or 'does not 
contain any of the prescribed particulars, return the application to 
the applicant; or 
35 
(b) if the application is.in the prescribed ,form and contains the 40 
prescrihed particulars. erant the certificate subje'ct to such terms and 
conditions as may be determined by regulations. 
13. (1) The Board may cancel any certificate on anyone or more of 
the following grounds, namely:-
(0.) that the holder of the certiftcate has violated any of the 45 
terms and conditions of the certificate; and 
(b) that in the opinion of the Central Government it. is nece .. 
aBry in the interests of general public to cancel the certificate, 

, 
(2) Where the Board, for reasons to be recorded in writin,a, Is satis-
fied that pending consideration of the question of . cancelling the certi-
ficate on any grounds mentioned in sUb-section (1), it is necessary so to 
5 do, the Board may, by order in writing,. suspend the operation of the, 
certificate for such period not exceeding f('rty-five days as may be speci-
fied in the order and require the holder of the certificate to show cause, 
within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such order, as to why the 
suspension of the certificate should not be extended till the determina-
tion of the question as to whether the registration should be cancelled. 
10 
(3) No order of cancellation of registration under this section shall 
be made unless th~ person concerned has been given" a' reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard in respect of the grounds for such cancellation. 
14. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made u·nder section 13 
I_may prefer an appeal to the C.entral Government within such period as 
!) may be prescribed. 
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of 
the period prescribed there~or: ' 
Providen that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the 
period prescribed therefor if the appellant satisfies the Central Govern-
80 ment that he had sufftcient· cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the prescribed perroct. 
(.1> Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form 
and shall be accompanied by a copy of order appealed against and by 
such fees as may be prescribed. 
85 (4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as ·may 
be prescribed: 
Provided that before disposiriJl of an ~p~~l. the appellant shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. . 
(5)- 'nte Central Government may conftrm, modify or reverse the 
30 or~er. appealed against. 
15. The Central Government may, if ·satisfted that it is necessary or 
expenient. so to do. in public intpreRt. bv nntificatinn in the Oftichll 
Gazet.tr. ann subject. to such conditions. if any. as may be Rpeeifted there-
in. "ermit anv body or other ntJ~ncv to commence or carry on the busi-35' ,'. .. ,.. 
nes~ of extlort of ST'llCf'S without a certificate. 
CHAPTER V 
CONTROl. ~y nn: CENTRAL GOVERNM1l!NT 
lR.O) The CentrRl Govemment MAY, bv o,rder notified in the Offi-
cial Gazette. fhe: in respect of c::lrdamom of any rtescriptionspecifted 
40 therein-
45 
(a) the mAximum nrice or the minimum fl"ire. or the maxi-
mum an~ minimum prices. whfrh mav be- ChArged bv /I Jlrnwer of 
rArnamOITl Or C9'!'.:iamnm delller. wholeSAle or ret~n wheth.er ,or" the 
In"'an market or for export; and 
(11) thp. mll;ximllm ~u",ntit" whiC'h may in one transaction be 
s"ld to any person. 
Appeal 
Power to 
permit· 
export 
without 
certi-
ficate. 
Powcrto 
control 
price 
and dis-
tribution 
of carda-
mom. 

Power to 
"p!'ohl-
hibit 
or con-
trol im-
port of 
carda-
mom. 
Power of 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to issue 
diRe-
tiOnB. 
Power of 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to lUper-
sede 
the 
Board. 
8 
(2) Without prejudice to tne generality of the powers conferred by 
sub-section (1), any order made thereunder may provide-
(a) for requiring persons engaged in the production, sup~ly ?r 
distribution of, or trade and commerce in, cardamom to mamtam 
and produce for inspection such books, accounts and records relat- 5 
ing to their bUsiness and to furnish such information relating there-
to as may be specified in the order j and 
(b) for such'other m~tters, including in particular the entering 
and search of premises, vehicles, vessels and aircraft, and the seizure 
by a person authorised to make such search, of cardamom in respect 10 
of which such person has reason to believe that a contravention of 
the order ha'S been, is being or is about to be, committed. 
17. The Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise con-
trolling the import of cardamom, either generally or in specified classes 15 
of cases. 
18. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, 
the Board shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this 
Act,. be bound by such directions on' questions of policy as the Central 
Government may give in writing to it from time to time: 20. 
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an op-
portunity to express its views before any direction is given under this 
sub-section. 
(2) The decision of ilie Central Government whether a question is 
one of policy or not shall be final 25 
19. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of opinion-
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable 
to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the 
provisions of this Act; or ' 
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying 30 
with any direction i!lsued by the Central Government under this Act 
or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the 
financial position of the Board or the administration of the Board 
has deteriorated; or 35 
(c) that ci.rcumstances exist which render it necessary in the 
pUblic interest so to do, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
,supersede the Board for ~uch period, not ex.ceeding six months, as may be 
specified in the notificatIon. 40 
(2) Upon the publication of tl notification under sub .. section (1) 
superseding the Bo~,-:-
(0) all the members shall, as from the date qf supersession. 
vacate their offices as such; 

(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under 
the provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on 
behalf of the Board, shall until the Board is reconstituted under 
sUb-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or per-
5 sons as the Central Government may direct; and 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the 
Board i'S reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central 
Government. 
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the 
10 notification issu~d under sUb-section (1), the Central Government may, 
reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such case any per-
son or persons who vacated their offices under clause (a) of sub-section 
(2), shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment: 
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the 
15 expiration of the period of supersession, take action under this sub-sec-
tion. 
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under 
sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section 
and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid. before each House 
20 of Parliament at the earliest. 
CHAPTER VI 
FIN .... NCE, AcCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
ZOo The Central Government may, at1ter due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants and 10al114 of 
25 such sums of money as that Government may consider n~essary. 
35 
21. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Spices 
Board Fund and there shall be credited thereto-
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board. by the Central 
Government under section 20; . 
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificates grant-
ed under this Act; and' 
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as 
may be decided upon by the Central Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting-
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, . 
officers and other employees of the Board; 
(b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions 
under section 7; and 
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act. 
. , 
Grant. 
and 
loans by 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Board 
Fund. 
40 .~ The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time each Budpt. 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial 
year, showing the estimated receipts anq. expE'nditure of the Board and 
forward the I:jame to the Central Government. 

Annual 
report. 
Accou-
nts and 
audit. 
Annual 
report. 
and 
auditors 
report 
to be 
laid 
before 
ParHa-
meat. 
Penalty 
for ma-
king false 
returns. 
Penal- . 
ties for 
obstnic-
ting an 
officer 
or mem-
ber of 
the Board 
In the 
dis-
charge Of 
his du-
tiej and 
for fail-
ure to 
produce 
books and 
records. 
Penalty 
for cen-
traven-
tIon 
of order 
relating 
to ~ 
control 
of price, 
Me. 
i6 
23. The Board shall pl'epare, in such form and at such time each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full 
account of its activities during the previous financial year, and submit 
a copy thereof to the Central Government. 
24. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in 5 
such manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India, be pre~cribed and the Board shall furnish to the Cen-
tral Government before such date as may be prescribed, its audited copy 
of accounts together with the auditors' report thereon. 
25. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and 10 
auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, 
before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
26. Any person who being required by or under this Act to furnish 15 
any return fnils to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing 
any particular which is false and which he knows to be false or does not 
believe to be true shall be punishable with fbie which may ~xtend to 
five hundred rupees. 
27. Any person who-
(a) obstructs any member authorised by the Cha~rman in writ-
ingor any officer or other employee of the Bo~rd authorised by it 
20 
in this behalf or any person atit~orised in this behalf by the Central 
Government or by the Board, in the exercise of any power confer-
red, or in the disCharge of arty duty imposed, on him by or under 25 
this Act: or 
(b) having control over or custddy of any account book or other 
record, faUs to produce such book or record when required to do 
so by or under this Act, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, go 
or with fine which may extertrl to one thousand rupees, Or with both. 
28. (1) If any person contravenes any order made under section 16, 
he· shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both; and the property in respect of which the order has been con- 35 
travened or such . part thereof as the Court may deem fit, shall be tor-
feited to the Central Government. 
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene, or abets the contraven-
tion of, any 6rder under .. etlan 16 shall 'be deemed to have contraV'efiec'f 
that order. 40 

'2 of 1962. 
20. If ahy person contravenes the provisions of IeCtion 11 or any order 
made under 'Section 1 ~ he shall, without· prejudlee to any confiscation or 
penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of the Customs 
Act, 1962, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
5 to one year or with ftne wl10ich may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both. , " . _ "_,',,II.:,.i:i 
30. Whoever contravenes or attem'pts to contravene or abets the 
contravention of the provisions. of this Act or of any rules or regulation,s' 
made thereunder other than the provisions, punishment for the contra-
10 vention whereof has been provided for In .sections 26, 27, 28 'and 29, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, Or with both, and 
in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which. 
may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which such contravention 
15 continues after conviction for' the first such contravention. 
31. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was commUted was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the compal.1Y for the conduct of 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
20 to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he 
prows that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
25 had exercised all due ailigence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
nn offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
30 connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager. secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
;punished aceerdingly. 
35 E:rplanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a finn 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
32. (a) All spices ·to which section 11 of this Act applies, and 
40 (b) the 'earoamom to which any ortier under section 17 ot this Act 
applies, 
shall be deemed to be goods of which the import or export has 
b~eh prohlbited Or restricted under section 11 of the CustOms Act, 1962, 
and-all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordblgly. 
PCD.aL 
ties for 
cqatra-
veation 
of section 
11 or 
any order 
made 
under 
section 17. 
Other 
penalties. 
Ofrent!eJ 
by com-
panl.l. 
Provi-
sions ot 
Act 52 of 
1982 to 
apply to 
export of 
spices 
and lm-
po~ of 
cudamom. 

Previous 
sanction 
of theCea-
tral Gov-
ernment. 
Dele_ 
gation. 
Member5, 
officers 
and em-
ployees 
of the 
Board 
lobe 
public 
servants. 
Protec-
tionof 
action 
taken in 
ROod 
faith. 
Power to 
enter. 
Power 
. to make 
ruleI. 
Ii 
33. No prosecution lor any offence punishable under this Act shali. be 
instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government. 
\ 
34.. The Board may, by genera] Or special order in wdting,. ~.elegate 
to the Chairman or any other member or to any officer of the . Board, 
subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in 5 . 
the order, such of its powers and ~unctions .under this Act (except the 
power under section 39) as it may deem necessary. 
35. All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be 
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
p,rovisions of this Act to be public servants within the meaning of 10 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. fa of 1860. 
36. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Government, or the Board or any committee appointed by it, or any 
member of the Bocirq or such committee, or any officer or employee of 
the G~vernme~t or the Board or any other person authorised by the I.') 
Government or the Board, for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act or the rules . or regulations made 
thereunder. 
. 37. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person generally or 
specially authorised by the Board in this behalf, may. whenever it is 20 
necessary so to do, for any of .the purposes of· this Act, at all reasonable 
times, enter upon any land or premises and make any inspection or 
inquiry or do such other act or thing as may 1;>e prescribed: 
Pro~ded that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed 
courtyard or garden attached to a dwelling house (unless with the 25 
consent of the occupier thereof) withQut previously giving such occupier 
at least twenty-four hours' notice in writing of his intention to do so. 
38. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power suell 30 
rules may provide for .all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the number of members of the Board under sub-section (3) 
of section 3; 
(b) the term of office and other conditions of service of the 
.. ·members of the Board under sub-section (5) of section 3; 35 
(c) the powers and duties of the Chairman und~r sub-section 
(6) of section 3; 
, (4) the powers IUlCi functions of the Vice-Chairman under sub-
s«ltion (7) of ~tion 3; 
(e) the constitution of com!"ittc::$ under section 5; 40 
(I) f..he tenns and .oonditionsfor grant of licences to. manufac-
turers of. ~pices for export under clause (viii) of sub.,section (l) of 
aection 7; 

IS 
(g) the form and manner in which and the time at which the 
registered owner ~ay furnish returns to the Board under section 10; 
(h) the form of the application and the fees under sub-section 
(1 ) of section 12; . 
'5 (i) the period of limitation for appeal under sub-sectlon (1) of 
section 14; 
(j) the form of appeal and the fees payable under sub-section 
(3) of section 14; 
. (k) the procedure for disposal of appeal under sUb-section (4) 
10 of section 14; 
(l) the manner in which the account'S of the Board shall be 
maintained and audited and the date before which the audited copy 
of the accounts may be furnished to the Central Government under 
section 24; 
15 (m) the conditions and the restrictions with respect to the 
exercise of the power to enter under section 37; 
(n) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or 
ill respect of which provision is to be, or may be, matte by rules. 
39. (1) The Board may. with the previous approval of the Central 
20 Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules generally to carry out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power', such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
25 following, namely:-
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the Secreta~y and 
other officers and employees of the Board un,der sub-section (2) of 
section 4; and 
(b) the terms and . conditions under which the certifi.cate may be 
30 granted under sub-section (2) of section 12. 
40. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
35 before the expiry of the session immediately, followipg the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
40 may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule or regulation. 
. . 
41. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the proviSions of 
this Act, th~ Central Government may, by order: published in the Offtcial 
45 Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provimons of this 
Act as may appear to be necessary for' removing the difficulty: 
Power 
to make 
,regula-
tions. 
Rules and 
regula-
tiOM to 
tC' laid 
before 
Parlia. 
ment, 
Power ~o 
r:!move 
difflcul-
ties. 

Repeal 
and 
savings. 
14 
Provided that no or.der ahall be ~de uncUtr this .action after the 
expiry Gf two years from the corrunencement of this J\.ct. 
<g) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
. 42. (1) Sections 3 to 33 of the Cardamom Act, 1965 are hereby repealed. 5 ,42 ot 1968 .. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything' done or any action taken 
under the provisions of the, said Act shall, in so far as such thing or 
action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed 
to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act as if the 
said provisions were in force when, such thing was done or SUQh action IQ 
was taken and shall continue in force accordingly until superseded by 
anything done or any action taken under this Act. 
1: CardaJn()m 
2. Pepper 
3. ChHly 
4. Ginger 
5. Turmeric 
6. Coriander 
7. Cumin 
8. Fermel 
9: Fenugreek 
10. Celery 
11. Aniseed 
'12. Bishopsweeu 
13. Caraway 
14. Dill 
15 .. Cinnamon 
16. Cac:sia 
17. Garlic 
18. Curry Le~ 
19. Kokam 
20. Mint 
21. Mllst.ard 
.22- .f'arsley 
~. Pomegranate Seed 
. 24. Sa1fron 
25. Vanilla 
,26. Tejpat 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(n)] 
• 
15 
20 
35 
.fO 
in any form inc~l1ding curry powders, spice 011, oleoresin! and ot4er mix-
tures wheN SpIce conteatis pre-domin~nt. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India has been a tradiijonal exporter of spices. Though exports of 
spices from India have shown marginal increases over the last few years, 
the proportionate share of India in the total world trade has declined to 
about one-third. 
2. At present, the Spices Export Promotion Council looks after the 
exports of spices while the development of production and exports of 
cardamom. is being taken care of by the Cardamom Board. Due to lack 
of a cohesive organisation as well as financial constraints, India has not 
been able to undertake systematic development of products and export of 
spices. As a result, there has been limited product development and our 
spices are being exported largely in bulk and unprocessed form. Con-
centrated effort to promote exports in value added form and consumer 
packag~ are required to be made. Markets for spices as also .the prices 
have been ftuctuating from year to year causing ftuctu~qons in the pro-
duction pattern. The uneven production pattern has, in tum, its effect 
on exports. '['here is need for bringing out stabilisation In the export 
business of spices. Similarly, there is need to bring about constant 
improvement in quality of Ollr products, and in productivit.y to improve 
competitiveness of Indian spices. 
3. While a number of institutions and research organisations are 
operating in the spices sector, co-ordination of the activities of these 
agencies is considered necessary. 
4. In" view of, these problems affecting the spices trade and industry, 
it has been considered that the future export policy should concentrate 
on increasing production and productivity Qf spices, develop~ent of spice 
exports in value added form and initiating production of new spices and 
spice products for the international markEit. For this purpose, it is pro-
.posed to set upa Spices Board replacing the Cardamom Board and the 
Spices ,Export Promotion Council. While absorbing the present assets 
and ,taft of theSE" two organisations, the proposed Spices Board will be 
. responsible for the entire range of functions of production, marketing, 
exports and export promotion with regard to cardamom and export pro-
motion for all other spices. Tfle new Board would have representatives 
of growers, Centre.! and State Governroents, Research Institutions, traders 
and exporters. It will be financed by a cess .on exports within a ceUing 
of five per cent. The availability of funds will make it possible for it 
to direct and promote research and developmental activities aimed at 
increasing exports of spices and spice products. Such activities need the 
support of an organisation having a Bound financial base tQ help the 
tirade compete successfully against international competition. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; ARJUN SINGH. 
The 25th NotJember, 1985. 
15 

• I 
Not .. Oft cia"", 
Clawe 2 seeks to define certain words and ~pression8 used iD the BID. 
ClaU;ge 3,-
Sub-clause (1) provides for constitution' of the Board . 
Sub-clause (2) makes such Board a body corporate. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that the Board shall consist of members 
not exceeding thirty~two. 
Sub-clause (4) provides that the office of the member of the 
Board shall not disqualify its holder for being a member of either 
House of Parliament.· 
Sub-clause (5) provides that the term of office of the members 
and other conditions of service· of members of the Board may' be 
prescribed. 
Sub-clause (6) lays down the powers and duties of the Chairman. 
Sub-clawe (7) provides for the powers and functions of the 
Chairman. 
Sub-clause (8) lays down that any vacancy, defect or irregula-
rity in the constitution, appointment or procedur-e of the Board 
shall not invalidate the proceedings of the Board. 
Clause 4 provides for the appointment of the Secretary. other ofBcers 
and employees of the Board and their terms and conditions of service. 
ClAuse 5 empowers the Board to constitute advisory committees as 
may be necessary for performing its functions. 
Clause 6 (1) provides for' transfer of assets and liabilities vested in the 
Cardamom Board and the Spices Export Promotion Council from the 
date of commencement of the Act. The clause further provides that-
(a) All debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered 
into by the Cardamom Board or the Spices Export Promotion Council 
Ihall be deemed to have been incurred or entered into by or for the 
Board. • 
.(b) All sums of money due to the Cardamom Board or the Spices Ex-
port Promotion Council shall be deemed to be due to the Board. 
(c) All suits or legal proceedings with respect to any matter in rela-
tion to Cardamom Board or the Spices Export Promotion Council which 
have been Or could have been instituted by or against the Cardamom 
Board or the Spices Export Promotion Council may be im;tituted against 
the Board. 
(d) Every employees holding oftke under the Cardamom B~d or 
the Spices Export Promotion Council shall hold his office in the Board by 
the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of lervice. 
16 

17 
Sub-clause (2) provides that absorption of any employee by the 
Board under this clallse shall not entitle him to any compensation under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947). 
Clause 7 lays down the functions of the Board which inter CIlia include 
development, promotion and export of spices, grant of certificate for ex-
port of spices, undertake programmes and projects for promotion· at ex-
port of spices, assist and encourage studies and research for improvinl of 
process, quality, technique of grading and packaging of spices, stabilisa· 
tion of pr:ce of spices for export. evolve suitable quality standard and 
introduce certification of quality through quality marking for spices for 
export, control quality of spices for export, give licence to manufacturer 
of spices for export, market for spice in the interest of promotion of ex-
port, pr'.>vide warehousing facilities abroad for spices, collect statistics, 
import with the approval of the Central Government any spice for sale 
and advise the Central Government on matters relating to import and 
export of spices. 
Clause 8 provides fol' registration of owners of Cardamom Estates. 
Clause 9 empowers the State Governments to make rules prescribing 
the form of application for registration, cancellation of registration 
and the fee payable by applicants for registration, etc. 
Clause 10 provides that a registered owner shall furnish returns to 
the Board as may be required by the Board. 
Clause 11 prohibits the export ot spices without a certificate. 
Clause 12 lays down the procedure for grant of certificate for export. 
Clause 13 provides for cancellation. suspension, etc., of certificate of 
export. 
Clause 14 lays down that a person aggrieved by an order of refusal to 
grant of certificate of export m iy prefer an appeal ·to the Central 
Government. 
Clause .15 empowers the Central Government to permit anybody or 
other agency. to export or carry on the business of export without certi-
ficate.·· 
Clause 16 empowers the Central Government to control price and 
djstribution of cardamom. 
Clause 17 prohibits the import of cardamom. 
Clause 18 empowers the Central Government to issue directions to 
the Board. 
Clause 19 provides for supersession of the Board. 
Clause 20 provides for giving and grants of loans by the Centra' 
Government. 
Clause 21 provides for constitution of Spices Board Fund. 
Clauses ~2. 23. 24 and 25 make usual provisions regarding preparation 
of budget. annual report. accounts and audit and laying of annual report 
and audit report before Parliament. 
Clause 26,27,28.29 and 30 lay down the penalties for contravention of 
different provisions of the Act. 

18 
Clause 31 ,provides for offences by companie'~ 
Clause 32 provides that the provisions of Castoma Act, 1962 (52' of 
1~62) shall apply to export of spices and import of cardamOtnl. 
Clause 33 lays down that the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment is necessary before any prosecUtion under the Bill. 
Crause 34 provides for delegation of powers by the Board to the 
Chairman or' any other member or officer of the Board. 
Clause 35 lays down that all members, officers and' other employees by 
acting in pursuance of any of the ,provisions of the Act shall be deemed 
to be public servant. : 
Olau.se 36 se!!ks to . giveprotec~ion to any member, officer or 
employeE' of the Authority in res~t of any thing done or intended to 
}:i~ done in good faith in pursuance 'of this Bill or the rules or reRulations 
made thereunder. 
Clause 37 seeks to empower any person generally or specially 
authorised by the Board to enter, inspect, surveyor take levels of any 
land or premises necessary for the purposes of this Bill at all reasonable 
times. 
Clause 38 confers upon the Central Government power to make rules 
in respect of number of members of the Board, term of office and the 
other conditions of service of members. powers. duties and functions of 
the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, the fotm for preparing budget and 
annual report, the f~rm of appeal and procedure for disposal thereof, etc. 
Clause 39 confers powers on Board to make, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, regulations genetaly to carry out 
the purposes of this Bill. 
Clause 40 provides laying of rules and regUlations on the Table of 
boih the Houses of Parliament. .' 
Clause 41 seeks to empower the Central Government to remove any 
difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of this BUI. 
Clause 42 seeks to repeal the Cardamom Board Act, 1965. 

FI.NAN.CI!\.L, MEMOR~VM 
Sub-cipuses ,(1) and (3) of clause ,3 of the BU~ provide, respectively 
for the establisQment and constitution of the Spices B\itu'd. Sub-clause. 
(5) of clause 3 provides that the term of office of the members including 
the Chairman and other conditions of service of the m~mbers shall be 
such as may, be presclibed 
2. Clause 4 provides for the appointment of the Secretary and other 
officers and employees of the Board. ' The Secretary, other officers and 
employees will be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be 
determined by regulations under sub-clause (2) of clause 4. Provision 
has been made under clause 19(2) (b) for ,appointment of a rerson or 
persons to exercise and' perfonn the powers and duties of the Board 
when the Board is superseded. 
3. Clause 7 provides for the functions of the Board and these include, 
intler alia, developing, promoting and regulating export of spices and 
undertaking progrRnunes and projects· for promotion and export of 
spiceS.' 
,4. The aforementicmed p~ovistons Of the, Bill, involve expenditure 
towards-
(a) payment of salaries .. allowances, etc., of the members of the 
, 'BOard including' the Chairman, perSons appointed to exercise the 
powers and duties of the Board when the BOard is dissolved and of 
the OffiCPfS and employees cf tiie Board,; and 
(b) meeting othC:!r administrative expenses of the Board includ-
ing expenses for discharging its fu~ctions. 
5. Clause 21 of: the Bill provides for the constitution of a Fund to 
be called the Spices Board 'Fund and the Fund is to be applied for meet-
ing the aforementioned expenditure. The Fund will consist, inter alia, 
of the grants and loans given by the Central Government under cluse 
20 and the fees collected by the Board. 
6. It is not po!lsible at the present stage to indicate the expenditure 
involved. The Spices Board will utilise the budget available with the 
Cardamom Board in the first instance. However, it is estimated that 
additional amount of about Rs. 20 lakhs will be incurred initially on the 
establishment of the Board. When the Board expands its activities, its 
expenditure may jncrease further. The Board will meet its expenditure 
from its own Fund and any payments made to the Board by the Central 
Government after due appropriation' made by Parliament by law in that 
behalf. " .... ~ . ' ... '1"',.'.' ''''' ,-.".., 
19 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the State Govemment to make rules 
to prescribe the form of application for registration and its cancellation, 
the fee payable on such application, the particulars to be. included in 
such applications and the procedure to be followed in granting and 
cancelling registration and the registers to be kept by registering officers. 
Clause 38 of the Bi~l empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to provide, among other matters, the tenn of office and other 
conditions of service of members of the Bowd, powers and duties of the 
Chairman and Vice-Chainnan, the constitution of the advisory com-
mittees, the form in which the Board may prepare its budget and annual 
report and maintain its accounts and the manner of audit of accounts, 
the conditions and restrictions with respect to the power to enter upon 
any land or premises. 
ClaUse 39 of the Bill empowers the Board, to make, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, regulations to provide for the terms 
and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and 
employees of the Board and the terms and conditions under which 
certiftcate for export may be granted. 
The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made 
under the aforementioned provisions are matters of procedure or admin-
istrative detail and it is hardly practicable ~ provide for them in the Bf1l 
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

-
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of export 
of spices and for the control of cardamom industry including the 
control of cultivation of cardamom and matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Ar;un Singh, 
Minister Of Commerce) 