1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  200  of  2018
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
DR. DHARAMVIRA GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 171 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code), for
the words, "two hundred rupees" the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
3. In section 171 I of the Code, for the words "five hundred rupees" the words "two
thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
171.
5
Amendment
of section
171 I.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
45 of 1860.

2
4. In section 302 of the Code, for the words "and shall also be liable to fine" the words
"and shall also be liable to pay  fine to the victim which shall not be less than one lakh rupees
but which may extend upto ten Lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
5. In section 376 of the Code, in sub-section 1, for the words "and shall also be liable
to fine" the words "and shall also be liable to pay fine to the victim which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees but which may extend upto ten Lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
6. In section 376B of the Code, for the words "and shall also be liable to fine" the words
"and shall also be liable to pay fine to the victim which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees" shall be substituted.
7. In section 376C of the Code, for the words "and shall also be liable to fine" the words
" and shall also be liable to pay  fine to the victim which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees" shall be substituted.
8. In section 376D of the Code, for the words "and shall also be liable to fine" the words
" and shall also be liable to pay  fine to the victim which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees" shall be substituted.
5
10
Amendment
of section
302.
Amendment
of section
376.
Amendment
of section
376B.
Amendment
of section
376C.
Amendment
of section
376D. 15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is ranked 137th in the Global Peace Index 2018 report which shows the level of
crimes in India. In 2016, according to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data, the
total crimes were recorded to be 2.97 million. In 2017, however it was 2.94 million. India was
reported to be the fourth most dangerous country for women travellers.
Compensation should be paid to the victims because the accused has destroyed the
life not only of victim but also his family. Giving punishment to the accused doesn't give
justice to the victim, it is just the punishment given to the accused for his act. A good amount
of compensation should also be paid to the victim.
For example, if there is a poor family of six persons including husband, wife and four
small children. Now, if husband is being murdered by someone, the deceased being the only
bread earner in the family, the people left behind won't even have food to eat. Compensation
should be paid to the family of deceased so that they can at least live their life.
The Bill, therefore seeks to amend the various sections of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
with a view to increase the amount of fine imposed on the accused so that victim is paid a
justifiable amount of compensation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHARAMVIRA GANDHI
November 27, 2018.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
[45 OF 1860]
THE  SCHEDULE
* * * * * *
171. Whoever, not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or
carries any token resembling any garb or token used by that class of public servants, with
the intention that it may be believed, or with the knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that
he belongs to that class of public servants, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
two hundred rupees, or with both.
* * * * * *
171-I. Whoever being required by any law for the time being in force or any rule having
the force of law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with an election
fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees.
* * * * * *
302. Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or 1 imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * * *
376. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-section (2), commits rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which 1 shall
not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
* * * * * *
376B.Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately,
whether under a decree of separation or otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
376C. Whoever, being
(a) in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship; or
(b) a public servant; or
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of custody
established by or under any law for the time being in force, or a women's or children's
institution; or
(d) on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital, abuses
such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or seduce any woman either in his
custody or under his charge or present in the premises to have sexual intercourse with
him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than
five years, but which extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Wearing garb
or carrying
token used by
public servant
with fraudulent
intent.
Failure to
keep election
accounts.
Punishment
for murder.
Punishment
for rape.
Sexual
intercourse by
husband upon
his wife
during
separation.
Sexual
intercourse by
a person in
authority.

5
Explanation 1.—In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) section 375.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, Explanation 1 to section 375 shall
also be applicable.
Explanation 3.—"Superintendent", in relation to a jail, remand home or other place of
custody or a women's or children's institution, includes a person holding any other office in
such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue of which such person can exercise any
authority or control over its inmates. Explanation.
4. The expressions "hospital" and "women's or children's institution" shall respectively
have the same meaning as in Explanation to sub-section (2) of section 376.
376D. Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting
in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed
the offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to life which shall mean imprisonment
for the remainder of that person's natural life, and with fine: Provided that such fine shall be
just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of the victim: Provided
further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.
Gang rape.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
————
( Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2126LS(S3)—14.12.2018.