Short title and
extent.
THE RESERV ATION  FOR  THE  OTHER  BACKWARD  CLASSES
IN PRIV ATE SECTOR  BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJEEV  SATAV,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide reservation for persons belonging to the other backward classes in private
sector and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Other Backward Classes in Private
Sector  Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “private sector” means any organisation or establishment which is owned
purely by private individual or corporation or limited company or any organisation in
which the Government of India or a State has no financial interest and wherein not less
than fifty persons are employed; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill  No. 200 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall give due encouragement to private sector to make
provisions for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Other Backward Classes in
their organisation.
(2) The encouragement under sub-section (1) may include—
(i) special concessions under Central schemes; and
(ii) loans from nationalized banks at reduced rate of interest.
4. The Central Government shall cause to be laid an annual report before both Houses
of Parliament about the action taken under this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Government
to encourage
private sector
to make
provision for
reservation.
Annual
Report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, reservation in services under the State is available to persons belonging to
the Other Backward Classes. After economic liberalisation, the number of posts and
appointments in government sector has come down. Today, private sector has become more
pivotal and employment oriented. In such a scenario this sector has become more active in
nation-building activities and infrastructure and economic projects. As a result of the lesser
number of posts available for them, the persons belonging to Other Backward Classes are
finding it hard to gain a foothold on the government jobs.
There are several schemes and special provisions in the country for the welfare of the
people belonging to the Other Backward Classes. However, in spite of all these measures,
there has not been any great and requisite change visible in their socio-economic status. In
this situation, their presence is very vital in the largest sector of the country for putting a
stop to their exploitation and to ensure their all-round development.
At present, there is no provision for reservation of persons belonging to Other Backward
Classes in private sector. However, the Government also cannot exert pressure on them to
provide reservation. In such a scenario, by providing concession and special schemes, the
private sector can be encouraged to provide reservation to persons belonging to the Other
Backward Classes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
July 1, 2016
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide reservation for persons belonging to the Other Backward Classes in private
sector and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1459LS(S3)—27-07-2016.
————