As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

बज Ep

Bill No. 201 of 2000
__ सन -+

THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suri 0, M. BANatwaLta, M.P.
A
BILL
| further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. ")

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, after sub-section (1), the following
Proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that no Land Acquisition Authority shall have or be deemed to ever have
any jurisdiction to issue notification in respect of any piece of land, with or without super-
structure thercon, belonging to any community or denomination thereof, and set apart for
worship or for religious and charitable Purposes as wakf or for the performance of funeral
Tites or as depository for the remains of the dead, including the site of temple, mosque,
church, gurdwara, synagogue, idgah, imambara, ashoorkhana, grave, tomb, sepulchre,
graveyard, cemetry, marghat and tower of silence, ete., and the land appurtenant thereto
as well as the means of access to the same.”,

Di

Short title,

Amendment of
Section 4,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 contains no explicit bar to acquisition of properties
of religious significance. Attempts at such acquisition have created serious apprehensions
and agitations among members of religious communities. The Bill, therefore, seeks to bar
explicitly all such acquisitions. The protection is extended to all such land with or without
any structure thereon, as may belong to any community or denomination thereof, and as
may be set apart for worship or for religious and charitable purposes as wakf or for the
performance of funeral rites or as depository for the remains of the dead.

New Det; छ. ५, BANATWALLA
November 20, 2000.



ANNEXURE
EXtRacts FROM THE Lanp Acquisition Act, 1894

(1 oF 1894)

* 4 * * +

4. (1) Whenever it appears to the appropriate Government that land in any locality is

or is likely to be needed for any public purpose, or for a company, a notification 10
that effect shall be published in the Official Gazette, and in two daily newspapers circulating
in that locality of which at least one shall be in the regional language and the Collector
shall cause public notice of the substance of such notification to be given at convenient
places in the said locality (the last of the dates of such publication and the giving of such
public notice, being hereinafter referred to as the date of the pul

* * * * *

Publication of
preliminary
notification
and powers of
officers
thereupon,


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5274LS—06.12.2000.