Bill No. 201 of 2016
THE MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS (REGULATION OF MONEY LENDING)
BILL, 2016
BY
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Registering Authority for registration and regulation of Micro Finance Institutions.
4. Functions of Registering Authority.
5. Register of Micro Finance Institutions.
6. Cancellation of registration of Micro Finance Institutions.
7. Member of Self Help Group not to be member of more than one Self Help Group.
8. Micro Finance Institutions not to seek security for loan.
9. Display of rates of interest charged by Micro Finance Institutions.
10. Maximum amount of interest recoverable on loans and discharge of loans in certain
cases.
11. Prior approval for grant of further loans to Self Help Groups or their members.
12. Duty of Micro Finance Institutions to maintain accounts and furnish copies.
13. Submission of monthly statement by Micro Finance Institutions.
14. Power to require production of records or documents and power of entry, inspection
and seizure.
15. Complaints.
16. Settlement of disputes between Self Help Groups and Micro Finance Institutions.
17. Penalty for coercive actions by Micro Finance Institutions.
18. Penalty for carrying on business with registration.
19. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of the Act.
20. Every officer to be public servant.
21. Bar of certain proceedings.
22. Power to remove difficulties.
23. Power to give directions.
24. Annual report.
25. Power to make rules.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 201 of  2016
THE MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS (REGULATION OF
MONEY LENDING) BILL, 2016
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to protect the women Self Help Groups from exploitation by the Micro Finance
Institutions in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Micro Finance Institutions (Regulation of Money
Lending) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ''appropriate Government'' means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) 'interest' means a return on the amount lent by the Micro Finance Institution
to a Self Help Group;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(iii) 'loan' means an advance whether of money or in kind given to a Self Help
Group in consideration of interest, whether given before the commencement of this Act
or after such commencement and includes discount, money paid for or on account of or
on behalf of or at the request of any person or any account, whatsoever and every
agreement (whatever its terms or form may be) which is in substance or effect a loan of
money or in kind given to a Self Help Group and further includes, an agreement relating
to the repayment of any such loan;
(iv) 'Micro Finance Institution' means any person, partnership firm, group of
persons, including a Company registered under the provisions of the Companies
Act, 2013, a Non-Banking Financial Company as defined under section 45-I of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, a society registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860, a trust created under the Indian Trust Act, 1882, a Co-operative Society
registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 in whichever manner formed and
by whatever name called, whose principal or incidental activity is to lend money or
offer financial support of whatsoever nature to the low income population;
(v)  'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(vi) 'Registering Authority' means an Authority constituted under section 3;
(vii) 'Registration' means registration granted to a Micro Finance Institution
under this Act;
(viii) 'Self Help Group' means a group of women formed on principles of self help
and registered as such with the appropriate Government; and
(ix) ''Self Help Group member'' means a registered member of a Self Help Group
who intends to avail a loan through such Self Help Group.
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the Registering Authority for the purpose of registration and
regulation of Micro Finance Institutions in every district of the country.
4. (1) All Micro Finance Institutions operating in the country shall, within
thirty days from the date of commencement of this Act, apply for registration before the
Registering Authority of the district concerned specifying therein such details as may be
prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision such rules shall also
provide for the name of villages or towns in which the Micro Finance Institutions are operating
or propose to operate, the rate of interest being charged or proposed to be charged, system
of conducting due diligence and system of effecting recovery and list of persons who may be
authorized for conducting the activity of lending or recovery of money which has been lent.
(3) No Micro Finance Institution operating at the commencement of this Act or intending
to start the business of lending money to Self Help Groups after the commencement of this
Act shall grant any loan or recover any loan without obtaining registration under this Act
from the Registering Authority.
(4) The Registering Authority shall verify the details furnished by the Micro Finance
Institution and accord registration in such manner as may be prescribed for operation of
Micro Finance Institutions for a period of not more than one year at a time.
(5) Every Micro Finance Institution shall submit a written undertaking declaring that it
shall act in conformity with the provisions of this Act.
(6) Every Micro Finance Institution shall apply for renewal of registration at least sixty
days before the expiry of the period of one year referred to in sub-section (4).
(7) The Registering Authority, on receipt of an application for renewal of registration
shall either grant or refuse to grant the renewal of registration within fifteen days before the
18 of 2013.
2 of 1934.
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.
2 of 1912.
Registering
Authority for
registration
and regulation
of Micro
Finance
Institutions.
Functions of
Registering
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
date of expiry of registration, after due verification of the performance of the Micro Finance
Institutions at the field level and after hearing objections, if any, from the general public
regarding extension of registration.
5. (1) Every Registering Authority shall maintain for the area under its jurisdiction
a register of all Micro Finance Institutions having valid registration in such form as may be
prescribed.
(2) The register maintained under sub-section (1) shall be published in such manner
and at such intervals as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Registering Authority may, at any time, either suo motu or upon receipt of
complaints by Self Help Groups or its members or by members of the public, cancel the
registration of a Micro Finance Institution after assigning sufficient reasons for such
cancellation:
Provided that no order of cancellation of the registration shall be passed without
giving reasonable opportunity of being heard to the Micro Finance Institution concerned.
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, conviction of a Micro Finance Institution
for an offence or violation of any of the provisions of this Act shall be a sufficient cause for
suspension or cancellation of its registration.
(2) The Registering Authority may, pending inquiry under sub-section (1), for sufficient
reasons to be recorded, suspend the registration of a Micro Finance Institution.
7. No person shall be a member of more than one Self Help Group:
Provided that where a person is, at the commencement of this Act, a member of more
than one Self  Help Group, such  person shall have the option to retain the membership of
only one Self  Help Group and terminate the membership in other Self Help Groups:
Provided further that where a person expresses his intention of termination of
membership of a Self Help Group, such member shall settle and pay the amount payable to
the Micro Finance Institutions within a period of three months from the date of commencement
of this Act.
8. No Micro Finance Institution shall seek any security from a borrower by way of
pawn, pledge or any other security for the loan:
Provided that any such security obtained from a borrower before the commencement
of this Act shall forthwith stand released in favour of the borrower.
9. (1) All Micro Finance Institutions shall display the rates of interest charged by them
in a conspicuous place in their office premises in local language in bold letters visible to the
members of the public.
(2) No Micro Finance Institution shall charge any other amount from the borrower
except any charge prescribed in the rules for submission of an application for grant of a loan.
10. (1) No Micro Finance Institution shall recover from the borrower towards interest
in respect of any loans advanced by it, whether before or after commencement of this Act, an
amount in excess of the principal amount.
(2) All loans in respect of which a Micro Finance Institution has realized from the
borrower, whether before or after commencement of this Act, an amount equal to twice the
amount of the principal, shall stand discharged and the borrower shall be entitled to obtain
refund and the Micro Finance Institution shall be bound to refund the excess amount paid by
the borrower.
11. (1) No Micro Finance Institution shall extend a further loan to a Self  Help Group or
its members, where the Self Help Group has an outstanding loan from a bank unless the
Micro Finance Institution obtains the prior approval in writing in such manner as may be
prescribed from the Registering Authority after making an application seeking such approval.
Register of
Micro Finance
Institutions.
Cancellation
of
registration
of Micro
Finance
Institutions.
Member of
Self Help
Group not to
be member of
more than
one Self Help
Group.
Micro Finance
Institutions
not to seek
security for
loan.
Display of
rates of
interest
charged by
Micro
Finance
Institutions.
Maximum
amount of
interest
recoverable
on loans and
discharge of
loans in
certain cases.
Prior
approval for
grant of
further loans
to Self Help
Groups or
their
members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(2) The Registering Authority while considering such application from a Micro Finance
Institution seeking approval as aforesaid, shall secure the following information in writing
from the Micro Finance Institution in regard to every member of Self  Help Group namely,—
(i) name of the Borrower;
(ii) name of the Self  Help Group;
(iii) bank from which loan has been obtained by the Self Help Group;
(iv) date of the loan granted by the bank;
(v) amount paid to the Self Help Group by the bank;
(vi) amount due from the Self Help Group;
(vii) fresh amount of loan sought by the Self Help Group from the Micro Finance
Institution;
(viii) terms of repayment proposed by the Micro Finance Institution;
(ix) details of due diligence including the capacity of the Self Help Group for
repayment; and
(x) such other details as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(3) The Registering Authority shall, not later than fifteen days from the date of filing of
such application for approval under sub-section ( 2), cause an inquiry into the contents of
the application  before granting approval to further loan.
(4) If the Registering Authority is satisfied that the Self Help Group and its members
have passed a resolution that they have understood the conditions of the loan and terms of
repayment and the Registering Authority is also satisfied that such further loan  may generate
additional income to the Self Help Group and its members for servicing the debt.
(5) No Micro Finance Institution shall grant loan to a member of Self Help Group
during the subsistence of two previous loans irrespective of the source of the previous two
loans.
12. (1) All borrowings by a member of a Self  Help Group from a Micro Finance
Institution shall be contracted in such manner, form and format, as may be prescribed.
(2) Every Micro Finance Institution shall keep and maintain a cash book, a ledger and
such other books of account in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Every Micro Finance Institution shall—
(a) deliver or cause to be delivered, to the borrower within seven days from the
date on which a loan is made, a statement in the prescribed form showing in clear and
distinct terms the amount and date of the loan and of its maturity, the name and
address of the functionary of the Micro Finance Institution and the effective rate of
interest charged;
(b) upon repayment of a loan in full, obtain an indelible mark on every paper
signed by the borrower with words indicating such repayment and provide copies
thereof to the borrower.
(4) No Micro Finance Institution shall receive any payment from a borrower on account
of any loan without giving him a duly signed receipt for the payment.
(5) Every Micro Finance Institution shall, on a demand in writing by the borrower,
supply a copy of any document relating to a loan availed by the borrower, or if  the borrower
so requires, to any person specified in that behalf in the demand:
Provided that in respect of loans given prior to the commencement of this Act, it shall
be obligatory for the lender to specify if any security was accepted from the borrower.
(6) All tranches of repayment shall be made by the group at the office of the Gram
Panchayat only.
Duty of
Micro
Finance
Institutions
to maintain
accounts and
furnish
copies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(7) No Micro Finance Institution shall deploy any agent for recovery or use any other
coercive action either by itself or by its agents for recovery of money from the borrower; and
any form of coercive recovery including but not limited to visiting the house of the borrower
shall, apart from being punishable under the provisions of this Act, empower the Registering
Authority to suspend or cancel the license of such Micro Finance Institution.
13. Every Micro Finance Institution shall submit a monthly statement to the Registering
Authority before 10th day of every month giving therein the list of borrowers, the loan given
to each, the rate of interest charged on the loan and the repayment made.
14. (1) The Registering Authority or any officer authorised by him in this behalf may,
to verify whether the business of the Micro Finance Institution is being carried on in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, enter the premises of the Micro Finance Institution
office or of any person who in his opinion is carrying on the business of lending and call
upon him to produce any record or document relating to such business and every such
Micro Finance Institution shall allow such inspection and produce such record or document.
(2) The Registering Authority may, for the purpose of sub-section ( 1), search the
premises and seize any record and document as may be necessary and the record or document
seized shall be retained only for such period as may be necessary for the purposes of
examination, prosecution or other legal action:
Provided that the provisions of sections 100 and 102 of the  Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, shall, so far as may be, apply to such search and seizure.
(3) The Registering Authority or the other officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall
also have power to summon and examine the Micro Finance Institution or any person who in
his opinion is in a position to furnish relevant information.
15. (1) Any Self Help Group or its members or any member of the public may file a
complaint regarding violation of the provision of this Act by a Micro Finance Institution
before the Registering Authority.
(2) The Authority, on receipt of a complaint, shall inquire into the same after giving a
reasonable opportunity to the Micro Finance Institution to show cause and pass such
orders as it may deem fit.
16. (1) For the protection of debtors and for the settlement of disputes of civil nature
between the Self  Help Group or its members on the one hand and the Micro Finance
Institution on the other hand or between the members of the Self Help Group and the Self
Help Group, in relation to the loans granted under this Act to the Self Help Group or its members,
the appropriate Government after consultation with the High Court, and by notification,—
(a) shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, establish for
every district in the State a Fast-Track Court;
(b) may establish Fast-Track Court for such other areas in the State, as it may
deem necessary.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, after due consultation with the High Court
concerned, specify, by notification, the local limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of a
Fast-Track Court shall extend and may, at any time, increase, reduce or alter such limits.
(3) The cases that may be filed before the Fast-Track Court shall be disposed of within
a period of three months.
(4) The decree of the Fast-Track Courts shall be liable to be executed in accordance
with the procedure under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
17. (1) All persons who are connected with and responsible for the day-to-day control,
business and management of a Micro Finance Institution including the Partners, Directors
and the employees who resort to any type of coercive measures against the Self Help Groups
or its members or their family members shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
Submission of
monthly
statement by
Micro
Finance
Institutions.
Power to
require
production of
records or
documents
and power of
entry,
inspection
and seizure.
2 of 1974.
Complaints.
Settlement of
disputes
between Self
Help Group
and Micro
Finance
Institution.
5 of 1908.
Penalty for
coercive
actions by
Micro
Finance
Institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
Explanation:— For the purpose of this section, "coercive action" by a Micro Finance
Institution against the Self  Help Groups or its members or their family members includes the
following:—
(a) obstructing or using violence to, insulting or intimidating the borrower or her
family members, or
(b) persistently following the borrower or her family members from place to place
or interfering with any property  owned, or used by her or depriving her of, or hindering
her in, the use of any such property, or
(c) frequenting the house or other place where such other person resides or
works, or carries on business, or happens to be, or
(d) doing any act calculated to annoy or intimidate such person or the members
of her family, or
(e) moving or acting in a manner which causes or is calculated to cause alarm or
danger to the person or property of such other person, or
(f) seeking to remove forcibly any document from the borrower which entitles
the borrower to a benefit under any Government programme:
Provided that a person who frequents the house or place referred to in clause ( c) in
order merely to obtain or communicate information shall not be deemed to be using coercive
action.
(2) The Micro Finance Institution or the persons who use coercive actions shall be
prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be,
apply to the proceedings before a Fast-Track Court, and for the purpose of the said provisions,
a Fast-Track Court shall be deemed to be a Magistrate.
18. All persons who are connected with and responsible for the day-to-day control,
business and management of a Micro Finance Institution, including the Partners and Directors
of Institution, which carries on the business of providing loans without obtaining registration
from the Registering Authority shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
19. If any person contravenes any provision other than those of sections 4, 17 and 18
of this Act, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term of six months or with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
20. Every officer of the Government and every person acting under the provisions of
this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860.
21. (1) No suit, prosecution or other proceedings shall lie against any officer or employee
of the Government for any act done or purporting to be done under this Act, without the
previous sanction of the Government.
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall be instituted against any
person for anything which is, in good faith, done or intended to be done under this Act or the
rules made thereunder.
22. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Government
may, by notification, remove difficulties by orders not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, but which appear to them to be necessary or expedient to remove such difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years,
from the date of commencement of this Act.
23. The Government may, from time to time, issue such orders, instructions and
directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder to
2 of 1974.
Penalty for
carrying on
business
without
registration.
Penalty for
contravention
of the
provisions of
the Act.
Every officer
to be public
servant. 45 of 1860.
Bar on certain
proceedings.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to give
directions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
the officers for the proper administration of the Act, and such officers and all other persons
employed in the enforcement of the Act, shall comply with such orders, instructions and
directions.
24. The Central Government shall prepare an annual report, in such form and manner,
as may be prescribed, on the administration of this Act and cause the same to be laid before
each House of Parliament.
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, so, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

8
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State Governments have made rapid strides in the field of financial inclusion of the
rural and urban poor by organising women Self  Help Groups (SHG) and linking them with the
banks for meeting their credit needs.
However, of late, many individuals and other entities have come up styling themselves
as Micro Finance Institutions and are giving loans to Self Help Groups at very high or
usurious rates of interest and are using inhuman coercive methods for recovery of the loans.
This has even resulted in suicides by many rural poor who have obtained loans from such
individuals or entities.
In the larger public interest and to protect the poor from exploitation, and to regulate
the lending of monies to the Self  Help Groups by the Micro Finance Institutions, it is
urgently required to bring forward a suitable legislation to check the illegal acts of these
Micro Finance Institutions across the country.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA
July 5, 2016

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute an authority
to be known as the Registering Authority in every district for the purpose of registration and
regulation of Micro Finance Institutions. Clause 5 provides for maintenance of a register of
Micro Finance Institutions by the Registering Authority. Clause 16 provides for establishment
of  Fast-Track Court in every district in the State. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of  India. It is likely to involve about rupees
one hundred crore as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
10

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to protect the women Self Help Groups from exploitation by the Micro
Finance Institutions in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1454LS(S3)—26.07.2016.