1
THE VICTIMS OF NAXALITE ACTS OF VIOLENCE (RELIEF AND
REHABILITATION) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the payment of compensation, monthly allowance, relief and other
rehabilitation measures and facilities to the dependents of persons killed in
naxalite acts of violence and payment of compensation to those who lost
their property, crops and houses due to such violence in the country and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Naxalite Act of Violence (Relief and
Rehabilitation) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 201 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, Government of that
State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "family" includes husband, wife and dependent children and aged parents;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to
them in those Acts.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the family of a citizen who is killed due to naxalite act of violence shall be paid compensation
by the appropriate Government as specified hereinafter, namely:—
(a) an ex-gratia grant of such amount which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) financial assistance at the rate of two thousand rupees per month for such
period, as may be prescribed;
(2) In case a citizen killed by naxalite act of violence above was the only earning
member of family, the appropriate Government shall,—
(i) pay family pension at the rate of four thousand rupees per month to the
family;
(ii) provide gainful employment to any one eligible member of the family;
(iii) provide free education including vocational education to the children of the
citizen killed; and
(iv) provide such other assistance to the family of the citizen killed as it may
deem necessary for the welfare of the family.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall be in addition to the provisions of the
sub-section (1).
4. Any citizen who receives severe injuries thereby permanently incapacitating him
or seriously injuring him with deep wounds, the appropriate Government shall,
(a) provide him appropriate medical care and bear the entire costs of his medical
treatment; and
(b) pay an ex-gratia grant as compensation of not less than four lakh rupees in
such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1)
 Where any citizen or family losses the dwelling unit having been destroyed or
damaged due to torching or bombing by the naxalities, the appropriate Government shall,—
(a) provide an alternate dwelling unit to such citizen or family, as the case may
be, in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) bear the entire cost of repairs of the damaged dwelling unit in case it is
repairable.
(2) Where a citizen losses his livestock or his standing crop or orchard or poultry
farm or piggery farm due to naxalite act of violence, the appropriate Government shall pay
adequate compensation to such citizen in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Where a citizen losses his business establishment or shop or kiosk or hawking
or vending apparatus due to destruction thereof due to naxalite acts of violence, the appropriate
Government shall pay adequate compensation to that citizen in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Definitions.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
37 of 1967.
Payment
Compensation
to the family
of persons
killed by
naxalites.
Compensation
to persons
wounded by
naxalite
violence.
Compensation
for other
losses due to
naxalite
violence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, in consultation with the
State Governments affected by naxalite violence, formulate a national policy—
(i) to curb the spread of naxalite menace and eliminate the naxalite insurgents in
the manner it is deemed necessary; and
(ii) to grant general amnesty to and rehabilitation of those naxalites who wish to
surrender arms and shun violence and return to the mainstream of the nation under the
Constitution of India by providing them gainful employment assistance for self
employment and such other measures as the Central Government may deem necessary
and expedient to do so in the overall national interest.
(2) The appropriate Government may, if it deems necessary, fit and expedient to do so
in the public interest, promote village level security system by way of constituting teams of
volunteers of village youth for the protection of their village from naxalite violence and
provide such volunteers with necessary training, weapons and ammunition and necessary
aids from time to time in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide the requisite funds to the States affected by acts of naxalite violence
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the
difficulty and any such order or direction, as the case may be, shall be final:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this
Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
National
Policy for
Naxal
violence.
Central Govt.
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
15
20
25
30
35
10
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is very vast and insurgency is not a new phenomenon in the country but
of late many parts of the nation are in the grip of naxalite violence who are openly challenging
the authority of the State and are virtually running parallel Governments in some parts of the
country. The naxalites who are mostly the youth are known by different names such as
naxalities, Peoples War Group (PWG), Maoists, Leninist-Maoists, etc. are active on a
substantial scale in Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, parts of Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Maharashtra,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu etc. apart from
the insurgents in North-East. The naxalites are killing thousands of innocent people, police-
men, personnel of paramilitary and armed forces just to create panic. They torch or blow up
houses, shops and other establishments. They kidnap people for ransom and hang many
after conducting people’s court. They even loot the police stations, their weapons and blow
them up with police personnel. The naxalites indulge in extortions, collect illegal taxes and in
the naxalite occupied areas people remain indoors after the sunset.
Though, many precious lives are lost due to acts of violence of the naxalites but the
victims are not duly compensated by the States. A paltry amount is given to the victims that
too with much hassles. The families of people losing  lives are not taken care of nor those
who are critically injured or losing their houses, livestock, crops, business establishments,
etc. In a democratic country like ours, it is the sacred duty of the State to protect the life and
property of its citizens and eliminate the extremists. If the State fails in its duty, then the
affected citizens have to be duly compensated by the State. The youth join these outfits for
variety of reasons and they have to be brought back to the mainstream of the nation by
giving them amnesty, employment opportunities and incentives and suitable rehabilitation.
But those defying, despite best efforts, should be eliminated under a national policy.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
July 6, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for payment of compensation to the family of persons
killed by naxalites. Clause 4 provides for compensation to persons wounded by naxalites.
Clause 5 provides for compensation for other losses. Clause 7 makes it obligatory for the
Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The
Bill if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per
annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is therefore of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the payment of compensation, monthly allowance, relief and other
rehabilitation measures and facilities to the dependents of persons killed in
naxalite acts of violence and payment of compensation to those who lost
their property, crops and houses due to such violence in the country
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1490LS(S3)—21-07-2015.