1
Short title.
Bill No. 201 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI AJAY BHATT, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.

2
2. Article 44 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
3. After Part IV A of the Constitution, the following Part and articles thereunder shall be
inserted, namely:—
"PART IVB
UNIFORM  CIVIL  LAW
51B. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, "the State" has the same
meaning as in Part III.
51C. The State shall, within one year of coming into force of this Act, secure for the
citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.".
Definition.
Omission of
article 44.
Insertion of
new Part IVB.
Uniform civil
code for the
citizens.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The founding fathers of the Constitution while framing the Constitution of India have
been instrumental in including uniform civil laws for all citizens throughout the country. It
was therefore included as a Directive Principle of State Policy under article 44 which requires
the State to secure for the citizens of India a Uniform Civil Code throughout the territory of
India. However, even after sixty-nine years of the framing of the Constitution, the Uniform
Civil Code is yet to be enacted.
India is a country of multi-religions and every religion has its own set of personal laws
to govern their respective personal matters like marriages, adoption, succession, etc. However,
no uniform personal law universally acceptable to all  religious communities has been codified
so far.
Uniform Civil Code being a Directive Principle of State Policy is not enforceable.
Therefore in order to ensure uniformity, equality and social justice, it is imperative that a
uniform civil code be codified at the earliest. A uniform civil code will not only help the
society move forward but will take India towards its goal of becoming a developed nation.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide for the
citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY  BHATT
June 27, 2019.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
44. The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizen a uniform civil code throughout
the territory of India.
* * * * *
Uniform civil
code for
citizen.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Ajay Bhatt, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2678LS(S3)—22-10-2019.