1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI JAYADEV GALLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment) Act,
2017.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Bill No.  201 of  2017
5

2. In section 46 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Central Government shall
make necessary grants and also ensure that adequate benefits and incentives in the
form of special development package on the lines of Bundelkhand area and KBK
districts in Odisha are given to the backward areas of successor State of
Andhra Pradesh.".
3. In the principal Act, after Part V , the following new Part and sections thereunder shall
be inserted, namely:—
"PART V A
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE TO THE SUCCESSOR
STA TE OF ANDHRA PRADESH
46A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the successor State of Andhra Pradesh shall be granted special development package with
effect from the 1st day of January, 2015 for a period of ten years.
46B. The Central Government shall bear the entire expenditure of externally-aided
projects in respect of successor State of Andhra Pradesh with effect from 1st day of January,
2015 for a period of ten years.
46C. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the successor State of Andhra Pradesh shall, by virtue of being granted special Development
Package, be provided, in particular, the following concessions with regard to tax revenues
and grants—
(i) fixation of limt under the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act,
2003, for successor State of Andhra Pradesh at five per cent. of State Gross Domestic
Product with effect from the 1st day of April, 2015 for a period of ten years;
(ii) concessions in investment allowance, accelerated depreciation, industrial
incentives and other tax concessions in line with Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and
Kashmir within three months from the date of coming into force of this Act; and
(iii) exemption in capital gains tax on the sale of developed land in the capital
region of Amaravati.".
4. In section 90 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) The Central Government shall bear the entire cost of the project including
expenditure on rehabilitation and resettlement and reimburse to the successor State of
Andhra Pradesh, the expenditure incurred by it till 31st day of March, 2014.”.
5. In theThirteenth Schedule to the principal Act, under the heading "Infrastructure",
for paragraph (8), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:—
"(8) Indian Railway shall, within six months from the coming into force of this Act,
establish a new railway zone at Vishakhapatnam in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh.".
2
Amendment
of section 46.
Insertion of
new Part V A.
Special
Development
package to
the successor
State of
Andhra
Pradesh.
Central
Government
to bear
expenditure
of externally-
aided projects.
Concessions
with regard to
taxes and
grants.
Amendment
of section 90.
Amendment
of Thirteenth
Schedule.
6 of 2014
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
39 of 2003

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Union Finance Minister announced a Special Development Package for Andhra
Pradesh on 7th September, 2016, and also made a statement that 'Government of India will
support Andhra Pradesh to the hilt.'
There is no doubt that Special Development Package includes full funding of Polavaram
project, tax concessions, special assistance, apart from other fiscal measures to the State of
Andhra Pradesh. But, the demand and the need of the hour for a level-playing field to the
State of Andhra Pradesh can only be achieved if industrial incentives and other tax
concessions are given at par with Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir.
Clause 2 of the Bill talks about giving special package for development of backward
districts of Andhra Pradesh. But, the assurance of the Prime Minister on the Floor of Parliament
is that special package to AP would be given on the lines of Bundelkhand region and KBK
districts of Odisha. This was missing in the AP Reorganisation Act. Hence, it is proposed to
include this in this Bill to fulfill the assurance given by the Prime Minister.
Secondly, Andhra Pradesh is given development package due to immense loss it has
suffered aftr bifurcation. And, financial/development packages with different nomenclatures
were announced to various States and regions earlier and everybody knows the fate of such
announcements. So, looking at the past experience, people of Andhra Pradesh are apprehensive
that this development package may also meet the same fate. In view of this, there have been
demands from various quarters and also from the Chief Minister and the Finance Minister of
Andhra Pradesh for giving legislative backing to the entire Special Development Package
announced on 7th September, 2016, and also to implement the package in a fixed time-frame.
In view of the above, there is a need to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act,
2014, to give legislative backing to the Special Development Package to legitimize the
announcement made by Government of India. The Union  Finance Minister also assured that
he would take steps to exempt capital gains tax on the sale of developed land in the capital
region of Amaravati.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAYADEV GALLA
February 1, 2017.
________
3
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1), 274(1)  AND 1173(3) OF
THE CONSTITUTION
________
[Copy of letter No. 16017/01/2017-SR dated 1 November, 2017 from Shri Hansraj Gangaram
Ahir, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Andhra Pradesh
Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2017 ( Amendment of Section 46, etc. ) by
Shri Jayadev Galla, M.P., has recommended under articles 117(1), 274(1) and 117(3) of the
Constitution for introduction and consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha, respectively.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to make available necessary grants for the backward areas of
the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. Clause 3 seeks to provide a Special Development
Package to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. Clause 4 provides that the Polavaram
project shall be funded by the Union Government entirely. As the sums of moneys will be
given to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh as Special Development Package concessions
and grants by appropriation, by law, made by Parliament, it is not possible to give the
estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund
of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

ANNEXURE
Extract from the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
(6 OF 2014)
*****
46. (1) * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Central Government may, having
regard to the resources available to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh, make appropriate
grants and also ensure that adequate benefits and incentives in the form of special
development package are given to the backward areas of that State.
(3) * * * *
90. (1) * * * *
(2) * * * *
(3) * * * *
(4) The Central Government shall execute the project and obtain all requisite clearances
including environmental, forests, and rehabilitation and resettlement norms.
* * * * *
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE
* * * * *
* * * * *
* * * * *
(8) Indian Railway shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine establishing
a new railway zone in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh and take an expeditious decision
thereon;
* * * * *
5
Distribution of
revenue.
Polavaram
Irrigation
Project to be a
national
project.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
————
(Shri Jayadev Galla, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4681LS(S3)—10-11-2017.