1
THE NATIONAL SOLAR ENERGY AUTHORITY BILL, 2016
By
DR. MANJOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Authority for the purpose of promotion of
generation and utilization of solar energy in the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Solar Energy Authority Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date,  as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 202 of  2016
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “Authority” means the National Solar Energy Authority established under
section 3; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall , by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the National Solar Energy Authority for the purpose of
promotion of generation and utilization of solar energy in the country.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of:—
(i) Minister-in-charge of the Union : Chairperson;
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
(ii) Secretary, Union Ministry of : member,
Finance ex-officio;
(iii) Secretary, NITI Aayog : member,
ex-officio;
(iv) Ministers-in-charge of the : members,
Department of Energy of   State ex-officio;
Governments
(v) Principal Secretaries of  State : members,
Governments ex-officio;
(vi) five persons having not less than : members; and
fifteen years of experience of working in the
field of non-conventional power generation
sector, to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed
(vii) Secretary, Union Ministry of New : member-secretary.
and Renewable Energy
(2) the Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall hold office for a period
of three years.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of members other than ex-officio members of the Authority shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Authority as is required for its efficient functioning.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The Authority shall meet at least four times in a year.
(8) The Authority shall have its offices in every State to be headed by the Secretary
of the Department of  Power of the Government of that State.
(9) The Offices of the Authority in the States shall function under the overall guidance
and control of the Authority.
5. The Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(i) exploring the potential of solar power generation in each State and compiling
a comprehensive report on potential of solar power generation;
(ii) providing requisite technological and financial assistance for solar energy
generation;
Establishment
of National
Solar Energy
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iii) promoting research in the field of solar energy to improve the technology
with the aim of increasing solar energy generation;
(iv) promoting projects relating to solar energy for increasing the availability of
equipments used in solar energy generation and also making available  state- of- the- art
technology, guidance and other assistance with a view to increasing solar energy
generation;
(v) organizing workshops and seminars on generation, utilization and promotion
of solar energy;
(vi) making recommendations for maximum use of solar energy in Government
buildings;
(vii) prescribing guidelines for issuing of  no-objection certificate for installation
of solar energy equipments in residential units, housing colonies and offices in urban
areas; and
(viii) recommending to the Government regarding payment of subsidy for
promoting the use of solar energy by making it cost effective.
6. As soon as may be, but not later than two years from the commencement of this
Act, the appropriate Government shall take steps to make mandatory the use of solar
energy in all commercial establishments  having a turnover of more than rupees ten lakh per
annum.
7.  Any commercial establishment violating the provisions of section 6 shall be
punished with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority for the effective implementation of
the provisions of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions  aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Commercial
establishments
to use solar
energy.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Country is currently going through a phase of crisis in the power sector. Almost all
sectors of the economy are suffering due to the shortage of power in the country. Persons
working in the fields of industry, agriculture, health, business, education are facing hardships
on account of shortage of power in the country. New technologies are being developed to
overcome the shortage of power. Solar energy is one such technology. Generation of solar
energy has now become easier and more cost effective. Nowadays, the cost of power based
on solar energy comes to fifteen rupees per unit but with improvement in technology it is
likely to come down to four rupees per unit. Power is essential to build infrastructure in the
country. It is necessary to promote alternate  sources of energy because of paucity of coal
and pollution caused by atomic energy. In view of growing concern regarding global warming,
we can increase the generation of solar energy to meet our energy needs on the basis of
resources available locally. Sunshine is available in our country for 250 days out of
365 days. Desert areas and wasteland in our country have the potential of  large scale
generation of solar energy through solar energy projects. Government needs to take
appropriate steps for it. Today, generation of solar energy and manufacturing of associated
equipments are expensive. Intervention by the Government is required to make solar energy
a viable alternative to other sources of energy. Intervention may be in the form of promoting
research in the field of solar energy, better marketing and promoting its utilization especially
in commercial establishments.
The Bill seeks to provide for legislative framework to promote the use of solar energy
in residential, industrial, agriculture sectors including in Government and private
establishments. Therefore, it is proposed to constitute an Authority to promote generation
and utilization of solar energy in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ  RAJORIA
July  5, 2016

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution  of National Solar Energy Authority.
Clause 4 provides for composition of the Authority. Clause 5 provides for certain functions
of the Authority.  Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
funds to the Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.  It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees
ten thousand crore is likely to be incurred.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Authority for the purpose of promotion of generation
and utilization of solar energy in the country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1455LS(S3)—26-07-2016.