Bill No. 202 of 2022
THE CHILLI (PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI L A VU S RI K RISHNA D EVARAYALU, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF C LAUSES
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE C HILLI BOARD
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board.
4. Terms of office and conditions of service of Chairpersons and other
members.
5. Vacancies, etc. not to invalidate proceedings of the Board.
6. Chairpersons to preside over meetings.
7. Committees, officers and staff.
8. General powers and functions of the Board.
CHAPTER III
PROMOTION AND D EVELOPMENT
9. Objectives of promotion and development.
10. Issuance of direction and advisories by the Board.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CHAPTER IV
COMPLIANCES
11. Registration.
12. Submission of returns.
13. Inspection and penalties.
14. Appeal.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDITS
15. Chilli Promotion and Development Fund.
16. Power to borrow.
17. Budget.
18. Accounts and audit.
19. Annual report.
20. Auditor’s report and annual report to be laid before Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
21. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Board.
22. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
23. Power to delegate.
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.
25. Power to make rules.
26. Power to make regulation.
27. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
28. Power to remove difficulties.
29. Transitional provisions.
30. Act to have overriding effect.
31. Amendment of Act 10 of 1986.
ii
CLAUSES

Bill No. 202 of 2022
THE CHILLI (PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEVARAYALU, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion and development of the Chilli industry,
constitution of a Chilli Board and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Chilli (Promotion and Development)
Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “advisories” means non-binding standards and guidance issued
by the Board for promotion and development of the chilli industry;
(b) “Board” means the Chilli Board established under section 3 of
this Act;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed
under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 3 of this Act;
(d) “chilli industry” means the industry engaged in the production,
manufacture, export, supply, trade and commerce of chilli
(e) “directions” means binding standards and guidance issued by the
Board for promotion and development of the chilli industry;
(f) “export” means taking out of India by sea, land or air;
(g) “exporter” means any person engaged in the business of export
of chilli;
(h) “Fund” means the Chilli Promotion and Development Fund
constituted under section 15;
(i) “grower” means the owner of chilli cultivation, and includes any
agent of such owner, and mortgagee, lessee or any other person in actual
possession of such chilli cultivation;
(j) “import” means bringing into India by sea, land or air;
(k) “importer” means any person engaged in the business of import
of chilli;
(l) “member” means a member of the Board appointed under
sub-section (3) of section 3 of this Act and includes the Chairperson;
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(n) “specified” means specified by regulations made by the Board
under this Act;
(o) “small grower” means a grower the size of whose cultivation
does not exceed ten hectares;
(p) “stakeholders” means any person, entity or organisation engaged in
the production, manufacture, export, supply, trade and commerce of chilli; and
(q) “worker” means any person who works in chilli cultivation
excluding the grower.
CHAPTER II
THE CHILLI BOARD
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called the
Chilli Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall
by the said name, sue and be sued.
Constitution
and
incorporation
of the Board.
35
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
2
Definitions.

(3) The Board shall consist of the following members:
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government
in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected
by the House of the People and one by the Council of States;
(c) three members to represent respectively the Ministries of the
Central Government dealing with–
(i) Commerce;
(ii) Agriculture; and
(iii) Finance;
(d) four members to represent major chilli producing States
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(e) ten members to represent the growers, workers and
exporters in the chilli industry to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(f) five members to represent such institutes or authorities
having specialisation in research in the chilli industry, agriculture,
foreign trade, packaging and food safety to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and other
members of the Board and the manner of filling vacancies among the members
of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The term of office of, salaries, remuneration or other allowance
payable to, and the other conditions of service of, the Chairperson and
other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(2) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder
for being chosen as or for being a member of either House of Parliament.
(3) Any officer of the Central Government when deputed by that
Government to the Board shall have the right to attend meetings of the Board
and take part in the proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote.
5.  No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of:
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or
member of the Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the
merits of the case.
6. (1) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Board,
and without prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and discharge
such other powers and functions of the Board as may be prescribed.
(2) In the absence of a Chairperson in a meeting, the Board may elect
any member who is present to preside over such meeting.
Terms of office
and conditions
of service of
Chairpersons
and other
members.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to invalidate
proceedings of
the Board.
Chairperson to
preside over
meetings.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
3

7. (1) The Board may constitute such advisory or executive
committees, appoint such officers and staff as it deems necessary for the
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The method of recruitment and terms and conditions of service of
officers and staff employed, as the case may be, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
8. (1) The Board shall be responsible for promotion and development
of the chilli industry in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the Board
shall:
(a) take such steps as it deems necessary in order to achieve
objectives enlisted under section 9;
(b) monitor the export, import and price of chilli and propagate
data and other information regarding the demand for and marketability
of chilli in the country and in the foreign market;
(c) render scientific and technical advice aimed at improving the
production, manufacture, supply and distribution of chilli;
(d) undertake, assist and encourage scientific, technological and
economic research in the area of chilli production;
(e) collect statistics from stakeholders in the chilli industry;
(f) plan and implement human resource training and skill
development in line with the needs of chilli industry;
(g) take steps either by itself or through accredited agencies to
maintain quality standards for chilli produced in the country;
(h) collaborate and cooperate with national and international
scientific and economic bodies for the benefit of the chilli industry;
(i) collaborate and cooperate with departments of the Central or
State Governments on all matters relating to the promotion and
development of chilli industry;
(j) protect the intellectual property rights of the Indigenous
varieties of chillies in the country and abroad;
(k) subscribe to the share capital of or entering into any
arrangement or other arrangements (whether by way of partnership,
joint venture or any other manner) with any other body corporate for
the purpose of promoting the development of chilli industry or for
promotion and marketing of chilli in the country or elsewhere;
(l) advise the Central Government on all matters relating to the
promotion and development of the chilli industry, including but not
limited to the import and export of chilli;
(m) advise the Central Government with regard to participation
in any international conference or scheme relating to the chilli
industry;
(n) provide advisory services on matters including but not limited
to research, testing and training to such other class of persons upon
the payment of such fee or other charges as may be specified;
Committees,
officers and
staff.
35
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
4
Functions of
the Board.
45

(o) formulate incentive schemes for the chilli industry;
(p) conduct seminars, workshops research activities and other
programmes for development and promotion of chilli industry in the
country; and
(q) any other actions in the interest of chilli industry.
CHAPTER III
PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT
9. The Central Government and the Board, as the case may be, while
exercising its powers, discharging its functions, or undertaking any other
activity under this Act shall be guided by the following objectives namely:
(a) optimising the production, sale and consumption of chilli, which
may include:
(i) promoting the export of chilli;
(ii) promoting the sale and trade of chilli through e-commerce
platforms;
(iii) improving the quality of chilli cultivated in the country for
consumption in the country and export;
(iv) promoting branding, product diversification, value addition,
packaging and furthering the interests of stakeholders involved in
the chilli industry;
(v) promoting sustainable cultivation and increasing production
and productivity of chilli;
(vi) providing support and encouragement to small growers for
using and implementing new technology in chilli cultivation;
(vii) recommending fair and remunerative prices for chilli growers;
(viii) safeguarding the interests of chilli workers; and
(ix) increasing awareness among the general public about the chilli
industry in the country.
(b) promoting economic, scientific and technical research into the
chilli industry, which may include:–
(i) collecting, analysing, and disseminating economic, scientific
and technical data, information, statistics, and studies related to the
chilli industry in the country;
(ii) encouraging the adoption of best available technologies so as
to minimize the adverse impact of climate change;
(iii) promoting an understanding of plant ecology, physiology, and
pathology among growers; and
(iv) encouraging the adoption  of global best practices by the chilli
industry in the country.
10. For the purposes of this Act, the Board may issue directions or
advisories to stakeholders and such other persons in the chilli industry or any
class thereof, as it may deem fit:
Objectives to be
followed for
promotion and
development.
Issuance of
direction and
advisories by
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
5

Provided that every direction issued shall be complied with by any person
engaged in the chilli industry to who such direction has been issued.
CHAPTER IV
COMPLIANCES
11.(1) Every stakeholder shall obtain a certificate of registration issued
by the Board in such form, subject to such conditions and payment of such
fee, and with effect from such date as may be specified:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, exempt such person or class of persons as may be specified.
(2) The certificate of registration shall be issued or rejected after due
verification in such manner and within such period as may be specified.
(3) The certificate of registration shall be deemed to have been issued
after the expiry of the period specified under sub-section (2), if no deficiency
has been communicated to applicant within that period.
(4) A certificate of registration issued, or deemed to have been issued
under this section shall remain valid for a period of fifteen years, or such
period beyond fifteen years as may be specified by the Board, from the date
on which it was issued, or deemed to be issued, as the case may be, except
when the certificate is cancelled or suspended pursuant to an inspection under
section 12.
12. Every stakeholder liable to be registered under section 11 shall submit
to the Board such returns at such times, in such form, and containing such
particulars, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, exempt such person or class of persons as may be specified.
13.(1) Where the Board has reason to believe that any stakeholder:–
(a) has contravened any direction issued to such person under
section 10;
(b) liable to be registered under section 11 has failed to obtain
registration or has obtained registration through fraud or
misrepresentation;
(c) liable to submit returns under section 12 has failed to submit
returns, or has submitted false returns;
(d) has contravened any other provision of the Act,
it may authorise such officer, as may be prescribed, by an order in
writing in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be
specified, to conduct an inspection.
(2) In the course of inspection under sub-section (1), the authorised
officers may, subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be
prescribed:
(a) enter any place or premises where any activities related to the
chilli industry are undertaken;
Registration.
Submission of
returns.
Inspection and
penalties.
35
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
6

(b) require the production of any books, registers, records or other
articles or papers kept therein; and
(c) ask for any information relating to the sale or purchase of
chilli.
(3) Upon completion of the inspection, the authorised officer shall
submit to the Board a report containing:
(a) recommendations on whether there is a contravention of the
provisions of this Act; and
(b) in cases where there is found to be a contravention of the
provisions of this Act, recommendations on the imposition of a
penalty, suspension or cancellation of registration or such other
particulars as may be prescribed.
(4) Upon receipt of the report referred to in sub-section (3), after
considering the recommendations provided therein, the Board shall pass an
order as may be deemed fit in such form, manner and subject to such conditions
as may be prescribed for:
(a) closing the matter forthwith; or
(b) imposing a civil penalty which may extend to ten thousand
rupees; or
(c) suspending or cancelling of registration under section 11; or
(d) or for conditions mentioned in clauses (b) and (c):
Provided that the amount of any penalty imposed under this section, if
not paid, may be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue:
Provided further that no order of suspension or cancellation of registration
shall be passed under this sub-section unless the person concerned has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the grounds of
such suspension or cancellation, as the case may be.
14.(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed under the provisions of
sub-section (4) of section 13 may, within such period of the passing of the
order, prefer an appeal to the Central Government, on payment of such fee, in
such form and manner, and subject to such other conditions as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may confirm, modify or reverse the order
appealed against:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the parties shall be given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDITS
15.(1) The Board shall constitute a Fund to be called the Chilli
Promotion and Development Fund.
(2) The Chilli Promotion and Development Fund shall be credited:
(a) all sums transferred to or vested in the Board;
(b) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central
Government;
Appeal.
Chilli
Promotion and
Development
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
7

(c) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificates of
registration issued and any other fees or charges collected under
this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder;
(d) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as
may be decided upon by the Central Government; and
(e) all assets transferred from the Spices Board Fund under
the Spices Board Act, 1986 (Act 10 of 1986).
(3) The Fund shall be applied to:
(a) meet the salary, pension, remuneration and other allowances
of the members, officers, and staff of the Board as applicable;
(b) meet the expenses relating to such measures as the Board may
undertake under this Act from time to time in order to achieve the
objectives enlisted in section 9, and in exercise of its general powers
and functions under section 8;
(c) meet the other administrative expenses of the Board and any
other expenses authorised by or under this Act;
(d) repay loans; and
(e) settle any liabilities arising out of legal proceedings.
16. The Board may, from time to time, with the previous sanction of the
Central Government and under such conditions as may be prescribed, borrow
any sum required for any of the purposes for which it is authorised to expend
under this Act, from:–
(a) any bank or other financial institution by taking loan; or
(b) the public by issue of bonds or debentures or any such instrument
in the form and manner approved by the Central Government.
17. The Board shall prepare in such form and manner, at such time, and
such intervals, as may be prescribed, its budget, showing the estimated receipts
and expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
18. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such
manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India, be prescribed and the Board shall furnish to the Central Government
before such date, as may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together
with the auditors’ report thereon.
19.(1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such
time each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full
account of its activities during the previous financial year, and submit a copy
thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The annual report prepared under sub-section (1) shall contain:–
(a) a description of all the activities of the Board for the previous
year;
(b) the plan of the Board for the upcoming year; and
(c) any such other details as may be provided under any law for
the time being in force.
Power to
borrow.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
8
Budget.
Accounts and
audit.
Annual report.

20. The Central Government shall cause the auditor’s report under
section 18 and annual report under section 19 to be laid, as soon as may be
after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
21. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion:
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to
discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with
any direction issued by the Central Government under this Act, in
achieving the objectives enlisted in section 9 or in exercising its
general powers and functions under section 8, and as a result of such
default the financial position of the Board or the administration of
the Board has deteriorated; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public
interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, supersede the Board for such period, not exceeding six
months, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1)
superseding the Board:
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate
their offices as such;
(b) the general powers and functions which may, by or under the
provisions of this Act, by exercised or discharged by or on behalf of
the Board, shall until the Board is reconstituted under sub-section (3),
be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central
Government may direct; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the
Board is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central
Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the
notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may
reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such case any person or
persons who vacated their offices under clause (a) of sub-section (2), shall
not be deemed disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the
expiration of the period of supersession, take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under
sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament
at the earliest.
Auditor’s report
and annual
report to be laid
before
Parliament.
Power of the
Central
Government to
supersede the
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
9

22.(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the
Board, in discharge of its general powers and functions under this Act, shall
be bound by such directions as the Central Government may give in writing
to it from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity
to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is
one of policy or not shall be final.
23. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette,
direct that any power exercisable and functions performed by it under this
Act may be exercised and performed in such cases and subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be prescribed in the notification by such officer or
authority as may be prescribed therein.
24. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
Central Government, the Board, or any officer, member, or employee thereof
for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act
or the rules or regulations made, or standards notified thereunder.
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:–
(a) the qualification for appointment of the members of the Board
and the manner of filling of vacancies among the members of the
Board under sub-section (4) of section 3;
(b) the procedure to be followed at meetings of the Board and at
committees thereof for the conduct of business, and the number of
members which shall form a quorum at any meeting;
(c) the holding of a minimum number of meetings of the Board
every year;
(d) the term of office of, salaries, remuneration, or other allowances
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and other members of the Board under sub-section (1)
section 4;
(e) the other powers and functions of the Board which shall be
discharged by the Chairperson under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(f) the officers who shall be authorised by the Board to conduct
inspection under sub-section (1) of section 13;
(g) the form and the manner of, and the conditions to be met and
fee to be paid for, preferring an appeal to the Central Government
under sub-section (1) of section 14;
(h) the conditions to be met for borrowing any sum under section 16;
(i) the form and the manner of, the time at which and the intervals
for the preparation of a Budget under section 17;
Power of
Central
Government to
issue directions.
Power to
delegate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
10
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power to make
rules.

(j) the form and the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall
be audited and the date before which the audited copy of the accounts
may be furnished to the Central Government under section 18;
(k) the form and the manner and the time at which the annual
report shall be prepared under section 19; and
(l) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in
respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
26. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 9, and with the approval of the
Central Government, the Board may by notification in the Official Gazette
make such regulations consistent with this Act and any rules made thereunder
to carry out its functions under this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following
matters namely:
(a) the method of collecting statistics from such stakeholders in
the chilli industry;
(b) the method of recruitment and terms and conditions of service of
any officers appointed, and any staff employed under sub-section (2) of
section 7;
(c) the fee or other charges for providing advisory services under
clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 8; and
(d) the form and the manner of, the conditions to be met and fee to
be paid for, and the date of effect of certificate of, registration under
sub-section (1) of section 11;
(e) the manner of verification of an application to obtain certificate
of registration and the period within which such certificate shall be
issued or rejected under sub-section (2) of section 11;
(f) the period of validity of a certificate of registration under sub-
section (4) of section 11;
(g) the form and the manner of, the particulars to be contained in,
and the times at which, returns shall be submitted under section 12;
(h) the conditions subject to which the Board may authorise
officers to conduct an inspection by an order in writing under sub-
section (1) of section 13;
(i) conditions subject to and manner in which inspection is to be
conducted under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(j) the particulars to be contained in the report to be submitted by
an executive officer upon completion of investigation under sub-
section (3) of section 13;
(k) the form, manner, and conditions subject to which the Board
shall pass an order under sub-section (4) of section 13;
(l) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in
respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by regulations.
Power to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
11

27. Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation.
28.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
29.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law
for the time being in force, on and from the date of commencement of this
Act, all matters pertaining to chilli under the Spices Board Act, 1986 (Act 10
of 1986) shall be deemed to be governed by the provisions of this Act.
(2) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, any
stakeholder in the chilli industry that has a valid registration, certification or
licence, by whatever name called, under the Spices Board Act, 1986 (Act 10
of 1986), shall be deemed to be registered under section 11, and shall be
deemed to remain so registered till the registration or license as the case may
be, remains valid under the Spices Board Act, 1986 (Act 10 of 1986).
30. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
31. In the Spices Board Act, 1986 in the Schedule, the entry namely,
‘3. Chilly’, shall be omitted.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Transitional
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
12
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Amendment of
Act 10 of 1986.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Spices Board Act, 1986 was enacted for the purpose of 
development of export of 26 specified spices, including chilli. Among these 
spices, chilli assumes great significance for a variety of reasons. India is 
the largest producer and exporter of chilli in the world. It contributes 
to roughly 37 per cent. of the total global chilli production, with an 
estimated production of 14 million tonnes. It has about 8 million 
hectare of land under chilli production, amounting to 39 per cent. of the 
total area under chilli production in the world.
India’s export of chilli and chilli products is valued at more than 
Rs. 6,000 crores, with the export quantity having almost doubled in the last 
decade. Within the basket of spices exported from India, chilli contributed 
to more than 40 per cent.  of the volume and 30 per cent. of the value. One 
of the primary reasons for the  high demand,  popularity and renown of 
Indian chilli, especially  in lucrative  markets of the USA and UK, is its 
superior commercial qualities of colour and pungency.
These factors make chilli one of the  most prominent spices in the 
country and across the world. However, the potential of the chilli industry 
is immense and remains to be fully exploited. Due to the fact that chilli has 
been clubbed with  25 other spices under the Spices Board, it  has been 
difficult to provide concerted attention to and allocate  sufficient resources 
for the  promotion and development  of the chilli industry in  the country. 
A separate Chilli Board will  help address these problems while also 
allowing the Spices Board to focus  its efforts on promoting other  spices 
under its ambit.
The Bill, therefore, provides for the removal of chilli from the purview 
of the Spices Board Act,  1986 and instead facilitate  its promotion and 
development through the  constitution of  a separate Chilli Board. It  also 
provides for allied matters such as registration of stakeholders, inspections 
and penalties, appeals, budget, audits and annual reports. Furthermore, it 
establishes a Chilli Promotion and Development Fund towards payment of 
salaries, allowances,  etc. of  the members, officers, and staff  of the Board 
and meeting  other administrative expenses of the Board. The  Bill also 
makes the necessary provisions to facilitate  the smooth transition of  chilli 
industry from the scope of the Spices Board to the  new Chilli Board. 
Through this Bill, the Indian chilli industry can  achieve greater heights of 
prosperity and reach its  true economic potential whilst also promoting the 
overall welfare of all  stakeholders involved.
Hence this Bill.
   N EW D ELHI;  LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU
11 July, 2022
13

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Chilli Board.
It also provides for appointment of the Chairperson and other members of
the Board. Clause 4 provides for the term of office of, salaries, remuneration
or other allowance payable to, and the other conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and other members of the Board. Clause 7 provides for the
constitution of advisory or executive committees, appointment of officers
and employment of staff of the Board. Clause 15 provides for the constitution
of a Fund called the Chill Promotion and Development Fund. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty
crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five crore is also
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
14

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Board, with approval of the Central
Government, to make regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
As the matters in respect of which rules, regulations or orders may be
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
15

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion and development of the chilli industry,
constitution of a Chilli Board and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
(Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, M.P .)