1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF LOGIC IN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2015
By
SHRI DADDAN MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of logic in all educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Logic in Educational
Institutions Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council for Education of Logic
constituted under section 6;
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 202 of  2015
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "educational institution" means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a
senior secondary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name
such institution is called, but does not include a minority educational institution;
(d) "logic" means study of principles of reasoning, valid inference and
demonstration; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the education of logic shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational
institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on
the recommendation of the Advisory Council constituted under section 6.
4.  The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of logic in all educational institutions,
within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching logic in educational institutions.
6.  (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
the Compulsory Teaching of Logic in Educational Institutions Act, 2015, by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Education of Logic.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such numbers of persons, having special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of logic education or school education, as the
Central Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of education of logic for
each class upto senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the
education of logic is to be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching logic;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in education of logic for the purpose of their
appointment in educational institutions; and
(e) coordinate with the appropriate Government and school authorities with a
view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The appropriate Government shall de-recognize such educational institutions, which
do not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
Compulsory
teaching of
education of
logic in
educational
institutions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
logic in all
educational
institutions.
Appointment
of teachers for
education of
logic.
Constitution
of Advisory
Council for
logic
education.
Functions of
the Advisory
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
De-recognition
of educational
institutions for
non-compliance
of the
provisions of
the Act.

3
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Immediately after the completion of their schooling, students need to appear for
various competitive examinations such as Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT), Common Law
Admission Test (CLAT), Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT), Indian Institute
of Technology (IIT), Pre Medical Test (PMT), etc. All these examinations have a crucial
component of logical reasoning. In the absence of learning of logic in schools, children
have to go to expensive coaching centres which most of them cannot afford. Also, the
knowledge of logic is limited to the students of philosophy at the University level.
There are two civilizations that have contributed immensely to the growth of logic-
India and Greece. On the basis of indisputable facts, it can be said that the Indian logic is
more comprehensive. The original works of logic are available in translation in large number,
so it will not be difficult to design courses and syllabus.
Logic has declined in public life. And India can regain its glory by inclusion of this
subject in school curriculum thereby facilitating scientific temper of the citizenry, as enshrined
in our Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DADDAN MISHRA
July 7, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of logic teachers for imparting logic
education in educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of an Advisory
Council for logic education by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of
adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this
stage, it is not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring and non-
recurring, which will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted
into a law. However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees
one hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—1457LS(S3)—21.07.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of logic in all educational institutions and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Daddan Mishra, M.P.)