8 3 FER i

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 202 of 2000
_—_—————

THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Sur G.M. Banatwata, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commission of Inquiry (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title, and
5 commmence-
(2) It shall come into force at once. sea
5 2. In section 3 of the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952, after sub-section (4), the Amendment
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— of section 3.

“(S) Where a report of the Commission laid before each House of Parl iament

or, as the case may be, the Legislature of the State in accordance with sub-section

(4), discloses or indicates any criminal offence and where no legal action has already

10 been taken on such criminal offence, the appropriate Government, shall immediately
and effectively, commence the required action including taking every legal action

or process, taking cognizance of any complaint or offence, making of arrests, re-


2 of 1974

2

Opening of closed investigations, and whiny of action against corruption, brutality.
dereliction of duty, malafide exercise of authority and delinquency in the handling
of cases by officers and policemen.

Explanation: Where a report of a Commission has already been laid before
cach House of Parliament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of the State, before
the commencement of thisAct, the word “immediately” in this sub-section shall mean
immediately after coming into force of this Act.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 468 and 469 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any law or public service manual of the Union, All-
India or a State service, no action pursuant to sub-section (5) shall be vitiated by any
Consideration of the action being a delayed or belated action or action being barred by
lapse or expiry of the period of limitation.

7) It shall be the personal responsibitity and duty of the highest police officer
of the State and of the district concerned to comply completely with the requirements
of sub-section (5) and any failure to do so shall be punishable with imprisonment of
either description, for a term which may extend to three years.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A report of a Commission appointed under the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952
and laid before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of a State
in accordance with sub-section (4) of section 3 of the Act. disclose or indicate the
Commission of criminal offence. Where no legal action has already been taken on such
criminal offence, there is need to provide that the appropriate Government shall immediately
Commence the required action thereon and that no such action shall be barred by any
consideration of the period of limitation.

‘The Bill seeks to amend the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952 to make the aforesaid
and other consequential amendments of important nature,

New DeLay 6.५, BANATWALLA
November 10, 2000


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952
(No. 60 oF 1952)
* * + * * * *

3. (1) The appropriate Government may, if il is of opinion that it is hevessary so to
do, and shall, if a resolution in this behalf is passed by cach House of Parliament or, as the
case may be, the legislature of the State by notification in the Official G
Commission of Inquiry for the purpose of making an inquiry into any definite matter of
Public importance and performing such functions and within such time as may be specified
in the notification and the Commission so appointed shall make the inquiry and perform
the functions accordingly:

Provided that where any such Commission has been appointed to inquire into any
matter—

(a) by the Central Government, no State Government shall, except with the
approval of the Central Government, appoint another Commission to inquire into
the same matter for so long as the Commission appointed by the Central Government
is functioning;

(b) by a State Government, the Central Government shall not appoint another
Commission to inquire in to the same matter for so long as the Commission appointed
by the State Government is furictioning, unless the Central Government is of opinion
that the scope of the inquiry should be extended to two or more States.

(2) The Commission may consist of one or more*members appointed by the
appropriate Government, and where the Commission consists of more than one member,
one of them may be appointed as the Chairman thereof.

(3) The appropriate Government may, at any stage of an inquiry by the Commission
fill any vacancy which may have arisen in the office ofa member of the Commission (whether
consisting of one or more than one member).

() The appropriate Government shall cause to be laid before cach House of
Parliament or as the case may be the Legislature of the State the report, if any, of the
Commission on the inquiry made by the Commission under sub-section (/) together with
a memorandum of the action taken thereon, within a Period of six months of the submission: =
of the report by the Commission to the appropriate Government.

* * * * * * * *

* * * * * * * *


LOK SABHA

a
BILL
further to amend the Co.umission of Inquiry Act, 1952.

(Shri G.M4. Banatwalla, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5275L S—06-12-2000.