THE UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of unemployment allowance till gainful employment is provided
to eligible citizen and ensuring the Right to gainful employment and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unemployment Allowance Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 202 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Fund" means the National Youth Unemployment Assistance Fund constituted
under section 4;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act;
(d) "self-employment" means to work independently for one's clients or customers
by setting up of own production or selling unit or establishment and not for any
employer; and
(e) "unemployed citizen" means a citizen of India who has attained the age of
eighteen years having no source of livelihood.
3. (1)Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
every unemployed citizen shall have the right to gainful employment.
(2) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide gainful employment
opportunity to every unemployed citizen within its territorial jurisdiction.
(3) The gainful employment referred to in sub-section (1) shall be provided according
to the age, educational qualifications and physical status of the unemployed citizen.
(4) For carrying out the purposes of this Act, it shall be the duty of the appropriate
Government to generate adequate employment opportunities in the public sector, private
sector, small scale industries, cottage and village industries, khadi and other weaving
industries, food processing sector, self-employment opportunities, agriculture and other
sectors.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to fill up all the vacant posts in the Ministries,
Departments, Public Sector Enterprises and other Government agencies and organisations
in a time bound manner.
4. Till such time gainful employment is provided to an unemployed citizen or
provision is made for self employment under any Government scheme or by providing
loan through a Bank or Financial Institution, every such citizen shall be paid by the
appropriate Government an unemployment allowance, not being less than rupees twenty
thousand per month in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the unemployment allowance shall not be paid under this Act to an
unemployed citizen who:—
(a) has an income from any source not being less than the amount of
unemployment allowance fixed under this Act, or
(b) is covered under any existing scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent
in a State or Union Territory, as the case may be:
Provided further that in case an unemployed citizen has an earning from any other
source which is less than the amount of unemployment allowance fixed under this Act, his
unemployment allowance shall be reduced by the amount of his earning.
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund for unemployment allowance with initial corpus of rupees sixty
thousand crore and thereafter shall contribute to the fund, from time to time, along
with the State Governments in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received
by way of donation, contribution, assistance or otherwise from individuals, body
corporate, financial institution, firms and partnership.
Definitions.
Right to
gainful
employment.
Unemployed
citizen.
Constitution of
corpus fund for
unemployment
allowance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) The Fund shall be managed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made there-under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Central
Government to
provide
adequate fund.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is projected to grow at eight per cent. per annum [Gross Domestic Product
(GDP)] in the next two years and is the fastest growing major economy in the world. Jobless
growth is an economic phenomenon in which an economy experiences growth while
maintaining or decreasing its level of employment. The International Labour Organisation
predicted that joblessness will increase from 17.7 million in 2016 to 18 million by 2018,
even though the country's unemployment rate is expected to go down from 3.5 per cent. to
3.4 per cent.. The trend of significant gap between the pace of GDP growth and that of
employment growth has given rise to the phenomenon of "jobless growth" in India.
As per the survey by Labour Bureau, country's unemployment rate has shot up to a
five year high of five per cent. in 2015-16. This figure is significantly higher, at 8.7 per cent,
for women as compared to 4.3 per cent. for men. Equally tragic is the mounting unemployment
among educated youth. The growing unemployment among educated youth (age group 15 to
29 years) in recent years is an outcome of such slow growth rate of jobs. At the all-India
level, the unemployment rate among youth with secondary education unemployment rate
increased from 2.6 per cent. to 3.2 per cent. and for those with higher secondary education
unemployment rate increased from 3.3 per cent. to 4.4 per cent. In case of youth with a
graduate degree unemployment rate increased from 5.8 per cent. to 8.4 per cent. and with a
postgraduate degree it rose from 5.7 per cent. to 8.5 per cent.
About seventy-seven per cent. of Indian households do not have a regular wage/salaried
person. India has no dearth of quality human resources at its disposal. As a long term measure,
there is a need to boost entrepreneurial instincts within the demographic base by substantially
investing in human capital via education.
Another vital area needing policy intervention is the increasing gender-gap in the labour
force participation. The shortage of jobs is compounded by depressed wages, with 82 per
cent. of men and 92 per cent. of women earning less than Rs. 10,000 per month. The
advantages of economic growth are futile if it is not able to create sufficient jobs in the
economy. India has an advantage due to its demographic dividend. There is an urgent need
to effectively implement policy measures to exploit the demographic dividend and ensure
inclusive and sustainable growth which is not jobless.
The Bill therefore proposes to grant unemployment allowance through creation of a
fund for unemployment allowance having a corpus of sixty thousand crore. The grant of
unemployment allowance will help in curbing the increasing unemployment. The bill also
seeks to make right to work compulsory by imposing an obligation on the Government to
provide gainful employment.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
November 27, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for right to gainful employment to every unemployed
citizen. Clause 4 provides for unemployment allowance to be paid to every unemployed
citizen. Clause 5 provides for the constitution of the corpus Fund for payment of
unemployment allowance. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will
involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of India. At this stage it is not possible to
estimate the expenditure. However, it is estimated that a sum of rupees sixty thousand crore
in addition to rupees sixty thousand crore as initial corpus, will involve a recurring expenditure
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.
6

MGIPMRND—2323LS(S3)—20.12.2018.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of unemployment allowance till gainful employment is provided to
eligible citizen and ensuring the Right to gainful employment and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Rajeev Satav,  M.P .)