5

As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

Bill No. 203 of 1991
a

THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-FOURTH AMENDMENT)
BILL. 1991
a
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Re-
public of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1991.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint

2. After article 239A of the Constitution, the following articles shall
be inserted, namely: —

23988. (1) As from the date of commencement of the Consti-
tution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1991, the Union territory
of Delhi shall be called the National Capital territory and the adminis-
trator thereof appointed under | be designated as the
Lieutenant Governor.

“(2) (a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the National
Capital Territory and the seats in such Assembly shall be filled by

®

Short
title
and
com-
mence-
ment.

Insertion
of new
article
23948
end
23948.

Special
Provi-
sions
with res
peet ty
Delhi


2

members chosen by direct eiection Liv ieeriturial consutuencies 11

the National Capial Tercitory.

(0) Mee total करा ol seas शा sic Legisiiive Assembly, the
RUBIES OF SEALS FESErseu ioe Seavdaica Castes, che division of tie
cal comstitueneies (छा जा

National Capital Yerrior, ite very
the t
tioning of the Legisimene cosemity null b
by Parliazaent

10 ७८७ auatters veludiss to the iaic-

LOE MEN HK ५

regulated

(०) The provisions oi atic wy 327 aud 329 आया apply in

relation to the Nutional Capital Territory, the Legislative Assembly 10
of the National Capital ‘Territory and the members thereof as they
apply, in relation to a the 1 egislative Assembly of a State and
the members thereof respe ly; and any reference in these articles
326 and 329 to “appropriale Legislature” shall be deemed to be a

reference to Parliament. ‘ | 15

(3) (a) Subject 1० the provisions of this Constitution, the Legis-
jative Assembly shall have power to make laws for the whole or any
part of the National Capital Territory with respect to any of the
matters enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so
far as any such matter 18 .pplicable to Union territories except matters 2)
with respect to Entries 1, 2 ad 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65
and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said Entries 1, 2 and
18.

(७) Nothing in sub-c.ause (व) shall derogate from the powers
of Parliament under this Constiution to make laws with respect to 2:
any matter for a Union territory or any part thereof.

&

(०) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly
with respect to any matter is repugnant to any provision of a law
made by Parliament with respect to that matter, whether passed
before or after the law made by the Legislative Assembly, or of an 30
earlicr law, other than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then,
in either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case may be,
such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislative
Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnaney, be void:

Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly 45
has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has —
received his assent, scl: law shall prevail in the National Capital
Territory:

Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall prevent
Parliament from enacting at any time any law with respect to the 4y
same matter including a law adding to. amending, varying or re-
pealing the law so made by the Legislative Assembly.

(4) There shall be 2 Council of Ministers consisting of not more
than 10 per cent. of the total number of members in the Legislative
Assembly, with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the 45
Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to
matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly has power to
make laws, except in so far as he is, by or under any Law, required to
act in his discretion: \ |


35

40

3

Provided that in the case of difference of epinion between the
Lieutenant Governor and his Mit istes on any matter, the Lieutenaut
Governor shall refer it to the President for decision and act accord-
ing 10 the decision given tlereon by the President and pending such
decision it shall be com for the Licutenant Governor in any
case where the 19६16 tis Gyo, is so urgent thal it is nevessa:
for him to take immesio.e action, iv iuke such action or to give such
direction m the matier as he deeins necessary,

(5) The © : appointed by the President and
the other Ministers shaii he appointed by the President on the advice
of the Chief Minister ang the Ministers shal! hold office during the
pleasure of the President

(0) The Council of
the Legislative Assembly

isters shall be collectively responsible to

(7) (a) Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving
effect to, or supplemenung, the provisions contained in the foregoing
clauses and for all matters incidental or consequential thereto.

(०) Any such law c {s referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not
be deemed to be sn amen‘ment of this Constitution for the purpo:
of article 368 notiviths‘andine that it contains any provision which
amends or has the efiect of amending, this Constitution

(8) The provisions of article 2398 shall, so far as may be, apply
in relation to the National Capital Territory, the Lieutenant Gover-
nor and the Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation to the
Union territory of Pondicherry, the administrator and its Legisla-
ture, respectively; and any reference in that article to “clause (1) of
article 239A” shall be deemed to ‘be a reference to this article or
article 239 AB, as the case may be i i

239AB. If the President, on receipt of a report from the Lieute-
nant Governor or otherwise, is satisfied—

(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration of
the National Capital Tetitory cannot be carried on in accord-
ance with the provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in
pursuance of that article; ot j

(७) that for the proper administration of the National
Capital Territory it is necessary or expedient so to do,

the President may by order suspend the operation of any provision
of article 239AA or of all or any of the provisions of any law made
in pursuance of that article for such period as he thinks fit and make
such incidental and consequential provisions as may appear to him
to be necessary or expedient for administering the National Capital
Territory in accordance with the provisions of article 239 and article
23008.”

Provi
sion in
ease of
failuce
of con
stitution
machin-
vi


STALEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

Fine question of re

organisation of the adnunisteative set-uy in the Union
गण; of Delhi has been under the consideration of the Government — for
some time, The Government of India appointed on 24-12-1987 a Committee
to 80 into the various issues connected with the administration of Delhi and
to recommend measures inter बांध for the sieamlining of the administra-
tive set-up. The Committee went into the matter in great detail
and considered the issues after holding discussions with various individuals,
associations, political parties and other experts and taking into account the
arrangements in the national Capitals of other countries with a federal set-up
and also the debates in the Constituent Assembly as also the reports by
earlier Committees and Commissions. After such detailed inquiry und exami-
nation, it recommended that Delhi should continue to be a Union territory
and provided with a Legislative Assembly and a Council of Ministers res-
ponsib’e to such Assembly with appropriate powers to deal with matters of
concern to the common man. The Committee also recommended that with
a view to ensuring stability and permanence the arrangements should be incor-
Porated in the Constitution to give the National Capital a special status among
the Uniow territories,

2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above proposals

New Detur; S. B. CHAVAN,
The 12th December, 1991,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill confers powers on Parliament for regulating the
total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly. the number of seats
reserved for Scheduled Castes, the division of the National Capital Terri-
tory into territorial constituencies and other matters relating to the
functioning of the Legislative Assembly. It further provides for a Coun-
cil of Ministers to be appointed with the Chief Minister at the head to
aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions.

2. The proposed provisions of clause 2 will involve some expenditure
to be incurred as and when the Legislative Assembly is constituted and
a Council of Ministers is appointed for the National Capital Territory.
The expenditure on salaries and allowances will roughly be of the order
of Rs. 20 crores per annum. But there would also be a corresponding
saving on account of abolition of the Metropolitan Council of Delhi to
the extent of aboul Rs. 10 crores per annum. Though the said expendi-
ture will ultimately be met from the Consolidated Fund of the National
Capital Territory proposed to be set up under the law made in pursuance
of new article 239AA, yet the said expenditure will have to be taken
into account in determining the financial assistance which may be given
to the National Capital Territory by way of grants from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India.

3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a
recurring or non-recurring nature.