1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 203 of  2016
Amendment of
article 243Q.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 243Q of the Constitution, in clause (1), after sub-clause (c), the following
sub-clause shall be inserted, namely—
"(d) a Metropolitan Authority for Metropolitan areas comprising one of more
whole districts with a population of more than ten lakh,".
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In article 243R of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause (2),—
"(i) in sub-clause (a), for existing proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided that the persons, members and Chairpersons referred to in
paragraphs (i) to (iv) shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality.";
(ii) sub-clause (b) shall be omitted.
(b) after clause (2), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) The Chairperson of a Municipality to be known as Mayor shall be
chosen by direct election by electors of the territorial constituencies of a
Municipal area, to be held in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by
law, provide.
(4) The term of the office of the Mayor shall be co-terminus with the term
of the Municipality.
(5) There shall be constituted by the Mayor, within a period of thirty days
of entering into office, a Mayor-in-Council for a Municipal Corporation or
Metropolitan Authority, as the case may be.
(6) The Mayor-in-Council shall consist of the Mayor and other members
to be nominated by the Mayor from amongst the directly elected members of the
Municipal Corporation or the Metropolitan Authority, as the case may be.
(7) The members of the Mayor-in-Council (excluding the Mayor) shall not
exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of directly elected members of the
Municipal Corporation or the Metropolitan Authority, as the case may be, or
fifteen members, whichever is higher.
(8) The Mayor-in-Council shall exercise such powers and perform such
functions as may be assigned to it by the Mayor.
(9) A member of the Mayor-in-Council shall hold office as long as he is a
member of the Municipal Corporation or the Metropolitan Authority, as the case
may be, unless he resigns or is removed from office by the Mayor by order in
writing.".
4. In article 243S of the Constitution,—
(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) There shall be constituted, within two years from the commencement
of this Act, a Ward Committee for every ward within the territorial area of a
Municipality having a population of one lakh or more.";
(b) in clause (3), for the words "Wards Committee", the words "Ward Committee"
shall be substituted; and
(c) clause (4) shall be omitted;
5. After article 243S of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"243SA. (1) The Mayor of every Municipality shall constitute Area Sabhas,
consisting of one or more polling booths but not exceeding five, with all voters
registered at the polling booth as its members and shall provide for the purposes
of the Area Sabhas.
(2) The Chairperson of an Area Sabha shall be directly elected by members of an Area
sabha in such manner as the Mayor may, by order, specify.
Amendment of
article 243R.
Amendment of
article 243S.
Insertion of
new article
243SA.
Constitution
of Area Sabhas
for one or
more polling
booths.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) The Mayor of a Metropolitan Authority shall constitute Zonal Committees for
that Metropolitan Authority, consisting of two or more contiguous wards and shall
provide for—
(a) the manner of determining the area of jurisdiction of each Zonal Committee
having regard to the population of the area, the density of the population therein and
such other factors as he may deem fit;
(b) membership to Zonal Committee of persons having special knowledge or
experience in Municipal administration or of such other persons as he may deem fit:
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such Committee
shall be elected members of the Metropolitan Authority from wards within that
Committee; and
(c) the purposes of the Zonal Committees;
(4) The Chairperson of the Zonal Committee shall be elected from amongst the elected
members of the Metropolitan Authority in such manner, as the Mayor may, by order, specify.
6. In article 243V of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause ( 1), for the words "a member of a Municipality", the words "a
member of a Municipality or a Mayor" shall be substituted.
(b) in clause ( 2), for the words "for the decision of such authority and", the
words "for the decision of the Governor" shall be substituted.
(c) after clause (2), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—
"Provided that the Governor shall, before giving any decision on any
such question, obtain the opinion of the State Election Commission and act
according to such opinion.".
7. In article 243W of the Constitution,—
(a) for the words "the Legislature of a State may, by law", the words "the
Legislature of a State shall, by law" shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (a) ,
(i) for the words "subject to such conditions as may be specified therein,
with respect to", the words "including but not limited to" shall be substituted;
(ii) after para (ii), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Legislature of a State shall, within two years from
the commencement of this Act, devolve all powers and responsibilities in
relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
(c) after clause (b), the following proviso and new clause shall be added, namely:—
"Provided that the Chairpersons of the Committees shall communicate all
decisions, information and reports in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth
Schedule to the Mayor of the Municipality concerned and act in consultation
with the Mayor;
(c) individuals or body corporates or associations or bodies of
individuals, with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable
them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon them in relation to
the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule:
Provided that such individual or body corporate or association or
body of individuals shall communicate and report all decisions, information
and reports in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule to the
Mayor of the Municipality concerned and act in consultation with the
Mayor.".
Amendment
of article
243V.
Amendment
of article
243W.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
8. After article 243W of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"243WA. (1) The Mayor of a Municipality shall —
(a) be  the  executive  head  of  the  Municipality and the municipal
administration shall be under his control;
(b) convene and preside over any meeting of the members of a Municipality;
(c) exercise such powers and discharge such duties of the Municipality as
the Legislature of a State may, by law, confer upon him;
(d) exercise overall supervision over the working of the Municipality; and
(e) co-ordinate the functions of the Municipality and the Committees
thereof.
(2) The Mayor shall have the following powers, namely:—
(a) the Mayor shall give such directions and orders as may be necessary
for the efficient management and development of his Municipality, including
directions or orders to implement any resolution of the Municipality or
Committees:
Provided that the Mayor of a Metropolitan Authority shall also give such
directions and orders as may be necessary for inter-agency co-ordination,
management of Metropolitan services and pan Metropolitan governance;
(b) the Mayor shall exercise administrative powers to implement the
provisions of any law made by the Legislature of a State relating to the
Municipality;
(c) the Mayor shall supervise the acts done by the officers and employees
of the Municipality;
(d) the Mayor shall authorise the payment and repayment of money relating
to the Municipality;
(e) the Mayor shall appoint employees to execute the functions of the
Municipality and may suspend from service any such employee in such manner
as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide;
(f) the Mayor may call for from Chairpersons of Committees constituted
under article 243S, article 243ZD and article 243ZE or any other officer under the
Municipality, any file and record in writing relating to the administration of the
affairs of the Municipality concerned and issue appropriate directions and orders;
(g) the Mayor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate execution of any
work is necessary, direct the execution of such work without the approval of the
Members of a Municipality in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by
law, provide;
(h) the Mayor may veto any resolution passed by a Municipality, if in his
opinion such resolution is in excess of the powers conferred on the Municipality
under this Part or by any law made by the Legislature of a State or is likely to
endanger public health or safety; and
(i) the Mayor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
related functions as may be conferred upon or entrusted to him by law made by
the Legislature of a State;
Insertion of
new article
243W A.
Mayor of
Municipality.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
9. For article 243X of the constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"243X. The Legislature of a State shall, on the recommendations of the State
Finance Commission, by law,—
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes,
duties, tolls and fees to enable it to discharge its responsibilities as specified in
article 243W in accordance with such procedure and subject to such reasonable
limits;
(b) assign to a Municipality such percentage of the net proceeds of taxes,
duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by the State Government and such
other sums from the Consolidated Fund of the State, as may be necessary to
enable it to discharge its responsibilities as specified in article 243W subject
to such reasonable conditions and limits;
(c) provide to such Municipalities as the Legislature of the State may
determine to be in need of assistance such annual grants-in-aid from the
Consolidated Fund of the State;
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys received,
respectively, by or on behalf of the Municipalities and also for the withdrawal of
such moneys therefrom;
(e) authorise a Municipality to borrow from within the territory of India
such reasonable sums,
as may be specified in the law.".
10. In article 243Y of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause (1),—
(i) for sub-clause (a), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(a) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities of the
net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State and
such other sums from the Consolidated Fund of the State, which may be
divided between them under this Part and the allocation between the
Municipalities at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds;";
(ii) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(d) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which
may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Municipalities;
(e) the principles which should govern the grants-in-aid to
the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State; and
(f) the determination of the limits of borrowings of the
Municipalities.".
(b) in clause (2), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—
"Provided that the explanatory memorandum shall be laid before the legislature
of the State within six months from the date of submission of the recommendations by
Commission to the Governor.".
11. In article 243ZD of the Constitution,—
(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Except for Metropolitan areas under article 243ZE, there shall be
constituted, within two years from the commencement of this Act, in every
district in every State a District Planning Committee to consolidate any plans
Power to
impose taxes
by and Funds
of, the
Municipalities.
Amendment of
article 243Y.
Amendment of
article 243ZD.
Substitution of
new article for
article 243X.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and to prepare
a draft development plan for the district as a whole.
(b) in clause (2), for sub-clause (d), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees, who shall
be Chairpersons of Panchayats or Mayor, shall be chosen.";
(c) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(5) The State Government shall cause the development plan, as
recommended by District Planning Committee, together with an explanatory
memorandum as to the action taken thereon, to be laid before the Legislature of
the State within six months from the date of submission of such plan to the State
Government.".
12. After article 243ZE of the Constitution,—
(a) for clause (1), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) There shall be constituted, within two years of the coming into force
of this Act, in every Metropolitan Area under a Metropolitan Authority, a
Metropolitan Planning Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the
metropolitan area as a whole.
(1A) The Major of the Metropolitan authority shall be the Chairperson of
the Metropolitan Planning Committee.";
(b) in clause (2),—
(i) sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(b) the manner in which the seats in such committees shall be filled:
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such
Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of
the Metropolitan Authority.
(ii) sub-clause (e) shall be omitted; and
(c) in clause (3), for the words "(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and
the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area", the words "any plan prepared by the Zonal
Committees in the Metropolitan Areas" shall be substituted; and
(d) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(5) The State Government shall cause the development plan, as
recommended by such Committee, together with an explanatory memorandum
as to the action taken thereon, to be laid before the Legislature of the State
within six months from the date of submission of such plan to the State
Government.".
13. After article 243ZG of the Constitution, the following article shall be added at the
end, namely:—
"243ZH. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating
to Municipalities or Municipal governance in force in any State immediately before the
commencement of this Act, which is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution,
as amended by this Act, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a
competent Legislature of other competent authority or until the expiration of one year
from such commencement, whichever is earlier.".
Amendment of
article 243E.
Insertion of
new article
243ZH.
Continuance of
existing laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
14. In the Twelfth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 18, the following entries
shall be inserted, namely:—
"19. Public transportation including roads, links, tolls and traffic management.
20. Promotion of information technology, internet connectivity and broadband
links.".
Amendment of
the Twelfth
Schedule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Almost twenty five years after the passage of the Seventy Fourth Amendment to the
Constitution, our Municipal Bodies are yet to be fully empowered, both politically as well as
functionally.
Fragmented leadership across State Governments, MLAs, Mayors and the City Councils
with the resultant fragmentation of service delivery across civic agencies is hurting our cities
and citizens. Decentralisation of governance is a national priority so as to enable our cities to
achieve their fullest social and economic potential and provide the highest quality of life our
citizens deserve. A directly elected Mayor, at the head of the Municipal Body, will be fully
empowered with political, functional, and budgetary autonomy and would serve to fix both
ownership and accountability for running the town or city. This is the need of the hour.
Moreover, the functions to be devolved to Municipal Bodies with regard to subjects
contained in the Twelfth Schedule, have not yet been devolved to elected Local Governments
and are currently being undertaken by the departments of State Governments. This directly
undermines responsible local self-government.
A constitutional provision to mandatorily devolve such functions in a time bound
manner is essential to make effective the institutions of Local Government. It is in this
context that the relevant articles of the Constitution are proposed to be amended so as to
make it mandatory for State Legislatures to enact laws aimed at conferring Municipal Bodies
with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function  as
Institutions of Local Government. It is also proposed to strengthen provisions relating to
metropolitan governance and constitution of Ward Committees.
Therefore, this Bill.
New Delhi; SHASHI THAROOR
July 5, 2016
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for election of the Mayor, constitution of Mayor-in-
Council for Municipal Corporation or Metropolitan Authority. Clause 4  provides for
constitution of the Ward Committees for every ward within territorial area of a Municipality
having population of one lakh or more. Clause 5 provides for constitution of Areas Sabhas
consisting of one or more polling booths and the Zonal Committees for Metropolitan Authority.
The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the States
concerned. However, the expenditure in relation to Union territories shall be incurred from
the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees six hundred and twenty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred and twenty five crore is also
likely to be involved.
99

10
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
243Q. (1) There shall be constituted in every State,—
(a) * * * * * * *
(b) * * * * * * *
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area, in accordance with the
provisions of this Part:
Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be constituted in such urban
area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area and the
municipal services being provided or proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment
in that area and such other factors as he may deem fit, by public notification, specify to be an
industrial township.
243R. ( 1) * * * * * * *
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide—
(a) for the representation in a Municipality of—
(i) persons having special knowledge or experience in Municipal
administration;
(ii) the members of the House of the People and the members of the
Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies which comprise
wholly or partly the Municipal area;
(iii) The members of the Council of States and the members of the
Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within the Municipal area;
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committee constituted under clause ( 5) of
article 243S:
Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph ( i) shall not have the
right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality;
(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality.
243S. (1) There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consisting of one or more
wards, within the territorial area of a Municipality having a population of three lakhs or more.
(2) * * * * * * *
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the territorial area of the
Wards Committee shall be a member of that Committee.
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of—
(a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the Municipality;
(b) two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards in the
Constitution of
Municipalities.
Composition
of
Municipalities.
Constitution
and
composition
of Wards
Committee.

11
Municipality elected by the members of the Wards Committee, shall be the Chairperson
of that Committee.
* * * * * * *
243V. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
a Municipality—
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the
purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than
twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years;
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of the
State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Municipality has become subject
to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall be referred for the
decision of such authority and in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide.
243W. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by
law, endow—
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to functions as institutions of self-government and such law may contain
provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities,
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as
may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such power and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in
relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.
243X. The Legislature of a State may, by law,—
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties,
tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits;
(b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected
by the State Government for such purposes and subject to such conditions and limits;
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State; and
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys received,
respectively, by or on behalf of the Municipalities and also for the withdrawal of such
moneys therefrom, as may be specified in the law.
Disqualifications
for
membership.
Powers,
authority and
responsibilities
of
Municipalities,
etc.
Power to
impose taxes
by, and Funds
of, the
Municipalities.

12
243Y. (1) The Finance Commission constituted under article 243-I shall also review the
financial position of the Municipalities and make recommendations to the Governor as to—
(a) the principles which should govern—
(i) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities of the net
proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be
divided between them under this Part and the allocation between the
Municipalities at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds;
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tools and fees which may be
assigned to, or appropriated by, the Muncipalities;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of
the State;
(b) * * * * * * *
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests
of sound finance of the Municipalities.
* * * * * * *
243ZD. (1) There shall be constituted in every State at the district level, a District
Planning Committee to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the
Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a
whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to—
(a) * * * * * * *
(b) * * * * * * *
(c) * * * * * * *
(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen.
(3) * * * * * * *
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the development
plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.
243ZE. (1) There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan Planning
Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to—
(a) * * * * * * *
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled:
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such Committee shall
be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Municipalities and
Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio
between the population of the Municipalities and of the Panchayats in that area;
(3) * * * * * * *
(4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall forward the
development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.
* * * * * * *
Finance
Commission.
Committee
for district
planning.
Committee for
Metropolitan
planning.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1731LS(S3)—26.07.2016.