 Bill No. 203 of 2022
THE TERMINA TED EMPLOYEES (WELFARE)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI D ILESHWAR K AMAIT, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the employees who have been terminated
by the employers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Terminated Employees (Welfare)
Act, 2022.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall not apply to
employee who has been terminated for any of the following reasons:–
(a) proven misconduct;
(b) cheating;
(c) indulging in fraudulent means or misappropriation of money; or
(d) having been found guilty by a criminal court of justice.
Short title and
application.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
10

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) ‘employer’ means the owner or the director of any establishment
or any organization which is not owned by the Central Government or a
State Government or which is not the undertaking of or  controlled by the
Central Government or a State Government or funded by the Central
Government or a State Government but includes the owner or director of
a private establishment where not less than ten persons are employed;
(b) “fund” means the Corpus Fund established under section 4;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “terminated employee” means any employee who was employed
by any employer, whether regular or temporary or casual or on contract
and whose services have been terminated by the employer.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being
in force, every employee whose employment has been terminated by the
employer  for the reasons of the winding up of the organization or the
establishment due to:–
(i) economic slowdown; or
(ii) change in technology in the respective field; or
(iii) the owner or director managing the affairs of the establishment
becoming insolvent; or
(iv) the orders of any court; or
(v) incurring losses making it unviable to carry on the business; or
(vi) the change in Government policy;
shall be entitled to such unemployment compensation, health
insurance benefits or any other benefits as may be prescribed if such
benefits are not part of the employee-employer agreement, for a period of
nine months or till the time he gets employed elsewhere, whichever is
earlier.
Explanation I– The period of nine months shall include the notice
period to be served by the employer before termination.
Explanation II– The unemployment compensation shall be admissible
if the employer does not provide any severance package to the terminated
employee or the severance package is less than the compensation provided
under this Act.
(2) The unemployment compensation under sub-section (1) shall not
be less than sixty per cent. of the gross salary of the terminated employee or
as per the terms of the employee-employer agreement, whichever is higher
and it shall be borne by the employer.
(3) The health insurance benefit shall continue till the period as
specified in sub-section (1) with the same terms and conditions which prevailed
during his employment.
(4) A terminated employee shall also be entitled to such terminal
benefits which would have been available to him on the cessation of
employment including provident fund, gratuity and leave encashment.
5
10
15
20
Benefits to
terminated
employees.
Definitions.
25
30
35
40

3
(5) The benefits notified under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the
terminated employee from the month following the month on which
termination notice is communicated to the employee or on completion of the
notice period, if any:
Provided that if due to any reason, the employer is not able to pay the
benefits within one month from the date of the termination of the employment,
the employer shall pay to the terminated employee an interest at the rate of
twelve per cent. per month for such delay.
(6) Nothing in this Act shall apply to any terminated employee
if benefits admissible under the employee-employer agreement, are higher
than the benefits prescribed under this Act.
4. (1) Every employer shall create a corpus fund to which at least five
per cent. of the net profit of the organization shall be credited, which shall be
used for the welfare of terminated employees under this Act.
(2) Every employer shall be entitled to solicit contribution from any
organization, individual or trust for the purpose of maintaining the fund, in
such manner as may be, prescribed.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in
sub-section (1) the fund shall also be utilized for the following purposes,
namely:–
(a) payment of expenditure in connection with the education of
the children of the terminated employees; and
(b) medical facilities, free of cost, in such a manner as may be
prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, Parliament agrees
in making any modification in the rule or Parliament agrees that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Corpus fund
for welfare
of terminated
employees.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In an era, when the space for Public Sector has substantially shrunk
and role of Private Sector has expanded, many questions relating to the
welfare of employees attached to Private Sector and employer-employee
relations have become significant. It has been observed that employees face
undiminished threat of losing jobs and live in a climate of uncertainty.
Things become worse when they are relieved from jobs without any
substantive compensation. Hundreds and thousands of people in their
midage with family responsibilities and economic liabilities face
unprecedented challenges to survive. It not only affect their lives but also
the social and cultural process too. Moreover, laying off due to change in
management policies or the Government policies or due to the losses
incurred due to inefficient management are all the events where the
employee doesn’t have much control but is the one who suffers the most.
Neo liberalisation has increased the uncertainties in the lives of people.
It also justifies inequality to an extent on the one hand and indoctrinates the
employers to become insensitive to their employees. In fact, it has revived
the rejected doctrine ‘survival of the fittest’. This concern needs to be
essentially addressed. Any welfare State cannot give primacy to profit making.
Indian Constitution aspires, idealizes and also inspires to make endeavour to
achieve equality. This cannot be treated as dead ideal. The State has to strive
for it. No economic system can endure or can yield greater good of greater
number and protect the interests of working people if it follows the blind path
of development and allows the concentration of wealth. The goal of New
India is to maximise egalitarianism and to minimise inequality. In this context
protection of economic interests and dignity of employees of private sector is
both moral and constitutional duty of the Indian State.
At present there is no law to ensure that the employers provide terminal
benefits in time and which makes provision for education, medical facilities
etc., to the families of employees who have been terminated. The Bill provides
for minimum nine months of assured income including medical benefits to
the terminated employees which will give them enough time to reassign
themselves to new employment without disturbing the existing set up of their
family. After employment a person often takes few loans to meet his need,
gets their children admitted at a certain level of school. All this cannot come
to a halt without any of his fault. The family of the employee should not
suffer because of such events. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                      DILESHWAR KAMAIT
18 July, 2022.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide
funds for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand
crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely
to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the employees who have been terminated
by the employers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Dileshwar Kamait, M.P .)