1
THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure
Code, 1973
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India, as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
2. For section 497 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:
"497. Whoever has consensual sexual intercourse with a person who he knows
or has reason to believe is the wife or husband of another person, such sexual intercourse
not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of the offence of adultery, and shall be
Bill No. 203 of 2018
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 497.
Adultery.
5 of 1860.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.".
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
3. In section 198 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, for sub-section ( 2), the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no person other than the husband or wife of
the women or man shall be deemed to be aggrieved by any offence punishable under section
497 of the said Code:
(2A) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), no person other than the husband of
the woman shall be deemed to be aggrieved by any offence punishable under section
498 of the said Code:
Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care of the woman
on his behalf at the time when such offence was committed may, with the leave of the Court,
make a complaint on his behalf.".
Amendment
of section
198.
1 of 1974.5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Supreme Court in the matter of Joseph Shine v. Union of India, on 27 September
2018, struck down section 497 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), 1860, and section 198 (2) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr. P.C.) 1973, Inter alia on the grounds of being irrational,
arbitrary and violative of articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution Section 497 of the I.P.C.,
1860, and section 198 (2) of Cr. P.C., also suffered from poor drafting, as well as being archaic
in nature. This section was drafted in completely different social and legal context that
existed 158 years ago. A plan reading of the said section reveals the discriminatory and
manifestly arbitrary application of the provision, wherein it only provides for circumstances
where such an "offence" occurred "without the consent or connivance of that man...".
However, judging by the reportage in some sections of the media, the spirit of equality
as upheld by the Supreme Court in the abovementioned judgement is unfortunately being
misinterpreted by some sections of the society, to mean that the Supreme Court intended to
condone, or encourage adultery in society. This is also unfortunately reflected in the social
media posts, wherein a wrongful impression is being created that amongst the public that
adultery is now an acceptable act that carries no penalties. The above erroneous
understanding of the said judgement could cause irreparable damage and chaos to the
institutions of marriage and family in our society, and may also have a traumatic effect on
children who could suffer the unpleasantness of such adulterous relationships, in the absence
of any sanction under the law, despite the existence of a strong moral prohibition and
preponderant cultural taboo against the act.
It is pertinent to the proposed Bill that while majority of the women in our society often
continue to have little power over their marriage, as an equal partner, the striking down of the
above provision could also embolden adulterious men to commit adultery in various situations
of power, including in social hierarchies that unfortunately continue to exists despite our
social best efforts, and the accompanying laws, including those to prevent, protect and
punish against such mental cruelty and violence against women. The legislation would help
safeguard and nurture the sacred institution of marriage and family life in India, and be in
keeping with our cultural ethos and traditions as a nation that has placed great value on
family, matrimonial promises and relationships, for thousands of years. Therefore, in order to
vindicate the stand taken by the Parliament, of constitutional morality, dignity of women and
the principles of gender equality, as also against gender equity guaranteed under the
Constitution, it is hereby proposed that "Adultery" wherein committed whether by husband
or wife, must be a punishable as a non cognizable offence under the Indian Penal Code, 1860,
and the consequent amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, be introduced to
ensure free, equal, and dignified existence of all members of society. This Bill seeks to
achieve the above objects.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI
February 9, 2017.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(NO. 45 OF 1860)
* * * *
497. Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent or connivance of that
man, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of the offence of
adultery, and shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. In such case the wife shall be punishable as an
abettor.
* * * *
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
[2  
OF  1974]
* * * *
198. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved
by the Offence:
Provided that—
(a) where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a
lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who,
according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in
public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his or
her behalf;
(b) where such person is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed
Forces of the Union under conditions which are certified by his Commanding Officer
as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to enable him to make a complaint
in person, some other person authorized by the husband in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf;
(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under section 494 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is the wife, complaint may be made on her behalf by
her father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter or by her father's or mother's brother
or sister.
(2) For the purposes of sub-sectin (1), no person other than the husband of the woman
shall be deemed to be aggrieved by any offence punishable  under section 497 or section 498
of the said Code:
Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care of the woman
on his behalf at the time when such offence was committed may, with the leave of the Court,
make a complaint on his behalf.
* * * *
Adultery.
Prosecution
for offences
against
marriage.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure
Code, 1973
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2321LS(S3)—14-12-2018.