1
THE  CROP  INSURANCE  BILL,  2015
By
SHRI AJAY MISRA 'TENI', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for insurance of crops and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Crop Insurance Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title
and extent.
Bill No.  203 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "crop" includes all agricultural crops such as paddy, wheat, gram, pulses, all
types of fruits, coconut, all types of cotton and cotton seeds and such other agricultural
commodities which may be notified, from time to time, by the Central Government, in
the Official Gazette;
(b) "essential commodity" means food and clothing;
(c) "excess crop" means crop which is produced in excess of the demand and
within the country where the return is very less compared to cost of production;
(d) "natural calamity" means drought, floods, cyclone, storm and heavy rains;
and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall formulate a scheme providing for insurance of
crops and excess of crops throughout the country.
4. The insurance scheme shall be applicable to all kinds of crops and in all seasons and
to all farmers irrespective of the size of their land holding.
5. (1) The premium in respect of insurance shall be borne by the Central Government
and the State Governments in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(2) Each farmer shall contribute towards the premium according to the size of the land
owned by him and the rate shall be such as may be prescribed.
6.  It shall be the duty of the Central Government to pay insurance amount to the
farmers for the loss of crops suffered by them due to any natural calamity or excess of crops
where the return is less.
7. (1) The insurance amount shall be paid within two months after the full assessment
of the loss suffered by the farmer is made by a Committee of Experts to be constituted by the
Central Government.
(2) The farmers shall be fully compensated for the loss suffered by them.
8. It shall be the duty of both the Central and the State Governments to provide all
essential commodities to the farmers who have submitted their claims for insurance for
their daily needs free of cost till they are paid the insurance amount for the loss of their
crops under section 6.
9. It shall be the duty of the Central Government and the State Governments to procure
excess crops from the farmers at remunerative price to be fixed by the Central Government so
as to save the farmers from losses.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to crop insurance.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without  prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Insurance
Scheme.
Insurance
scheme to be
applicable to
all farmers.
Premium.
Payment of
Insurance
amount.
Insurance
amount to be
paid within
two months.
Supply of
essential
commodities
to farmers.
Procurement
of excess
crop.
Application of
other laws to
crop insurance.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The farmers always suffer heavily due to floods, cyclone, drought and heavy rains.
It has been a common phenomenon that the standing crops are destroyed by natural
calamities every year. In most parts of the country, drought has also affected the crops.
The frequent loss of crops suffered by farmers has rendered them helpless and has even
forced them to commit suicide. Due to the loss of crops, farmers are not in a position to
repay their loans to money lenders.
In the last few years, heavy rains have damaged the crops in several parts of the
country. Drought was also experienced in several other States which resulted  in heavy
loss to farmers. Farmers have not only been victimised by natural calamities but also by
Government by way of not procuring surplus production from them. It is, therefore, necessary
to enact a legislation so that farmers can be compensated for loss of their crops due to
natural calamities.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY MISRA 'TENI'
July 3, 2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of a Crop Insurance Scheme by the
Central Government. Clause 5 provides that the premium in respect of crop insurance shall
be borne by the Central Government and the State Governments. Clause 6 provides that it
shall be duty of the Central Government to pay the farmers the insurance amount due to
loss of crops. Clause 7 provides for constitution of an Expert Committee to make assessment
of the loss suffered by the farmers. Clause 8 provides for supply of all essential commodities
to farmers for their daily needs free of cost till they are paid the insurance amount. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
The State Governments will also incur expenditure from their respective Consolidated Funds
in respect of payment of premium of crop insurance and procurement of excess crop
production. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five
hundred crore from the Consolidated  Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for insurance of crops and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ajay Misra 'Teni', M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1439LS(S3)—21-07-2015.