As Intropucep mv Lok Sasa
1 GDEC 391

Bill No. 204 of 1991
See renee

THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY
\ BILL, 1991

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
PART I

PRELIMINARY
‘CLAUSES

. Short title and commencement.

N

. Definitions,
PART I
LecIsLAtIVe ASSEMBLY

Legislative Assembly and its composition.
Qualification for membership of Legislative Assembly.
Duration of Legislative Assembly.

aoe we

Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.

Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution
for his removal from office is under consideration.

en

2

Right of Lieutenant Governor to address and send messages to
Legislative Assembly.

ड़

. Special address by the Lieutenant Governor.
11. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly,
12. Oath or affirmation by members.

13. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum.

14, Vacation of seats.
15. Disqualifications for membership.
16. Disqualification on ground of defection.

17. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation
or when not qualified or when disqualified.



ai
Chases
18. Powers, privileges, etc., cf members.
19. Salaries and allowances of members.
20. Exemption of property of the Union from taxation,

21. Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative न्‍
"respect to certain matters.

22, Special provisions as to financial Bills.
23. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.

24. Assent to Bills.

25. Bills reserved for consideration.

26. Requirements as to sanction, ete.

27. Annual financial statement.

28. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates.
29. Appropriation Bills.

30. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.

31. Votes on account.

32. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative
Assembly.

33. Rules of procedure.

34, Official language or languages of the Capital and language or
languages to be used in Legislative Assembly thereof,

35, Language to be used for Bills, Acts, ete.
36. Restrictions on discussion in the Legislative Assembly.

gs

37. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative Assembly.
PART IIT

DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES

38. Election Commission to delimit constituencies.

39. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders
up-to-date.

40. Elections to the Legislative Assembly.
PART IV

CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO LIFUTENANT GoVERNOR AND MINISTERS”

41. Matters in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion.

42, Advice by Ministers.

43. Other provisions as to Ministers.


cp)
CLAUSES

44, Conduct of business.

45. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information
to the Lieutenant Governor, etc.

PART V

MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
46. Consolidated Fund of the Capital.
47. Contingency Fund of the Capital.
48. Audit reports. \ हि
49. Relation of Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers to President.
50. Authorisation of expenditure by President.
51.

Contracts and suits.

52. Power of President to remove difficulties.

53, Laying of rules before Legislative Assembly.
54. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.
55. Repeal of Act 19 of 1966.

THE SCHEDULE.


Bill No. 204 of 1991
reer Ser ama ५

THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY
BILL, 1991
A
BILL
to supplement the provisions of the Constitution relating to the Legislative

Assembly and a Council of Ministers for the National Capital Territory
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

PART I

PRELIMINARY
5 1, (1) This Act may be called the Government of National Capital
Territory Act, 1991.

(2) It shall come into farce on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions
10 of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement

of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of
that provision.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “article” means an article of the Constitution;

Short
title and
com-
mence-
ment,

Defini-
tions.


Legisla-
tive As-
sembly
and its
compo-
sition.

Qualifi-
cation for
member-
ship of
Legisla-
tive As-
sembly.

2

(09) “assembly constituency” means a constituer
under this Act for the purpose of elections to the Le
Assembly; ;

(c) “Capital” means the National Capital Territory;

(d) “Election Commission” means the Election Comm
referred to in article 324;

(०) “Legislative Assembly” means the Legislative Assembly
the National Capital Territory;
({) “Scheduled Castes”, in relation to the Capital, means st
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes,
or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be Scheduled Castes
relation to the Capital.

PART IL
Lecrstative ASSEMBLY

3. (/) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled
by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies shall be
seventy,

(2) For the purpose of clections to the Legislative Assembly, the Capital
shall be divided into single-member assembly constituencies in accordance
with the provisions of Part III in such manner that the population of each of
the Constituencies shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the
Capital.

(3) Seats shail be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the Legislative
Assembly, and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as neacly as may
be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assenibly as the
population of the Scheduled Castes in the Capital bears to the total popula
tion of the Capital and the provisions of article 334 shall apply to such
reservation,

Explanation. —In this sub-section, the expression “population” means the
population ay ascertained in the Inst preceding census of which the relevant
figures have been published:

Provided that where such figures have not been published, then for the
purposes of elections for the constitution of the first Legistative Assembly
under this Act, the provisional figures uf the population of the Cupital as pub-
lished in relation to the 1991 census shall be deemed to be the population of
the Capital,

4. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the
Legislative Assembly unless he—

(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before some
person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath
or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Schedule;

(b) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and

(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed i
that behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.


3

5. The Legislative Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue Duration
for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer, of Legis-
and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a lative
dissolution of the Assembly: feo

Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency
issued under clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, be extended by the
President by order for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not
extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclama-
tion has ceased to operate.

10 6 (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall, from time to time, summon the Sessions
Legislative Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six of Legis-
months shal] not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the _ltive
date appointed for its first sitting in the next session. ae

sembly,

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may, from time to time — Naat

5g (a) prorogue the Assembly; es
(b) dissolve the Assembly.

7. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two.
members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker nq
thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes Deputy

20 vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member to be Speaker or Speaker

Deputy Speaker, as the case may be. see
lative
(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the

Legislative Assembly— sembly.

(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the
25 Assembly;

(b) may, at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if
such member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such
member is the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and

(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
39 Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the
Assembly:

Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be
moved unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the inten-
tion to move the resolution:

Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the
Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first
meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution.

(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall

be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker

40 is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

3:

a

(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the
‘Assembly, the Deputy Speaker, or, if he is also absent, such person as


Speaker
or De-
puty .
Speaker
not to
preside
while a
resolu-
tion for
his re-
moval
from
office is
under
conside-
ration.

Right of
Licute-
nant Gov-

ernor to
address
and send
mes-
sages to

Legisla-
tive As-
sembly.
Special
address
by the
Lieute-
nant Gov-
‘ernor.

may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly, 6
such person is present, such other person as may be d
Assembly, shall act as Speaker.

6) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker
Legislative Assembly such salaries and allowances as may be
fixed by the Legislative Assembly by law and, until provision in
half is so made, such salaries and allowances as the Lieutenant
may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.

8. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolutior
for the removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration,
Speaker, or while any resolution for the removal of the Deputy 8
from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall
though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub-section (4) o}
section 7 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in
relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the case may be, the
Deputy Speaker is absent.

(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to
take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly while any reso-
lution for his removal from office is under consideration in the Assembly
and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 13, be entitled to vote only
in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during
such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.

9. (1) The Lieutenant Governor may address the Legislative Assembly
and for that purpose require the attendance of members.

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may send messages to the Assembly 25
whether with respect to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or otherwise,
and when a message is so sent, the Assembly shall with all convenient
despatch consider any matter required by the message to be taken into
consideration.

10. (1) At the commencement of the first session after each general 3
election to the Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the
first session of each year, the Lieutenant Governor shall address the
Legislative Assembly and inform it of the causes of its summons.

(2) Provision shall be made by rules to be made by the Assembly
regulating its procedure for the allotment of time for discussion of the 35
matters referred to in such address.

वा. Every Minister shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to
take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly and to speak in,
and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the
Legislative Assembly of which he may be named a member, but shall 40
not by virtue of this section be entitled to vote.

12. Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before taking
his seat, make and subscribe before the Lieutenant Governor, or some
person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according
to the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule.


5

13, (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions at any
sitting of the Legislative Assembly shall be determined by a majority
of votes of the members present and voting other than the Speaker or
person acting as such.

5. (2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first
instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vole in the case of an
equality of votes.

(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding

any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the

10 Legislative Assembly shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered

subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do, sat or
voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative Assembly
shall be one-third of the total number of members of the Assembly.

15 (3) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there
is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker, or person acting as
such, either to adjourn the Assembly or to suspend the meeting until
there is a quorum.

14, (1) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of the
20 Legislative Assembly and if a person is chosen a member both of Parlia-
ment and of such Assembly, then, at the expiration of such period as
ig specified in or under the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and
the rules made by the President under clause (2) of article 101 and clause
(2) of article 190, that person’s seat in Parliament shall become vacant,

25 unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Legislative Assembly.

(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly—

(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in section
15 or section 16 for membership of the Assembly, or

(0) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the
30 Speaker and his resignation is accepted by the Speaker,

his seat shall thereupon become vacant:

Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in clause

(७), if from the information received or otherwise and after making such

inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker is satisfied that such resignation is
35 not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.

(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly
is without permission of the Assembly absent from all meetings thereof,
the Assembly may declare his seat vacant:

Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days, no account
40 shall be taken of any period during which the Assembly is prorogued
or is adjourned for more than four consecutive days.

15. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being, a member of the Legislative Assembly —

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of
45 India or the Government of any State or the Government of any
Union territory other than an office declared by law made by

Voting
in As-
sembly,
power of
Assembly
to act
notwith-
standing:
vacancies
and

quorum.

Vacation
of seats.

Disquali-
fications
for mem-
bership,


Disquali-
fication
on ground
of defee-
tion.

Powers,

privileges,

ete, of
snembers.

6

Parliament or by the Legislature of any State or by
Assembly of the Capital or of any other Union territory 1
qualify its holder; or

(0) if he is for the time being disqualified for being choser
for being, a member of either House of Parliament under the
sions of sub-clause (9), sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d) of cla
(1) of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance of that arti

(2) For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be deem
hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the Govern
of any State or the Government of any Union territory by reason
that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State or Union
territory. fi

(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the Legislat
Assembly has become disqualified for being such a member under
provisions of sub-section (1), the question shall be referred for the deci-

sion of the President and his decision shall be final.

(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Presid
shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall 2
according to such opinion.

16. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall, 20
subject to the necessary modifications (including modifications for con-
struing references therein to the Legislative Assembly of a State, article
188, article 194 and article 212 as references, respectively, to the Legisla-
tive Assembly, section 12, section 18 and section 37 of this ‘Act), apply to
and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly as they apply
to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State,
and accordingly: —

(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed to
form part of this Act; and

(b) a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the 30
Legislative Assembly if he is so disqualified under the said Tenth
Schedule as so modified.

17. If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly
before he has complied with the requirements of section 12 or when he
knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for membership 35
thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or
votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due
to the Union.

18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and
standing orders regulating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly, —
there shall be freedom of speech in the Legislative Assembly.


Ke

(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any
proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given
by him in the Assembly or any committee thereof and no person shall
be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority of

5 such Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings,

(8) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the
Legislative Assembly and of the members and the committees thereof
shall be such as are for the time being enjoyed by the House of the People
and its members and committees.

10 (® The provisions of sub-sections (7), (2) and (3) shall apply in re-
lation to persons who by virtue of this Act have the right to speak in, and
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly
or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of that
Assembly.

is _ 19. Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive such
salaries and allowances as may from time fo time be deiermined by the Legis.
lative Assembly by law and until provision in that behalf is so made, such
salaries and allowances as the Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of
the President, by order determine,

20 20. The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament inay
by law otherwise provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by ot
under any law made by the Legislative Assembly or by or under any
other law in force in the Capital:

Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by law

25 otherwise provides, prevent any authority within the Capital from levying
any tax on any property of the Union to which such property was
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution liable or
treated as liable, so long as that tax continues to be levied in the Capital.

21. (1) The provisions of article 286, article 287 and article 288 shall
30 apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with
Tespect to any of the matters referred to in those articles as they apply
in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with respect

to those matters.

(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modifica-
tions, apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly
with respect to any of the matters referred to in that article as they
apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with
respect to those matters.

3:

a

22, (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved
40 in, the Legislative Assembly except on the recommendation of the
Licutenant Governor, if such Bill or amendment makes provision for any

of the following matters, namely: —

(०) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation
of any tax;

Salaries
and
allow~
ances of
members.

Exemp-
tion of
property
of the
Union
from
taxation.

Restric.
tions on.
laws
Passed by
Legislative
Assembly
with res=
Pect to
certain
matters,

Special

provi-
sions as to
financial
Bills.


Proce-
dure as to
Japeing
of Bills.

Aisent to
Bills.

(b) the amendment of the law with respect to any
gig wines be undertaken by the Gor
tal; .

(०) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated F
the Capital; ,

(d) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure
on the Consolidated Fund of the Capital or the increasing
amount of any such expenditure;

(e) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated
of the Capital or the custody or issue of such money:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this su
section for the moving of an amendment making provision fer the reduc
tion or abolition of any tax.

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision f
any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the
position of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or pay
ment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason tha
it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regula-
tion of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would in-
volve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Capital shall not
be passed by the Legislative Assembly unless the Lieutenant Governor
has recommended to that Assembly the consideration of the Bill.

23. (1) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by
reason of the prorogation of the Assembly.

(2) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly shall
on a dissolution of the Assembly.

24. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly,
be presented to the Lieutenant Governor and the Lieutenant v
shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds
therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the
dent:

Provided that the Lieutenant Governor may. as soon as possible

Money Bill together with a message requesting that the Assembly w
reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof, and, in parti
will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendment
may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned,
sembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is p
with or without amendment and presented to the Lieutenant
assent, the Lieutenant Governor shall declare either that he
Bill or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the


Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor shall not assent to,
but shall reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which,—

(a) in the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor would, if it became
law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger
5 the position which that Court is, by the Constitution, designed to
fill; or
(b) the President may, by order, direct to be reserved for his
consideration; or

(c) relates to matters referred to in sub-section (5) of section 7
10 or section 19 or section 34 or sub-section (3) of section 43.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section and section 25, a Bill
shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing
with all or any of the matters specified in sub-section (1) of section 22
or any matter incidental to any of those matters and, in either case, there

15 is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative As-
sembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

25. When a Bill is reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the con-
sideration of the President, the President shall declare either that he
assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom:

20 Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may
direct the Lieutenant Governor to return the Bill to the Legislative As-
sembly together with such a message as is mentioned in the first proviso
to section 24 and, when a Bill is so returned, the Assembly shall reconsider
it accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of

35 such message and, if it is again passed by the Assembly with or with-
out amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for his
consideration.

26. No Act of the Legislative Assembly, and no provision in any

such Act, shall be invalid by reason only that some previous sanction

30 or recommendation required by this Act was not given, if assent to that

Act was given by the Lieutenant Governor, or, on being reserved by the

Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the President, by the
President.

27. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall in respect of every financial
year cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous
sanction of the President, a statement of the estimated receipts and ex-
penditure of the Capital for that year, in this Part referred to as the
“annual financial statement”.

35

(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial
40 statement shall show separately—

(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this
Act as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the
Capital; and

Bills
reserved
for con-
sidera-
tion.

Require-
ments as
tosanc-
tion, ete.

Annual
financial
state-
f

ment.


Proce-
dure in
Legisla-
tive As-
sembly

respect
to esti-
mates,

Appro-
priation
Bills.

10
A *
(७) the sums required to meet other expenditure [|
be made from the Consolidated Fund of the Capital,

and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from.
expenditure,

<3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time
in force, the following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on
Consolidated Fund of the Capital: —

(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Lieutenant Governo
and other expenditure relating to his office as determined by
President by general or special order;

(b) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the
Capital from the Consolidated Fund of India including interest,
sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expendi-
ture connected therewith;

(c) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy 1:
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly;

(d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of
Judges of the High Court of Delhi;

(e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or
award of any court or arbitral tribunal; 20

(f) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by
law made by Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly to be so
charged.

28. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged
upon the Consolidated Fund of the Capital shall not be submitted to 25.
the vote of the Legislative Assembly, but nothing in this sub-section shall
be construed as preventing the discussion in the Legislative Assembly of
any of those estimates.

(2) So much of the said estimates as relates te other expenditure
shall be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative 3y
Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent,
or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject
to a reduction of the amount specified therein.

(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommen-
dation of the Lieutenant Governor. ध्

29. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have
been made by the Legislative Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill
to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of the
Capital of all moneys required to meet—

(a) the grants so made by the Assembly, and
(6) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of th

Capital but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in ४
statement previously laid before the Assembly.


i

(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative
Assembly which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the
destination of any grant so made or of varying, the amount of any expen-
diture charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Capital and the decision
of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under
this sub-section shall be final.

5

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall be with-
drawn from the Consolidated Fund of the Capital except under appropria-
tion made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

10 30. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall, —

(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance
with the provisions of section 29 to be expended for a particular
service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for
the purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the

15. current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure
upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial state-
ment for that year, or

(०) if any money has been spent on any service during a
financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and
20 for that year,

cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous

sanction of the President, another statement showing the estimated

amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to the Legislative

Assembly with such previous sanction a demand for such excess, as the
25 case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in rela-
tion to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any
law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Con-
solidated Fund of the Capital to meet such expenditure or the grant in

30 respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the annual
financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a
demand for a grant and the law to be made for the authorisation of
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital to
meet such expenditure or grant.

35 _ 31, (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of. this
Part, the Legislative Assembly shall have power to make any grant in
advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any finan-
cial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in section
28 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance

40 with the provisions of section 29 in relation to that expenditure and the
Legislative Assembly shall have power to authorise by law the with-
drawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the Capital for the
purposes for which the said grant is made.

(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation
4% to the making of any grant under sub-section (1) or to any law to be

Supple-
mentary,
additional
or excess
grants.

Votes on
account.


of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in
financial statement and the law to be made for the 1
appropriation of moneys, out of the Consolidated Fund of
meet such expenditure.

Authori- 32, Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions
sationof Part, the Lieutenant Governor may authorise such expenditure

Fae Consolidated Fund of the Capital as he deems necessary for a
ing its more than six months beginning with the date of the consti
sanction Consolidated Fund of the Capital, pending the sanction of such
by Legis- ture by the Legislative Assembly.
lative As-
sembly.
Rules of 33. (1) The Legislative Assembly may make rules for
procedure. subject to the provisions of this Act, its procedure and the
its business
Provided that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after co
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and with the approval
President, make rules—
(a) for securing the timely completion of financial busi
(b) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of
in, the Legislative Assembly in relation to any financial mat
any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Con 1६
of the Capital:
(c) for prohibiting the discussion of, or
on, any matter which affects the r
(2) Until rules are made er s on (1), । h
dure and standing orders with respect to the Legisl
the State of Uttar Pradesh in force immediately before t!
ment of this Act shall have effect in relation to the Legislative As
subject to such modificaticns an’ adaptations as may be m
by the Lieutenant Governor. 1
Omeial 34. (1) The Legislative Assembly may by law

language ore of the languages in use in the Capital or
or lan- _ language or languages to be used for all or any of the

guages
tote of the Capital;

कल Provided that the President may by order direct—
ae (® that the official language of the Union shall
guages to such of the official purposes of the Capital as may |
be used order:

in Legis-

lative As-

sembly

thereof.


13
(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted throughout
the Capital or such part thereof for such of the official purposes of
the Capital as may be specified in the order, if the President is
satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of the Capital
desires the use of that other language for all or any of such purposes.

(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly shall be transacted in the
official language or languages of the Capital or in Hindi or in Engi

Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or person acting
as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately

10 express himself in any of the languages aforesaid to address the Assembly
in his mother-tongue.

35. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34, until Parliament by
law otherwise provides, the authoritative texts—

(०) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved
15 in the Legislative Assembly;

(b) of all Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly; and

(० of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under any
law made by the Legislative Assembly,

shall be in the English language:

20 Provided that where the Legislative Assembly has prescribed any lang-

uage other than the English language for use in Bills introduced. in, or Acts
passed by. the Legislative Assembly or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-
law issued under any law made by the Legislative Assembly, a translation of

the same in the English language published under the authority of the
25 Lieutenant Governor in the Official Gazette shail be deemed to be the autho-

ritative text thereof in the English language.

36. No discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly with res-
pect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme

Court or of a High Court
in the discharge of his duties.

30 37. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall

not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers
are vested by or under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of
business, or for maintaining order in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject

35 to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those
powers.

Language
to be used
for Bills,
Acts, ete.

Restriction
on diseus-
sion in

the
Legislative
Assembly.
Courts
not

to inuire
into
Proceedings
of
Legislative
Assembly.


* Election
Commis.

sion to

~ delimit ——
constitu-
encies.

Power of
Election
Commis-
sion to
maintain
delimi-
tation
orders
up-to-
date,

Elections
tot i
Legisla-
tive
Assem-
bly.

14
PART IIL

DELIMITATION oF CONSTITUENCIES

38, (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manver |
distribute the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly under
-single-member territorial constituencies 2nd delimit them having
following provisions, namely:— 3

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be
such manner that the ratio between the population of each of
tituencies and the total population of the Capital, is the same;

(0) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the
Castes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the pr
tion of their population to the total population is comparatively large.

(2) The Election Commission shall—

(@) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in
Official Gazette and iso in such other manner as the Commission may
consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in
relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the pro-
posals will be further considered by it;

(©) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been
received by it before the date so specified;

(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may haye
been received by it before the date so specified, determined by one or
more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or
orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publica-
tion, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be 95
called in question in any court.

39, The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification
in the Official Gazette, —

(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under
section 38 or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or
omission; and

(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division
mentioned in any such order are or is altered, make such amend-
ments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such
order up-to-date.

40. (1) For the purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly,
a general election will be held as soon as may be, after the delimitation
of all the assembly constituencies under section 38.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Lieutenant Governor shi
by one or more notifications published in the Official Gazette, call पा
all the said assembly constituencies to elect members in accordance wii
the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and of
rules and orders made or issued thereunder as applicable under
section (3).


15

43 of 1950, (3) The Representation of the People Act, 1950, the Representation
43 of 1951. of the People Act, 1951, the rules and orders made or issued under the
said Acts and all other laws for the time being in force relating to
elections shall apply with necessary modifications (including modifica-
5 tions for construing references therein to a State, State Government
and Governor as including references to the Capital, Government of the
Capital and Lieutenant Governor, respectively) to, and in relation to, the
general election referred to in sub-section (1).

PART IV

1C CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS

41. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall act in his discretion in a
matter—

(i) which falls outside the purview of the powers conferred on
the Legislative Assembly but in respect of which powers or functions
15 are entrusted or delegated to him by the President; or

(i) in which he is required by or under any law to act in his
discretion or to exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions.

(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a

matter as respects which the Lieutenant Governor is by or under any

20 law required to act in his discretion, the decision of the Lieutenant Gover-
nor thereon shall be final.

(3) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a
matter as respects which the Lieutenant Governor is required by any
law to exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions, the decision of

25 the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

42, The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered
by Ministers to the Lieutenant Governor shall not be inquired into in
any court. ॥

43, (1) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Lieutenant Gov-
30 ernor shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according
to the forms set out for the purpose in the Schedule.

(2) A Minister who, for any period of six consecutive months, is not
a member of the Legislative Assembly shall, at the expiration of that
period, cease to be-a Minister.

(3) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legis-
lative Assembly may from time to time by law determine, and until the
Legislative Assembly so determines, shall be determined by the Lieutenant
Governor with the approval of the President.

35

Matters
in which
Lieute-
nant
Governor
to act in
his dis-
cretion,

Advice
by
Ministers.

Other
provi-
sions as
to Minis-
ters.


Conduct
of busi-
ness,

Duties of
Chief
Minister
as res-

nor, ete.

Consoli-
dated
Fund
of the
Capital.

16

44. (1) The President shall make rules— हु | 3

(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers in SO :
is business with respect to which the Lieutenant Governor is
ed to act on the aid and advice of his Council of Ministers;

(0) for the more convenient transaction of business win
Ministers, including the procedure to be adopted in the case
difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Governor and {
Council of Ministers or a Minister.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive action of
the Lieutenant Governor whether taken on the advice of his Ministers or

otherwise shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Lieutenant _
Governor. :

(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name
of the Lieutenant Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as
may be specified in rules to be made by the Lieutenant Governor and
the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall
not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instru-
ment made or executed by the Lieutenant Governor.

45. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister—

(a) to communicate to the Lieutenant Governor all decisions of
the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs
of the Capital and proposals for legislation; :

00

(0) to furnish such information relating to the administration
of the affairs of the Capital and proposals for legislation as Lieutenant
Governor may call for; and 25

(c) if the Lieutenant Governor so requires, to submit for the
consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a

decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been con-
sidered by the Council.

PART V
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

46. (1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues receiv.
ed in the Capital by the Government of India or. the Lieutenant Governor
in relation to any matter with respect to which the Legislative Assembly
has power to make Jaws, and all grants made and all loans advanced to
the Capital from the Consolidated Fund of India and all moneys received
by the Capital in repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated Fund»
to be entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the National Capital Territory”
(referred to in this Act as the Consolidated Fund of the Capital).

be appropriated except in accordance with and for the purposes and
the manner provided in this Act, '


17

(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital, the pay-
ment of moneys into such Fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom
and all other matters connected with or ancillary to those matters shall
be regulated by rules made by the Lieutenant Governor with the approval

Sof the President.

47, (1) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the
nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency Fund of the
National Capital Territory” into which shall be paid from and out of
the Consolidated Fund of the Capital such sums as may, from time to

10 time, be determined by law made by the Legislative Assembly; and
the said Fund shall be held by the Lieutenant Governor to enable advances
to be made by him out of such Fund,

(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund referred

to in sub-section (1) except for the purposes of meeting unforeseen

15 expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislative
Assembly under appropriations made by law.

(3) The Lieutenant Governor may make rules regulating al] matters
connected with or ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys
into, and the withdrawal of moneys from the aforesaid Contingency Fund.

20 48. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
relating to the accounts of the Capital for any period subsequent to the
date referred to in sub-section (1) of section 46 shall be submitted to
the Lieutenant Governor who shall cause them to be laid before the
Legislative Assembly.

25 49. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Lieutenant Governor and
his Council of Ministers shall be under the general control of, and comply
with such particular directions, if any, as may from time to time be
given by, the President.

30 50. Where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved or its functioning
as such Assembly remains suspended, on account of an order made by
the President under article 239AB, it shall be competent for the President
to authorise when the House of the People is not in session expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of the Capital pending the sanction of such
expenditure by Parliament.

3551. For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that—

(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of the
Capital are contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of
the Union; and

(b) all suits and proceedings in connection with the admi
40 tration of the Capital shall be instituted by or against the Govegn-
ment of India.

Contin-
gency
Fund of
tae
Capital.

Audit
reports,

Relation
of
Lieute-
nant
Governor
and his
Ministers
to
President.

Authorisa-
tion of
expendi-
ture by
President.

Contracts
and
suits.


difficulties,

Laying
of rules
before
Legisla-
tive

bly.
Amend-
ment of
section.
27A of
Act 43
of 1950.

18

52. (1) If any difficulty arises in relation to the
provisions of any law repealed by this Act or in
provisions of this and in particular in t
of the Legislative Assembly, the President may by order do an
not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution or
hich appear to him to be necessary or expqdient for the
removing the difficulty:

expiry of’three years from the date, of constitution of the first
Assembly.

(0) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid befc
House of Parliament.

53. Every rule made by the Lieutenant Governor under this Act
be laid, as soon as it is made, before the Legislative Assembly. <

54. In section 27A of the Representation of People Act, 1950,
section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely

“(3) The electoral college for the Union territory of D
consist of the elected members of the Legislative A:
tuted for that territory under the Government of N
Territory Act, 1991.”.

55. The Delhi Administration Act, 1966 is hereby


THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 4, 12 and 43)
ForMs OF OATHS OR AFFIRMATIONS
ji

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election
to the Legislative Assembly:—

"पु, A. B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat
swear in the name of God
in the Legislative Assembly do ———_—————_—— that I
solemnly affirm
will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as
by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity
of India.” _~

IL

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of tlie Legisla-
tive Assembly:—

“J, A. 8., having been elected a member of the Legislative
swear in the name of God

Assembly do that I will bear true faith

solemnly affirm

and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established,
that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that T
will faithfully discharge the duty upon which | am about to enter.”

TIL
Form of oath of office for a member of the Countil of Ministers: —
swear in the name of God
“TJ, A. B. do ———_—_—_——__— that I will bear true
solemnly affirm
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established,
that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I
will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister,
and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with

the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or
ill-will.”

IV

Form of oath of secrecy for a member of the Council of Ministers: —

swear in the name of God
“1, A. B., do ————__———— that I will not directly
solemnly affirm
or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any
matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become
known to me as a Minister except as may be required for the due
discharge of my duties as such Minister.”

19


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Under the new article 239-AA proposed to be inserted by the 3

Council of Ministers will be established for the National Territory.
Clause (7)(a) of the said article provides that Parliament may by law
make provisions for giving effect to, or supplementing the provisions ००००
tained in, that article and for all matters incidental or consequential
thereto, ॥ |

2, In pursuance of the said clause, this Bill seeks to make necessary,
provisions in respect of the Legislative Assembly and its functioning, in-
cluding provisions relating to the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, qualifications
or disqualifications for membership, duration, summoning, prorogation or
dissolution of the House, privileges, legislative procedures, procedure in
financial matters, address by the Lieutenant Governor to the Legislative As-
sembly, constitution of Consolidated Fund for the National Capital Terri-
tory, Contingency Fund, ete. These are on the lines of the provisions made
in respect of a Legislative Assembly of a:State with suitable modifica- |
tions. -

3. Under the Bill the delimitation of constituencies will be made by
the Election Commission in accordance with the procedure set out
therein. Having regard to the special conditions prevailing in Delhi, it
has been provided that in respect of the first constitution of the As-
sembly, such delimitation will be on the basis of provisional figures of
population in relation to 1991 census, if final figures have not been |
published by then. i | |

4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above proposals,

New Detar; 8. 8. CHAVAN.

The 12th December, 1991.



Notes on clauses

Clause 3 provides that the total number of seats in the Legislative
‘Assembly of the Capital to be filled by persons chosen by direct elections
shall be 70. Seats shall also be reserved for Scheduled Castes in the
‘Assembly, There will be single-member assembly constituencies on the
basis of population as defined in this clause.

Clause 4 provides for the qualifications of the members of the Legisla-
tive. Assembly.

Clause 5 provides that the normal duration of the Assembly will be
5 years.

Clause 6 makes provision for the sessions of the Legislative Assem-
bly, its prorogation and dissolution.

Clauses 7 and 8 make provisions for the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.

Clauses 9 and 10 provide for the right of the Lieutenant Governor to
address and send messages to the Legislative Assembly as well as special
address by the Lieutenant Governor.

Clauses 11 to 14 provide for the right of Ministers as respects Legis~
lative Assembly, voting in Assembly, vacation. of seats, etc.

Clauses 15 to 17 relate to disqualification for membership and penalty
for sitting and voting before making oath.

Clauses 18 and 19 provide for the powers, privileges and salaries and
pllowances of the members.

Clause 20 provides for exemption of property of the Union from
taxation.

Clauses 21 to 32 relate to certain restrictions on the powers of the
Legislative Assembly to make laws in respect of certain matters, special
provisions as to Financial Bills, the procedure as to lapsing of Bills,
‘assent to Bills, Reservation of Bills for President's consideration, previous
sanction or recommendation to Bills, Annual Financial Statement Appro-
priation Bills and grants, ete.

Clauses 33 to 37 provide for rules of procedure for regulating the

procedure and conduct of ‘pusiness of the Legislative Assembly, official
language, etc.

Clauses 38 to 40 provide for delimitation of the constituencies by the
Election Commission on the basis of the procedure generally followed by
the Delimitation Commission, with suitable modifications.

Clause 41 sets out the matters in which Lieutenant Governor is to
act in his discretion.

21


22

Clauses 42 ard 43 contain the normal
advice by the Ministers and other pro
allowances of Ministers,

Clause 44 relates to the rule making power
allocation of business to the Ministers and for more
of business with the Ministers.

Clause 45 provides for duties of Chief
nishing of information to the Lieutenant Governor,

Clauses 46 to 48 relate to the Consolidated
Fund of the Capital and the audit reports.

Clause 49 provides for relation of Lieutenant
Ministers to President.

Clause 50 relates to authorisation of
~~

‘ -? —
Clause 52 provides for the powers of the President to :
ties in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 53 provides for laying of rules made by the Lieutenant Gov
before the Legislative Assembly.

Clause 54 seeks to amend section 27A of the Representation
People Act, 1950 to provide for electoral college for the Council of S
in relation to the Capital.

Clause 55 seeks to repeal the Delhi Administration Act, 1966.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Legislative Assembly
for the National Capital Territory. Clauses 7(5), 19 and 43(3) relate to
payment of salaries and allowances to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker,
Members of the Legislature and the Ministers. The expenditure on such
salaries and allowances and other expenditure of incidental nature such
‘as on the additional staff for the Legislature and Council of Ministers
will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the National Capital Territory.
On a rough estimate, the expenditure on the salaties and allowances, etc.
is expected to be about Rs. 20 crores per annum. But there would also be
a corresponding saving on the abolition of the Metropolitan Council of
Delhi to the extent of about Rs. 10 crores.

2, Clause 38 provides for the delimitation of seventy single member
territorial constituencies for the proposed Assembly of the National
Capital Territory. For this purpose, 8 non-recurring expenditure of about
Rs. 50,000 is likely to be incurred. This expenditure will be met from
the Consolidated Fund of India.

3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a
recurring or non-recurring nature.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION |

Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of ४!
Capital to make rules, subject to the provisions of this Bill, for regula
its procedure and conduct of its business, It also provides that
Lieutenant Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of

rules for securing the completion of financial business, regulating th
procedure and conduct of business ia the Legislative Assembly in relation
to any financial matter or to any Bill for appropriation of monies 0
of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital and for prohibiting the dis
sion of or asking any questions which affect the discnarge of the func-
tions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as he is required to act in his
discretion, j '

2, Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the President to make rules
garding allocatiun of business to Ministers and transaction of such
ness. It further empowers the I1eutenant Governor to make r
prohibiting the manner of authenticating the orders issued in his nam

3. Clauses 46 (3) aid 47(3) of the Bill provide that the Lieutenant |
Governor may make rules regard:ng the custody, etc., of the Co’ s
dated Fund of the Capital and the Contingency Fund of the Capital.

4, Clause 52 of the Bil empowers the President to issue orders
removing any diificulty in giving effect to the provisions of this Bul
in particular in relation to the constitution ae Legislative

5. The matters mentioned
difficult to provide for them r
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PgopLe AcT, 1950
(43 oF 1950)

* * a * *

27A. (1) * की * * Constitu-

tion of
हा (3) The electoral college for the Union territory of Delhi shall consist electoral
of the elected members of the Metropolitan Council constituted for that colleges

a A pa ™ for the
19 of 1966. territory under the Delhi Administration Act, 1966. anes

* * * * * seats in
the Coun-
cil of
States
alloted
to Union
territories.

25


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to supplement the provisions of the Constitution relating to the
lative Assembly and a Council of Ministers for the National
Territory and for matters connected therewith or in n

(Shri 5. 8. Chavan, Minister of Home Affairs)