5 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK S.U;HA ON 
BiJI No. 204 of 1980 
11I'S NATIONAL SECURITY BILL, 1980 
• 
B~ 
.,1,.. 'liz; tor ~""'e. tiel.ention in "lain cases and tor matters connected 
tht:rttrlllh. 
' .... itd.n .. " "yP~t in.the ~y-first Year of the Republic of Inma 
as foUows:-
;~I ";1 (J}'IhiI'ACJtI.,be·callcd.the National Security Act, 1980. Short 
title. 
(2) It ~xt~nas to. th" whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. and 
~. In this Act, unless the con.text otherwise requires,-
extent. 
Defini-
tion&. 
(q) ':.wp.{Qpriate Government" means, as respects a detention order 
':0~'''Y.~ ~ntral. Government or a person detained under such order, 
.• ~ ~Qpy~~Pt, and as respects a detention order made by a 
,,Sj~I;,OQye.r-mC;ot or .J>y an officer subordinate to a State Government or 
10. .!el!PQCts. ~ pt:il'~Qn dc::tained under such order, the State Government; 

Power to 
make 
orden 
detaining 
certaia 
persons. 
(b) "detention order" means an order made under sect~n 3; 
(c) "foreigner" has the same meaning as in the Foreigners Act, 1946; 31 of 1946. 
(d) "person" includes a foreigner; 
(e) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, meaBs the 
administrator thereof. S 
3. (1) The Central Government or tke State Government may,-
(a) if satisfied with respect te any person that with a view to preventing 
him from actiag in any manner prejudicial to the defence of India, the 
relations of India with foreign powers, or the security of India, or 
(b) if satisfied with respect to any foreigner that with a view to rep- 10 
lating his continued presence in India or with a view to malditg arransements 
for his expulsion from India, 
it is necessary so to do, make an order directing that such person be detained. 
(2) The Central Government or the State Government may, if satisfied with 
respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from actine in any IS 
manner prejudicial to the security of the State or from acting in any manner 
prejudicial to the mailltegance of public order Or from acting in any manner 
prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the cammunity 
it is necessary so to do, make an order directing that such person be detained. 
Explanation.-For the !purposes of this sub-section, "acting in any manner 20 
prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community" 
does not include "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies 
of commodities essential to the community" as defined in the Explanation to sub-
section (1) of section 3 of the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance 
of Supplies of Essential CommodiMes Act, 1980, and accordingly, no order of 2S 7 of 1980. 
detention shall be made under this Act on any ground on which an order of 
detention may be made under that Act. 
(3) If, having regard to the circumstances prevailing or likely to prevail 
in any area within the local limits of the jurisdiction of a District Magistrate or 
a Commissi.ner of Police, the State Government is satisfied that it is hl.MRlY 30 
so to do. it may, by order in writing, direct, that during such period as may be 
specified in the dreier, such District Magistrate or Conunissioner of Police may 
also, if satisfied as provide,d in sub-section (2), exercise the powers cOdlirred 
by the said sub-section: 
Provided that the period specifie" in an order made by the State G6ft.rn. 35 
ment uoder this sub-section shall not, in the first instance, exceed three months, 
but the State Government may, if satisfied as aforesaid that it is necessary so 
to do, amend such order to extend such· period from. time to time by any period 
not exceeding three months at anyone time. 
(4) When any order is made under this section by an ofIicer mentianed 40 
in sub-sectioA (3), he shall forthwith report the fact t& the State OoverDment 
to which he is subordinate together with the grounda on ~ch the order baa 
been made and such other particulars 88, in his opiDion, have a beariilg oa the 
matter, and no such order shall remain in farce for more than twe1Vedaya after 
the making thereof unless, in the meantime, it has been approved by tho State 45 
Government: 

2 of 1974. 
20f 1974. 
3 
~lovided that where under section 8 the grouDds of detention are com-
mumcated by the officer making the order after five days but not later than tell 
days. ~ the date of deteution, this sub-section shall apply subject to the 
modifica?on that, for the words "twelve days", the words ''fifteen. days" shall 
S be substituted 
. (5) ~ any arder is made or approved by the State Government under 
thiS sectIOn, the State Government shall, within seven days, report the fact to 
the Central Government together with the grounds on which the order haS 
been made and such other particulars as, in the opinion of the State Govern-
10 ment, have a bearing on the necessity for the order. 
4. A detention order may be executed ,at any }'ttace in India in the mannet' Execution 
provided for the eXe4.'U'tion of warrants of arrest under the Code of Criminal of deten-
Procedure, 1973. tion orden. 
5. Every person in respect of whom a detention order has been made sha1l 
IS be liable-
(a) to be detained in such place and under such conditions, indadiDI 
conditions as to maintenance, cisdpllne and punishment for breaches of 
discipline, as the appropriate Government may, by general or special order, 
specify; and 
20 (b) to be removed {rom one place of detention to anothu place of 
dctenti('n, whether within the same Stale or in another State, by ordor of 
the appropriate Government: 
. Provided that no Clrder shall be made by a State Government under clause 
(b) for the removal of a person frem one State to another State except with the 
25 consent of the Government of that other State. 
35 
4'l 
S. No detentior order shall be invC:llid or inoperative merely hy reason-
(0) that the person to be detained thereunder i~ ou~~ide the limits 0f 
the territorial jurisdiction of the Government or officer making the oreier, or 
(b) tha: the place of detention of such per~n is llUtside the said 
lin1its. 
7. (1) Tf the Central Govcrnnwnt or the State Gov::m.nent or an officer 
mentioned in 9Ub-section (3) of St'ction 3, as lihc cae;e may be, has reason to 
believe tha: a person in resp<,ct of whom a detention order has been made has 
absconded or is concealing himself so that the order cann0t be ex::cu'cd, that 
Government or officer may-
(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a Metropolitan Magistrate 
or a Judicial Magistrate of the lirst class having juri~dicti('n in 'he place 
where the said person ordinarily resides; 
(b) bv Clrder notified in the OffICial Gazette direct the said person to 
appe~r bef~re such officer, at such place and within such period as may be 
specified in the order. 
(2) Upon the making of a report. against alilY ~son under clause (a) of 
_.L ' (1) th provisions of sectIons 82. 83, 84 :md R'i of the Code of 
5Ul~~ct~o; ~ e 1973 shalT npplv in respect of lIuch TX'rson and hie; pl"OT'lerty 
On~~ clero t' tre, rder 'made "l{7ains! him were a warrant i!lc;ul:d by the 
as if \:LIe t~n Ion 0 ,I F . . . 
4S Magistrate. 
Power to 
reculate 
place and 
conditions 
Of deten-
tion. 
Detention 
orders not 
to be 
invalid 
or inopera-
tive On 
certain 
grounds. 
Powers in 
relation to 
abscondin,i 
perlOns. 

Grooods 
of order 
of de ten· 
tion to .. 
cRscloSed . 
to PersOns 
atreeted 
by the 
order. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Advisory 
Boards. 
K..ferell.ce 
te Advi-
sory 
Boards. 
Proce-
dure of 
Advisory 
Boards~ 
4 
(3) If any perso'n fails to cotnplywith Dn . order; tss,*,;under"eliWe'''b~t; 
of S\1I~scciion (1 ).he shall, \.11l1~s be proves th'at'it'ws net ptaible1fCJI:bim,. 
comp]y therewith and that he had, withinth'e periOtf' spetifted· ,ltli: die :-.oIiIIr. 
informed the officer mentioned in the ordor of the reasoD ,,·biS.t'CI •• re'· 
compIiaw;e therewith impossible and of his whel'Qabol1ts, be punh:bable witk S 
imprisonment for a term which may exteoo tOOrte year, or ,'lib 1\iie~' or !.With 
both. 
(4) Notwithstanding anytbing cootainedin the Codc.,of,CrjmUs~ P.rQQedW~, 
1973, every offence under sub-section (3) shall be cognizable. 
8. (1) When a person is detained in pursuance of a detentiOn or~~ t1ae'Io 
authority making the order shaD, as soon as may be, but ordinarDy: n6t t8t~i tIIIh-
five days and in exceptional circumstances and· ft>r ftIBIODS to __ ~~ in 
writing, not later than ten days from the date of detention, cOlDIDunica!o,1O laim 
the grounds on which the order has been ,made and shall afford him the earliest 
opportunity of making a representation against the order to t'lie ~propriate IS 
Government. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall require the authority to disclose facts 
which it considers to be against the public interest to dlsclose. 
9. (1) The Central Government 8ild each State Gov.eI1UlleDi sbaII, "laenever 
necessary, comtitute one or more Advisory Boards ,Or tile ~ ~ ''this 20 
Act. 
(2) Every such Board shan consist of three persons Who are, or baw been, 
or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High Court, and such persons 
~han be appointed by the appropriate Government. 
(.1) The appropriate Government shan appoint one of the members of the 2S 
Advisory Board who is, or has been, a Judge of a High COUlrt to be its Chairman, 
and in the case of a Union territory, the appointment to the Advisory Board of 
any person who is a Judge of the High Court of a Stme shMI·be Withi 8lc·pre-
vious approval Of the State Government concerned. 
10, Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, in .every'ICMrl ....... 30 
a detention order has been made under this Act, the appropriate Govel'lUDCl1t 
shall, within three weeks from the date of detention of a person tinder' the order~ 
place before the Advisory Board constituted by it under sectiOn 9, the grounds 
on which the order has been made and the rcpreseI1tation, if1any, made 'by the 
person affected by the order, and in case where the order 'hu been made by an 35 
officer mentioned in suh-section (3) of section 3, also the report hy such officer 
under sub-section (4) of that section. 
11. (1) The Advisory Board snall,after coDSi.der~ the materials pla~ 
before it and, after calling for 'sucbfurtber information,ao it may deem il~S$.ty 
from the appropriate Government or from any.peI'son.ca11ecUor the l'~e ~ 
through the appropriate Government Or from the jpel'son coriCerned,·· aM .It, :r~ 
any particular case, it cons~~e~ it es~ntia1 S9 to ~o or If _he peno~ cOQ~ 
let 1.7 .. 

5 
ddsirel to be heard, after hearing him' in person, submit its . report , to ··the 
apipmprtlte Government within seven weeks from -the date of deteDIidft 1!JfitIIe . 
petscmtconcerned. 
,(2) The report of the Advisory Board <shall specify in a separate part there-
S of the opinion of the Advisory Board as to whether or not'thereis' Btiftlcieet .:aue 
for'1lhe detention oftbe person concerned. 
(3) Wben dl,c;r~ is a difference of opinion among the members formiDg .. the 
Ad~S()IJ ~rd, the opinion .of the majority of such members sball. be deemed 
,to be the opinion of the Board. 
10 (4) Not~ lnl·tbis IleCtlQn shall entitle .any perIOD against whom . .a cktQqtion 
OM .. ;MClD made to appear by any legal practitiouerin.any rnq,tt4lr "c;;on~, 
with the refqroace I to the Advi~ Board; .8lldthe proceedings of ·the Mv,isl)q: 
Board and its re'J*>rt, excepting that part of the report in which the opinion of 
tho I Atlvi&o&y Board 4s specified, shall be confidc;ntial. 
IS lao (1) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that 1bcse is, in ;Action 
its opinion, sufficient cause for the detentiQn of a person, tbe approp{iate ,Oo,!~~- ,upon th~ 
ment may confirm the detention order and continue the detention of the person ~~ i»[ 
concerned for such period as it thinks fit. ~, -
BoW.. 
(2J .In .any CWie where the AdviSOry Board has .reported that th~e is, in J.ts 
20 opinion, no sufficient cause for the detention of a peDion,. the appr@ateGov-
ernment shall revoke the detention order and cause the person concerned to be 
released forthwith. 
U. The maximum period (or which any person may be~~~.xu.., 
of any cietention order which hali been con1itmed, under sectioD12,aball,bc""'.~od ", 
26 month & fliClm1 the date of detention: de~, 
Provided that nothinlZ contained in this section shall affect the PP""'.' , .... , 
appropriate Government~ to revoke or modify the detontioo ordor at'lIIly'"" 
time. 
14. (1) Without p'rejudice to the provisions of section 21 of the General Revoca-
10 of 1897. 30 CIau'Ses Act, 1897, a detention order may, at any time, be,revoHd-« mGdified,- ~:Oll 
3S 
(a) ~otwithstanding that the order has been made by 8n officer men- arders., 
tioncd in sub-section (3) of section 3, by ;the State Oovernment ,to which 
that officer is subordinate or by the Central Government; 
(b) notwithstanding that the order boas been made by a State GoVerJl-
ment, by the Central Government. 
(2) The revocation or expiry of ~ detentio~ order shan not bar .the making 
f f '. d tcntion order under sectIon 3 agaInst the same pe!SOB lID ,aDY C_ oa reS;l C· f··....J.· h ...... 
h f 'b facts have arisen 13ftcr the date 0 revocatIon or exptry ·00: -walle 'WIle w ~re res· ffi' -..I' • .J.., . 
C I G Vernment or a State Gt'vernment or an 0 oer mentiO_'rJD' ,IYV'" 
entra 0 • • 6.A th t oh ~ -I.-oIL 
section (3) of section 3. as the case may be, IS satfs ~. a ',u .. ~.'\'~,~ 
" be made. 

6 
Temporary , IS. (1) The appropriate Government may, at any time, direct that any person 
ra&aue Of detained in pursuance of a detention order may be released for any s~ 
:Sed. period either without condition'S or upon such conditions specified in the direction 
as that person accepts, and may, at any time, cancel his release. 
(2) In directing the release of any penon under sub~scction (l),thc Is 
appropriate Government may require him to enter into a bond with or without . 
sureties for the due observance of the conditions specified in the direction. 
(3) Any person released under sub-section (1) shall surrender himself at 
the time and place, and to the authority, specified in the order directing his 
I'elease or cancelling his releas~, as the case may be. 10 
(4) H any person fails without sufficient cause to surrender himself in the 
manner specified in sub-5ection (.l), he shall be punis41able with im~semntJDt 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
(5) H any person released under sub-section (1) fails to fulfil any of tbe 
cODditions imposed upon him under the said sub·section Or in the bond entered 1.5 
ioto by him, the bond shall be declared to be forfeited :lnd any person bound 
thereby shan be liable to pay the penalty .thereof. 
Protectlon 16. No !;uit or other legal proceeding shall lie aga1nst the Central Govern-
Of acti~D ment or a State Government, and no suit, prosecution or other Ie!!al proceeding •• 
;.:n r:th shaD lie against any person, for anything in good faith done or intended to be 20 
. done in pursuance of this Act. 
Act 
DOt to 
have 
effect 
with res-
pect to 
detentions 
under 
state 
laws. 
17. (1) Nothing in this Act shall apply or have any effect with respect to 
orders of detention, made under any State law, which are in force immediately 
before the commencement of the National Security Ordinance, 1980, and accord·· 11 of 1980. 
ingly every person in respect of whom an order of detention made under any 2S 
State law is in force immediately before such commencement. shan be governed.l 
with respect to such detention by the provisions of such State law or where) 
the State law under which such order of detention is made is an Ordinance 
(hereinafter referred to as the State Ordinance) promulgated by the Governor 30 
of that State and the State Ordinance has been replaced-
(i) before ~uch commencement, by an e1Ulct!l1e'nt pas-scd by the 
Lcgis':ature of that State,by such enactment: Of 
(ii) after such commencement, by an enactmenf which is pas<;ed bv 
the Legi'slature of that State and the application of which i!l confined to 
ordcT!; of d~tention made before such commencement u'nder the Statr 35 
Ordinance. by !=uch enactment, 
a~ if this Act had not been enacted. 
(2) NOthing in this section shall be deemed to bar the making. under s~ction 
3, of a detemidn order against any person referred to in s1Ib-section (1) a~I' 
the detention order in force ill resnect of bim as aforC';r.l.id )mmediatelv hcfore 40 
the commencement of the National Sec~rity Qrpimuu:e. 1980, ceases to nave 
fffect for any reason whatsoever~ . 11 of 1980. 

11 of 1980. 
1 
bplanation.-For the purposes of this section, "State law" means any la. 
Pl'OVidine for preventive detention on all or auy of the grounds on which an 
order of detentioD. may be made under sub-sectiOD. (2) of 8ICtioG 3 and in force 
in any State immediately before the commencement of the said Ordinance. 
5 18. (1) The National Security Ordinance, 1980, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken uoder 
the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act, as if this Act had come into force OD. the 
23rd day of September, 1980, and, in particular, any reference made under 
10 section 10 of. the said Ordinance and pending before any Advisory Board im-
mediately before the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President 
may continue to be dealt with by that Board after that date as if such Board 
had been constituted under section 9 of tbis Act. 
Repeal 
and 
saviDa. 

In the prevailing situation of communal disharmony, social ten-
sions, eXtren1ist actiVities, inctu'strial unrest and' increasing teI;.dency on 
the part of various interested parties to engineer agitation on di1ferent 
iSsUe~. it ms COnSidered necessary that the law and' order situation in 
the, country is tackled in a most determined. and effective way~ The 
aJatJ.!.soeial and anti-national elements including secessionists, commaoel 
a'U¢ pi'd-ocaste elements and also other elements who adversely iDflaeee 
.d' direct· the services essential to the community pose a grave eB'al-
, Mp' to the lawful authority and sometimes even hold the ~ 
to'ramtom. 
2. Considering the complexity and nature of tile problems, parti-
cularly in respect of defence, security, public order and services essential to the 
community, it is the considered view of the Government that the ad-
ministration would be greatly handicapped in dealing effectively with the 
same in the absence of powers of preventive detention. The National 
Security Ordinance, 1980, was, therefore, promulgated by the President 
on the 22nd September, 1980. 
3. Subject to a modification, the Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordi-
nance. The modification relates to the composition of Advisory Boards, and is 
for providing that the Chairman of an Advisory Board shall be a person who 
is. or has been, a Judge of a High Court and the other members of the Advisory 
Board may be persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed 
as, Judges of a High Court. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 26th NovembeT, 1980, ZAIL SINGH. 
RECOMMENDATION OF THE PRESIDENT UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1I/15012/21180-IS (DO II) dated the 11th November, 
1980 from Giani Zail Singh, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President having been informed Of the subject matter of the National 
Security Bill, 1980 recommends under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution 
of India, tbe consideration of the Bi1l in Lok Sabha. 
8 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause 5 (a) of the Bill, the Central Government has power 
to regulate the conditions of det~ntion of persons detained in purs'U-
ance of an order of the Central Government. Clause 9 (1) of the Bill 
provides, inter alia, for the constitution of Advisory Boards by the 
Central C'rOvernment. 
2. In the case of persons detained in pursuance of orders made by 
the Central Government, the expenditure in respect of facilities to such 
persons and the expenditure in conn~tion with the AdviSOry Boards 
will have to be met by the Central Government. The actual expendi-
ture in respect of facilities to detenus will depend upon various con-
tingencies su':h as the nurnber of persons who may be detained in pur-
s'uanCe of orders issued I:y th~ Central Government, the naturt of 
fac:ilities that may be provided fOf under the rules, etc., and it is not 
pc)s3ibl~ to visualise at this stage the quantum of s,uch e:,c,JPrldituj"e. 
Some expencLlure of a rC':::urrir.g nature will have to be incuned in 
connf'ction wi1h the Aclvis~)r,v BOi'rc:s and it is not possible at this stage 
if) make an accurate estimate of the expenditure which may be invol-
ved. 
3. The provision-; of the Bill 0(1 not involve any other expenditure 
of a re('urring or non-recurring nature. 
<) 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 (a) of the Bill provides that every person in respect of 
whom a detention order has been made shall be liable to be detained 
in such place and under such conditions, including conditions as to 
maintenance, dis=:ipline anj punishment for breaches of discipline, as 
the appropriate Government may. by general or special order, specify. 
2. The matters to be specified in such orders are matters of detail 
and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill. The delega-
tion of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
10 

Memorandum indicating the modifications contairned in the Bill to 
replace the National SeCurity Ordinance, 1980 
C:ause 9 'of the Bill relating to constitution of Advisory Boards cor-
responds to section 9 of the National Security Ordinance, 1980. Accord-
ing to sub-sectIons (2) and (3) of section 9 of the said Ordinance, the 
constitution of every Advisory Board has to be in accordance with the 
recommendaLons of the Chief Justi::e of the appropriate High Court and 
the Chairman of an Advisory Board has to be a Judge of an appropriate 
High Court and the other members shall be serving or retired Judges 
of any High Court. Sub-clauses (2) and (3) of clause 9 of the Bill modify 
these provisions. Under these sub-clauses, the members of an Advisory 
Board have to be appointed by the appropriate Government. The Chair-
man of ~n Ac1v;S0r y Board has to be a person who i!', or haf: bep.n, a Judgr 
of n High Court while the remaining- two members may be persons who 
are. or have bl'!en. or are Cfualified to he aQpointed as, Judges, of a High 
Court. 
u 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for pr£ventivc detention in certain cases and for matters 
connected therewith. 
(Giani Zail Singh, 
Minister of Home Affairs,) 