S-3\F\BILL 2017\LS\2617LS ENG
1
Bill No. 204 of 2017
THE DENTISTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Dentists Act, 1948.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dentists (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Dentists Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
in clause (f), the words and letter “and at least two shall be dentists registered in Part B of a
State register” shall be omitted.
3. In section 21 of the principal Act, clause (b) shall be omitted.
4. In section 23 of the principal Act, clause (b) shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 3.
Amendment of
section 21.
16 of 1948.
Amendment of
section 23.
5
10
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Dentist Act, 1948 (the Act) was enacted with a view to regulate the profession of
dentistry. Section 3 of the Act provides for the constitution of the Dental Council of India
(Council) for promoting dental education and dental profession in India. Section 31 of the
Act provides that the Council shall maintain a register of dentists known as the Indian Dentists
Register which consists of entries in all the State register of dentists. The register of dentists
shall be maintained in two parts, namely Part A and Part B, Part A consisting of all dentists
possessing recognised dental qualifications and Part B which contains persons not holding
such qualifications but engaged in practice of dentistry as principal means of livelihood for
a period not less than five years prior to the date appointed under section 32.
2. Registration under Part B was allowed from a date prior to the commencement of
the Act i.e. 29th March, 1948 for the persons displaced during Partition and displaced
from Bangladesh or repatriated from Burma or Ceylon after 14th April, 1957 and before
25th March, 1971. However, no person has been registered in Part B after the year 1972.
There are approximately 950 dentists registered in Part B against 1.6 lakh dentists registered
in Part A. Moreover, only few States and Union territories like West Bengal, Kerala, Jammu
and Kashmir, Puducherry, Punjab and Delhi have dentists registered in Part B.
3. Section 3 of the Act provides that the Central Government nominates six members
to the Council as Central Government nominees, of whom at least two shall be dentists
registered in Part B of a State register. The Act also provides for the constitution of State
Dental Councils with four members and Joint State Dental Councils with two members
elected from among themselves by dentists registered in Part B of the State register.
4. In view of above, it is proposed to amend the Dentists Act, 1948 so as to take away
the mandatory requirement of the representation of Part B dentists in the Council, State
Dental Councils and Joint State Dental Councils.
5. The proposed Dentists (Amendment) Bill, 2017, provides for the following,
namely:—
(a) to amend clause (f) of section 3 of the Act relating to membership of Council
so as to omit the provision for nomination of at least two members registered in
Part B;
(b) to omit clause (b) of section 21 of the Act relating to election of four members
from Part B to the State Dental Councils; and
(c) to omit clause (b) of section 23 of the Act relating to election of two members
from Part B to the Joint State Dental Councils.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; JAGAT  PRAKASH  NADDA
The 21st November , 2017.
S-3\F\BILL 2017\LAW\1013LAW(E)
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE DENTISTS ACT, 1948
(16 OF 1948)
* * * * *
CHAPTER  II
DENTAL COUNCIL OF INDIA
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Council consisting of
the following members, namely:—
*****
(f) six members nominated by the Central Government, of whom at least one
shall be a registered dentist processing a recognised dental qualification and practising
or holding an appointment in an institution for the training of dentists in a Union
territory, and at least two shall be dentists registered in Part B of a State register;
*****
CHAPTER  III
S
TATE DENTAL COUNCILS
21. Except where a Joint State Council is constituted in accordance with an agreement
made under section 22, the State Government shall constitute a State Council consisting of
the following members, namely:—
*****
(b) four members elected from among themselves by dentists registered in
Part B of the State register;
*****
23.  A Joint State Council shall consist of the following members, namely:—
*****
(b) two members elected from among themselves by dentists registered in
Part B of the State register of each of the participating States;
*****
Constitution
and
composition of
Council.
Constitution
and
composition of
State Councils.
Composition
of Joint State
Councils.
S-3\F\BILL 2017\LAW\1013LAW(E)
3

GMGIPMRND—2617LS(S3)—02.12.2017.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Dentists Act, 1948
————
(Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)