1
THE RIGHT TO PLAY SPORTS BILL, 2018
BY
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to confer right to play sports on every child as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Play Sports Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  204 of 2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "child" means every person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(b) "local authority" means the body which is vested with general executive
powers under any law for the time being in force; State or district level or local level or
a Municipal Corporation a Municipal Council, an improvement Board, a Sanitary Board
or a Notified Area Committee or a Town Board or a Resident Welfare Association
constituted under any law for the time being in force and such other authority as may
be specified by the Central Government;
(c) "open spaces" means parks, green spaces, gardens, road side plantings,
natural landscapes, Government owned spaces, Government owned vacant or
unoccupied land;
(d) "park" means a piece of land on which there are no buildings or of which not
more than one-twentieth part is covered with buildings, and the whole or remainder of
which is laid out as a garden with trees, plants or flower beds or as a lawn or as a
meadow and maintained as a place for the resort of the public for recreation, air or light;
(e) "play" means any freely chosen recreational activity with or without pre-
defined rules;
(f) "play field" means a piece of land adopted for the purposes of play, game or
sport and used by schools or colleges or clubs or general public and includes land set
apart as a play-field by a local authority;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "schools" means any public, private, corporation school under the jurisdiction
of local authority.
3. Every child shall have the right to,—
(a) participate in sports;
(b) participate at a level commensurate with each child's maturity and ability;
(c) play freely in local areas, parks, green spaces, sports clubs and community
centers and Government owned spaces;
(d) share in the leadership and decision making of their sport participation;
(e) participate in safe and healthy environments;
(f) proper preparation for in sports;
(g) an equal opportunity of strive for success;
(h) be treated with dignity;
(i) have fun in sports;
(j) be coached by individuals who are well trained in sport-specific safety and to
be monitored by athletic healthcare team members; and
(k) participate in sporting activities in safe environment both indoor and outdoor
facilities.
4. The Central Government shall,—
(a) ensure that the institutions, services and facilities necessary for the care
and protection of children and young adults shall conform with the standards
established by the competent authority in the area of playing sports activities and
other recreational activities;
Definitions.
Right of child
to play sports.
Central
Government
to ensure right
of child to
play sports.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) promote and develop sports at the regional level as part of the decentralization
process;
(c) provide adequate financial, material and administrative support to regional
sports organizations; and
(d) encourage the development of indigenous and traditional sports such as
wrestling countrywide.
5. It shall be the responsibility of every school to,—
(a) make sports as an intrinsic part of the Fundamental Right to Education;
(b) undertake "Play-led Learning Approach" to deliver early years learning in
schools from a play perspective;
(c) ensure children are provided with an interesting play environment for breaks
during the school day;
(d) provide play opportunities during out of school times, including before
school, evenings, weekends and holiday periods, including open access to school
grounds and use of premises for activities;
(e) provide morning, lunchtime and afternoon play breaks;
(f) include sports compulsorily in educational curriculum from elementary to
higher education;
(g) provide for well trained physical education and sports teachers;
(h) provide adequate sporting facilities including sports equipment; and
(i) make available security personnel for the supply of child while playing sports.
6. (1) The local authority shall assess the sufficiency of play opportunities under its
jurisdiction for children in accordance with provisions of this Act.
(2) In performing its duties under sub-section (1), the local authority shall take into
consideration:—
(a) the needs of children who are disabled persons (within the meaning of Rights
of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016);
(b) needs of children of different ages;
(c) steps to maintain opportunities for childen to play within its jurisdiction;
(d) safe environment to play and introduce 20 mph limits wherever appropriate;
and
(e) consultation with the children their parents and the local community in the
area for ensuring sports activities.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) "play" includes any recreational activity; and
(b) "sufficient" in relation to play opportunities, means sufficient having regard to
quantity and quality;
7. (1) The local authority shall develop an action plan and a sports agenda enumerating
associated costs, targets, priorities and milestones to achieve play sufficiency under its
jurisdiction.
(2) While formulating an action plan under sub-section (1), the local authority shall
take into account:—
Right to play in
schools.
Responsibilities
of local
authority.
Action Plan.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(a) national environment and geography of the area;
(b) built environment and characteristics of the communities;
(c) demography of the area;
(d) existing play opportunities and provision; and
(e) existing organizational structures.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in other law, the Central Government shall
make rules and regulations governing open public or private spaces to play and practice
other recreational activities for children free of charge ensuring equitable access.
(2) All open spaces shall be made accessible for children to play.
(3) Open play fields and playgrounds inside the premises of private sports clubs and
sports complexes shall be made accessible and available free of charge for two hours every
day.
(4) No child shall be evicted from an open space where he is indulging in playful
activity.
9. If any private entity fails to abide by the provisions of section 8, such entry shall be
liable to a fine which may extend upto rupees twenty-five thousand.
10. The Central Government shall ensure that a National Play Day is celebrated to
create public awareness about the benefits of playing sports to promote activities through
State, district, club level affiliates and schools to designate the whole day for playful activities.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree
that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
Accessibility
to open
space.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Penalty
National Play
Day.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 24 of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights confer the right to rest
and leisure and article 31 of the Convention on Rights of Child recognizes the right of the
child to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities. Right to play sports is
an inseparable and intrinsic part of the fundamental right to education.
The need is to realize the provision of quality spaces and time for play to children and
young adults for their physical, social and mental development. The need is also to make the
Government responsible to make available a conducive environment where children can
grow up in conditions where they can exercise their right to play.
With the rise of urbanization, mechanization and dwindling of public spaces, accessibility
to public outer spaces has been made a priority through which children from different social
backgrounds have open, free and equitable access to the playground. To bring inclusivity of
all children, no child shall remain excluded because of issues such as different levels of
ability, language, caste or gender. Playing sports may reduce inequalities among children
living in families with different background.
One should be able to indulge in play. It is also required to make physical education
and sports accessible and guaranteed within the educational system and in holistically
making play part of the social life. Sports may not necessarily be an end in itself  but a means
by which other end such as gender equality, racial equality, health promotion, education
development and social cohesion can be achieved and may eventually help in realization of
human rights and development goals. Right to Play Sports will elevate the status of physical
education, games and sports to a dignified height.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November 20, 2018.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for  the Central Government to ensure availability of
adequate financial, material and administrative support for ensuring right of every child to
play sports. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore
will be involved  per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to confer right to play sports on every child as enshrined in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2414LS(S3)—17-12-2018.