THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI AJAY BHA TT, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act  may be called the Constitution  (Amendment)  Act, 2019.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) entries 5 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 6 to 10, respectively, and—
(a) before entry 6 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"5. Garhwali.";
(b)  after entry 10 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"11. Kumaoni."; and
(ii) existing entries 10 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 12 to 24, respectively.
Amendment of
the Eighth
Schedule.
Bill No.  204 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Eighth Schedule to the Constitution recognizes twenty-two languages as national
languages of India being spoken and written by the citizens. It is believed that education,
culture and intellectual pursuits get created and develop around these languages. But it is
unfortunate that languages like Garhwali and Kumaoni spoken and written by millions of
people having distinct culture have not yet been included in the Eighth Schedule.
The Garhwali language is being spoken since ancient times in the Kedarkhand region
of Central Himalaya. However, when exactly the people started using this language in writings
can be correctly answered by linguistics only. Prior to 13th century, when the Hindi language
was not in existence, the official work of the State of Garhwal, spreading from Saharanpur to
Himachal, was being done in Garhwali language. The donation box inscription dating back to
the year 1335 during the reign of the Emperor Jagatpal in Devprayag temple, the 15th century
script of Ajaypal in Devalgarh, the inscriptions on copper plates found at various places like
Badrinath, Maldyul etc., are all evidences to prove that the Garhwali language is one of the
oldest languages. According to Dr. Haridutt Bhatt Shailes, literature of 10th century is also
available in this language.
Our country is a multilingual country. Some of the languages have been successful in
maintaining their existence and dignity with time while other have been struggling hard to
save their existence and dignity due to lack of adequate facilities of propagation. Garhwali
and Kumaoni are two such languages amongst them.
Keeping in view the sentiments of the people of Central Himalayan region and
linguaphiles, Garhwali and Kumaoni languages should be accorded the status and honour of
national languages by including them in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. It is urgently
required that necessary steps should be taken to propagate these languages. An academy
for the development of these languages should also be set up on the lines of Hindi Academy,
Urdu Academy, Punjabi and Sindhi Academy.
Such a step will not only help in propagation of these languages but would also save
the ancient Himalayan culture and heritage from becoming extinct.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY  BHATT
June 27, 2019.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithilli.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
* * * * *
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Ajay Bhatt, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2675LS(S3)—22-10-2019.