AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  204  of  2016
THE DOMESTIC WORKERS' WELFARE  BILL, 2016
By
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement
2. Definitions
CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF DOMESTIC WORKERS
3. Rights of domestic workers
4. Application of certain Acts to domestic workers
CHAPTER III
REGULATION OF WORKING CONDITIONS
5. Fixation of minimum rate of wages
6. Regulation of work hours
7. Paid Leaves
8. Compensation and injury
9. Regulation by the Central Government
10. Advise by National Board and State Boards
11. Duties of the employer and Placement Agency
12. Prohibition of employment of a child
CHAPTER IV
R
EGISTRATION
13. Appropriate Government to prescribe the terms and conditions of registration of
domestic workers
14. Registration of employment agreement
15. Registration of Placement Agencies
CHAPTER V
D
ISTRICT BOARDS
16. District Boards
17. Functions of the Board
18. Powers of the District Board
19. Reference of disputes
20. Rules of evidence

CHAPTER VI
PENALTY AND PROCEDURE
CLAUSES
21. Offences and penalties
22. Cognizance of offences
23. Limitation of prosecutions
24. Certain Contracts and Agreements to be void
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. Central Government to provide adequate funds
26. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act
27. Protection of action taken under Act
28. Power to remove difficulties
29. Power of the Appropriate Government to make rules
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
(ii)

1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  204 of  2016
Definitions.
THE DOMESTIC WORKERS’ WELFARE BILL, 2016
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare, protection and security of domestic workers and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Domestic Workers'  Welfare Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in the case of a State or a Union Territory
having legislature, the concerned State Government or the Union Territory Government,
as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) 'child' means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
5
10
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) 'District Board' means the district board constituted under section 16;
(d) 'domestic work' means work performed in or for a private household(s) and
includes cooking, cleaning, housekeeping, driving, gardening, childcare, and old-age
care, but does not include work related to businesses run from private households;
(e) 'domestic worker' means a person employed to do domestic work for
remuneration, whether in cash or in kind, for one or more employers by staying at the
household premises or otherwise and includes casual, temporary, contractual, or migrant
workers;
(f) 'employer' means a person living in a private household, who has employed a
domestic worker, either directly or otherwise for remuneration for doing domestic work;
(g) 'minor domestic worker' means a domestic worker who is above the age of
sixteen years but below the age of eighteen years and has completed compulsory
elementary education;
(h) 'National Board' means the National Social Security Board for unorganised
workers constituted under section 5 of the Unorganised Workers' Social Security
Act, 2008;
(i) 'placement agency' means any agency or bureau or contractor or person(s) or
association, whether registered or otherwise, engaged in the placement of domestic
workers with prospective employers and includes such agency or person offering
such services through any print, electronic or any form of communication;
(j) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k) 'schedule' means the schedule annexed to this Act;
(l) 'State Board' means the (name of the State) State Social Security Board for
unorganised workers constituted under section 6 of the Unorganised Workers' Social
Security Act, 2008;
(m) 'wages' means all remunerations expressed in terms of money or capable of
being so expressed which would be payable to a domestic worker in respect of domestic
work done but does not include—
(i) the value of any house accommodation, supply of light, water, medical
attendance, or any other amenity;
(ii) any contribution paid by the employer under any scheme of social
insurance and the interest which may have accrued thereon;
(iii) any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concession;
(iv) any sum paid to the domestic worker to defray special expenses entailed
on him by the nature of his/her employment; and
(v) any compensation paid on discharge;
(n) 'workplace' means any household where a domestic worker works; and
(o) 'work hours' means the period for which a domestic worker remains at the
disposal of the household for purposes related to domestic work.
CHAPTER II
R
IGHTS OF DOMESTIC WORKERS
3. (1) Every domestic worker shall have the right to—
(a) work and earn livelihood, free from all forms of forced or compulsory labour;
(b) earn such minimum wages, as may be prescribed, including allowances for
overtime;
33 of 2008.
Rights of
domestic
workers.
33 of 2008.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) such decent working and living conditions, as may be prescribed, including
reasonable working hours, periods of rest, annual paid leave and maternity leave, as
the case may be;
(d) access to benefits under social security schemes of the appropriate
Government;
(e) redressal of grievances through such appropriate mechanism as may be
prescribed;
(f) organise and bargain collectively through associations, co-operatives, and/
or union of workers;
(g) equal opportunities of employment and remuneration without discrimination
based on gender, age, caste or any other criteria that may be deemed discriminatory by
the court of law; and
(h) education and opportunities to participate in further education and vocational
training for domestic workers under this Act, who are above the minimum age for
domestic work and below the age of eighteen years.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, relevant provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923, the Inter State Migrant
Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service Act 1979, the Payment of
Wages Act, 1936, Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Equal
Remuneration Act, 1976, the Employee's State Insurance Act, 1948, the Employees Provident
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 and the
Unorganized Workers' Social Security Act, 2008 shall apply to domestic workers as they
apply to workmen or employees, as the case may be, within the meaning of those Act.
CHAPTER III
R
EGULATION OF WORKING CONDITIONS
5. (1) The Appropriate Government shall—
(a) fix the minimum rate of wages payable to domestic workers on the basis of the
needs of the domestic workers specified in the First Schedule;
(b) fix the minimum rate of wages which shall apply in substitution for the minimum
rate which would otherwise be applicable, in respect of domestic work done by a
domestic worker beyond work hours (hereinafter referred to as "overtime rate");
(c) review at such intervals as it may think fit, but not exceeding five years, the
minimum rates of wages, if necessary.
(2) The appropriate Government may fix—
(a) minimum rate of wages by the hour or by the day or by the month;
(b) minimum rate of wages for urban and rural areas;
(c) minimum rate of wages for different kinds of domestic work;
(d) different minimum rates of wages for—
(i) full-time resident domestic workers;
(ii) part-time resident domestic workers;
(iii) full-time non-resident workers;
(iv) part-time non-resident workers:
Provided that no discrimination shall be made in the rates of wages paid to men,
women, or minor domestic workers.
Application of
certain Acts to
domestic
workers.
8 of 1923
30 of 1979.
4 of 1936.
53 of 1961.
11 of 1948.
25 of 1976.
34 of 1948.
19 of 1952.
39 of 1972.
33 of 2008.
Fixation of
minimum rate
of wages.
5
10
15
20
25
25
30
35

4
6. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal working day,
inclusive of one or more specified intervals:
Provided that work hours shall not exceed forty-eight hours per week;
(b) provide for one holiday per week; and
(c) provide for payment for domestic work on a day of rest at a rate not less than
the overtime rate.
7. The appropriate Government shall fix the time period and minimum rate of wages for
paid leaves and maternity leaves:
Provided that a domestic worker shall be entitled to fifteen days of paid leave in
a year in addition to one holiday per week.
8. The appropriate Government shall formulate a criteria for determining the amount of
compensation for any personal injury caused to a domestic worker by accident arising out of
and in course of his employment:
Provided  that the District Board shall apply the criteria for deciding the
compensation amount after an enquiry.
9. The Central Government shall formulate and notify—
(a) minimum standards for decent conditions of work;
(b) schemes for benefit and welfare of domestic worker such as social security,
health, insurance, education and other beneficial schemes in the Second Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notificaton, amend the
Second Schedule, if it deems necessary.
(c) application of the provisions of this Act to any particular class of domestic
workers and employers;
(d) appropriate strategies on elimination of any form of trafficking or forced or
bonded or child labour.
10. The National Board and the State Board shall advise the appropriate Government
in matters related to this Act.
11. (1) A placement agency shall—
(a) ensure registration with the appropriate Government and obtain a registration
certificate, in such form as may be prescribed;
(b) provide for the registration of the employment agreement, engaged through
the agency, to the appropriate Government, in such form as may be prescribed;
(c) ensure that fees charged on registration, etc. is not deducted from the
remuneration of domestic workers; and
(d) maintain proper registers and records of domestic workers, placements of
domestic workers, payments and terms of employment.
(2) As far as practicable, every employer shall—
(a) ensure decent living conditions of the domestic workers;
(b) provide for of such minimum wages, as may be prescribed, including
allowances for overtime, to the domestic worker;
(c) engage the domestic worker for such work hours, as may be  prescribed;
Regulation of
work hours.
Paid leaves.
Compensation
for injury.
Regulation by
the Central
Government.
Advise by
National
Board and
State Boards.
Duties of the
employer and
placement
agency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(d) allow a domestic worker to take rest, weekly holiday, and such paid leaves
inlcuding maternity leave, as may be prescribed;
(e) provide education and vocational training for minor domestic workers;
(f) provide for education of children of resident domestic workers;
(g) provide for payment of compensation for any injury caused to a domestic
worker by an accident arising out of and in course of his/her employment; and
(h) provide for registration of the employment agreement with domestic workers
engaged directly to the appropriate government in such manner as may be prescribed.
12. No child shall be employed as a domestic worker or for any such incidental or
ancillary work which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force:
Provided that a minor domestic worker may be employed if he has completed
compulsory elementary education.
CHAPTER IV
REGISTRATION
13. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) prescribe the details of the form that specifies the terms and conditions of the
employment of a domestic worker, in accordance with the Third Schedule (hereinafter
referred to as 'employment agreement');
(b) designate any one or more of the following at such areas as may be considered
necessary, as Workers' Facilitation Centres for purposes of facilitating the filling and
verification of employment agreements:
(i) local panchayati raj institutions or urban local bodies;
(ii) resident welfare associations/society;
(iii) non-profit organizations working among the domestic workers;
(c) prescribe the details of the form for the registration of a placement agency;
(d) maintain such registers and records giving particulars of placement agencies
and such other particulars in such form as may be prescribed.
14. Every employer or the placement agency as the case may be, shall, within two
months of the commencement of the employment of a domestic worker, register the
employment agreement with the Appropriate Government, in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Appropriate Government or any authorised person may register
the employment agreement after the expiry of period of two months, if it is satisfied that
the applicant had sufficient reason for not making the application in time.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a domestic worker
is engaged through a middleman or placement agency for domestic work in any household,
it shall be the duty of such middleman or agency and not of the employer in whose household
such domestic worker works, to register the employment agreement as per the procedure
prescribed.
15. (1) Every Placement Agency shall make an application along with a prescribed fee
and  in such manner as may be prescribed to the appropriate Government for registration.
(2) Every applicant who satisfies all conditions as may be prescribed, shall be provided
with a registration number:
Provided that the placement agency shall renew its registration every five years
on the payment of the fee as may be prescribed.
Prohibition of
employment
of a child.
Appropriate
Government
to prescribe
the terms and
conditions of
registration of
domestic
workers.
Registration
of
employment
agreement.
Registration
of Placement
Agencies.
5
10
15
20
25
25
30
35

6
CHAPTER V
DISTRICT BOARDS
16. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a District Board in each of the districts for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The District Board shall consist of such number of members and staff to be
appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
members and staff of the District Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The procedure to be followed by the District Board in the discharge of its functions
and the manner of filling up of vacancies shall be such as may be prescribed.
17. The District Board shall—
(i) provide a helpline number for use of domestic workers for registering instance
of contraventions of the provisions of this Act;
(ii) provide for registration of complaints, for complaints mod both in writing or
orally;
(iii) facilitate the settlement of disputes through conciliation as per the procedure
provided under this Act;
(iv) disseminate information on available social security schemes for the domestic
workers;
(v) implement scheme or any welfare measures formulated by the Central
Government, the appropriate Government, the National Board or the State Board for
the welfare of domestic workers; and
(vi) undertake such other functions as may be prescribed.
18. (1) Subject to any rules by the State Government in this behalf, an inspector
appointed by the District Board shall, within the local limits, on a complaint received from a
domestic worker or on a complaint against the placement agency—
(a) make such examination and hold such inquiry as may be necessary for
ascertaining whether the provisions of this Act in relation to payment of wages,
conditions of service, and welfare of workers, have been or are being complied within
a place or premises of a domestic worker;
(b) examine any person found in any such workplace or premises for the purposes
of determining compliance with the provisions of this Act;
(c) require any person giving out work to any worker, to give any information,
which is in his/her  power to give, with respect to the name and addresses of persons
who give out work to the domestic worker and payments made or to be made for the
work;
(d) require the production of any document, record or evidence whether written
or oral;
(e) enter, with such assistance as it may consider necessary, at all times any
place or premises if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that any domestic
worker has or is being subjected to any form of sexual exploitation or wrongfully
confined in any such place or premises or rescue any child being employed as a
domestic worker; and
(f) exercise such powers as may be prescribed.
(2) Every employer shall accord to the Board all reasonable facilities in the discharge
its duties under this Act.
District
Boards.
Functions of
the Board.
Powers of the
District Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(3) Each District Board shall have the same powers as are vested in Civil Court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while adjudicating a dispute in respect of the following
matters, namely—
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; and
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
19. (1) Where the District Board is of the opinion that a dispute exists or is apprehended
it may at any time, by order in writing—
(a) refer the dispute to a Civil or Labour Court for promoting a settlement there
of; or
(b) refer any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant to the dispute to
a Dispute Settlement Council constituted under the District Board for inquiry or for
resolution of the dispute.
(2) No proceeding pending before a Civil or Labour Court or a Dispute Resolution
Council in relation to a dispute shall lapse merely by reason of the death of any of the parties
to the dispute being a domestic worker, and such Court or Council shall complete such
proceedings and submit its award to the District Board.
20. In this Act, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872,
the burden of proof that compliance with the provisions of the Act have been effected will be
entirely on the employer or the placement agency, as the case may be.
CHAPTER VI
P
ENALTY AND PROCEDURE
21. (1) Any placement agency who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three months and with fine
which shall not be less than two months wages of a domestic worker in accordance with the
prevailing minimum rate of wages.
(2) If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under sub-
section (1) is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention or failure of compliance of
the same provision, he shall be punished on a subsequent conviction with imprisonment for
a term which may extend upto six months and with fine which shall not be less than two
months wages of a domestic worker in accordance with the prevailing minimum rate of wages.
(3) Where an employer fails to comply with the provisions of this Act he shall be
punished with fine which shall not be less than two months wages of a domestic worker in
accordance with the prevailing minimum rate of wages.
(4) Whoever willfully obstructs any officer so authorised by the District Board to
conduct inspection under the Act or refuses or willfully neglects to afford such officer any
reasonable facility for making any inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation authorised
by or under this Act in relation to the employer or a placement agency to whom, this Act
applies, shall be punsihed with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three months
and with fine which shall not be less than two  months wages of a domestic worker in
accordance with the prevailing minimum rate of wages.
(5) Whoever willfully refuses to produce on the demand of such an inspector so
authorised by the District Board, any register or other document kept in pursuance of this
Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has reasons to believe is
likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by an inspecting
person acting in pursuance of  his/her duties under this Act, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend  up to three  months or with fine which shall not be
less than two months wages of a domestic worker in accordance with the prevailing minimum
rate of wages.
Reference of
disputes.
Rules of
evidence.
Offences and
penalties.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1 of 1872.
50

8
(6) Whoever—
(i) knowingly sends, directs or takes any child or  woman to any place for
immoral purposes or to a place where she is likely to be morally corrupted or,
(ii) in any manner sexually exploits such woman or child or,
(iii) make available young children as domestic workers,
shall be punished in accordance with the provision of the Child Labour Prohibition (And
Regulation) Act 1986, the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956, the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, and Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013, as the case may be, and such other Acts as may be
prescribed.
22. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except
on a complaint—
(a) made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of the District Board; or
(b) made by Office-bearer of a voluntary organization registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
23. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act unless the
complaint thereof is made within  three months from the date on which the alleged commission
of the offence came to the knowledge of the District or State Board.
24. Any contract or agreement, whether made before or after the commencement of
this Act, whereby a domestic worker relinquishes any right conferred by or any concession
or privilege accruing to him or her under this Act or any scheme, shall be void and of no effect
in so far as it purports to deprive him or her of such right or privilege or concession.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government for effective
implementation of the provisions of  this Act.
26. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any agreement or contract
of service, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act.
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed  as precluding any domestic
worker of  from entering into an agreement with the employer as the case may be, for granting
them rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them than
those to which they would be entitled under this Act.
27. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shal lie against any member of
the District Board or any non-Governmental organization for anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government for any damage
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
in pursuance of this Act.
28. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, may by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
Cognizance of
offences.
Limitation of
prosecutions.
Certain
contracts and
agreements to
be void.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Effect of laws
and
agreements
inconsistent
with the Act.
Protection of
action taken
under Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
6 of 1986.
104 of 1956.
32 of 2012.
14 of 2013.
21 of 1860.

9
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
29. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provided for all or any of the following matters, namely—
(a) the form and manner of notification of the minimum rate of wages, overtime
rate, maximum work hours, periods of work and rest, paid leave and maternity leave
applicable to a Domestic Worker;
(b) criteria for determining the amount of compensation for any personal injury
caused to a Domestic Worker by accident arising out of and in course of his/her
employment;
(c) the form and manner in which wages shall be paid to the Domestic Worker;
(d) establishment and regulation of Workers' Facilitation Centres;
(e) the manner and form of an employment agreement and its verification at the
Workers' Facilitation Centres;
(f) the manner and form of registration of a Placement Agency including issuance
of registration certificates and renewal of registration;
(g) the powers which may be conferred on the District Board, the Dispute
Resolution Council, and the Inspector under the terms of this Act;
(h) the number of persons to be appointed on the District Board, the term of their
office and other conditions of service, the appointment of the Chairperson, the
procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions and the manner of filling of
casual vacancies.
(i) the notification of fines payable for offences and as penalties under the terms
of this Act.
(j) Any matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
(4) Every rule made by a State Government or a Union territory Government shall be
laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Power of the
appropriate
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

10
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 5(1)]
Needs of Domestic Workers
1. Standard working class family should be taken to consist of three consumption
units for one earner and the earnings of women, children and adolescents should
be disregarded.
2. Minimum food requirements based on an acceptable net minimum intake of calories
for urban and non-urban citizens, as the case may be.
3. Clothing.
4. Housing.
5. Fuel and Lighting.
6. Children's education.
7. Medical requirements.
8. Recreation including festivals and ceremonies.
9. Provisions for old age and marriage.

11
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 9(b)]
Social Security Schemes for Domestic Workers
S.No. Name of the Scheme
1. The Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Y ojana.

12
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 13]
Terms of an Employment Agreement
1. The name and address of the employer, placement agency, if any, and Domestic
Worker.
2. Registration number of the Domestic Worker as mentioned on the Registration
Certificate.
3. The address of the usual workplace or workplaces.
4. The starting date and, where the contract is for a specified period of time, its
duration.
5. The type of work to be performed.
6. The remuneration, method of payment and periodicity of payments.
7. The normal hours of work.
8. Paid annual leave, and daily and weekly rest periods.
9. The provision of food and accommodation, if applicable.
10. Terms and conditions relating to the termination of employment, including any
period of notice by either the domestic worker or the employer.

13
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A large number of domestic workers in India are uneducated, women and children.
They are denied workers' compensation, weekly holidays, periods of rest, and minimum
wages. Legislations and policies dealing with informal labour such as the Workmen's
Compensation Act 1926, the Inter-State Migrant Workers Act 1976, the Payment of Wages
Act 1936, the Maternity Benefit Act 1961, the Equal Remuneration Act 1976, the Employee's
State Insurance Act, and the Unorganized Workers' Social Security Act 2008, have not been
able to extend adequate protection to the domestic workers.
Additionally, domestic work contributes significantly to the economy and yet remains
invisible and under reported. Demestic work is undervalued and many domestic workers are
overworked, underpaid and insufficiently covered by social security measures.
Domestic work warrants particular attention and hence calls for inclusion in existing
laws as well as a specific legislation to enable domestic workers to fully enjoy their rights and
protection under the law as labourers.
The Parliament's authority to enact a legislation for the domestic workers arises from
India's obligation to implement Article 7 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), which India ratified in 1979, and which ‘recognises the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of just and favourable conditions of work, including equal pay
for equal work and periodic holidays’. The Union List empowers the Centre to convert
ratification of international treaties into a central legislation.
The proposed Bill seeks to guarantees certain rights to the domestic workers in
accordance with international conventions on labour, which include:
(a) right to earn and earn livelihood free from forced and compulsory labour
(b) right to earn minimum wages
(c) right to decent working and living conditions
(d) right to address grievances in an appropriate manner
(e) right to organize and bargain collectively
(f) right to equal employment opportunities and remuneration
The Bill also seeks to regulate domestic work performed in private households of
employers, in the form of multiple work arrangements such as work type, hourly basis, part
time work, full time work, and live-in work. The Bill also proposes to regulate all placement
agencies to protect workers from exploitation.
The Bill further recognises that many minors or persons below eighteen years of age,
are engaged in domestic work and seeks to protect them appropriately. Accordingly, the
minimum working age for domestic workers to be eighteen years but allows minor domestic
workers, who are above sixteen years of age but below eighteen years of age, to be engaged
in domestic work on completion of compulsory elementary education as prescribed under
the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
July 5, 2016

14
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 16 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall constitute a District
Board for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. Clause 25 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage it is not possible to give an exact estimate of
expenditure to be incurred. However, it is estimated that recurring expenditure of about
rupees One thousand crore would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  One hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

15
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clauses 29 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare, protection and security of domestic workers and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1573LS(S3)—26.07.2016.