'15 of 19'16. 
28 of 1853. 
As IlmIoDUCBD IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill NO.. 285 of 1980 . I , $ 
THE TEA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Tea Act, 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first' Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tea (Ametldment) Act, 1980. 
(2) This section and section 8 shall come into farce at OJ'lce. 
S (3) Sections 3 ana 4 shall be deemed to have come iilto force' on and 
with effect from the date of commencement of the Tea (Amendment) 
Act, 1916. 
(4) Section 7 shall be deemed to have come into force on and with 
effect from the 13th day of October, 1980. . 
10 (5) Sections 2, 5 and 6 shall come into force on sUch date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appOint. 
Z. In the' Tea Act, 1953 (hereinafter refeJ'ted to as the prlncip8.l Act), 
in section 10, in sub-section (2), after clause (j), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(jj) subscribing to the share capital of, 01' eta1q. batb' any 
agreement or other arranpment ("hetht'll' by war 01. pariDenhIp, 
joint venture or In any otMr ........ ) With, any tiOd,y COI7On1e for 
Short 
title aDd 
com-
meft~ 
Mento 
Amend-
mentor 
section 10. 

Amend-
ment of 
.ection 
16E. 
Insertion 
of new 
.ection 
16LL. 
Debts in-
curred 
and 
invest-
ments 
made by 
the autho-
rised per. 
lOll to 
have 
priority. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
27. 
A.-nend-
ment of 
section 
46. 
,".. i . ,,~... .... . . ' ,,~ _ ~ ..... 
2 
the purpose of promotlDr the development of tea Industry or for pro-
moUon and marketlnr of tea, In bella or elsewhere;". 
3. In the principal Act, in section 16E, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) in clause (a), between the words "by reckless investments 
or" and "creation Of incumbrances", the word "by" shall be inserted; S 
(b) the following Explanatoon shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
(Exptanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "incum-
brances" includes any liability which may be recovered or satis-
fied from the a'3sets of the tea undertaking or, as the case may be, 10 
tea unit or the person owning the tea undertaking or tea unit.'. 
4. After section 16L of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"16LL. Every debt arising out of any loan or any other financial 
accommodation obtained by the authorised person for carrying on IS 
the management of, or exercising functions of control in relation to, 
the whole or any part of a tea undertaking or tea unit, the manage-
ment of which has been taken over or is purported to have been 
taken over under section 16D or section 16E or section 16-1,-
(a) shall have priority over all other debts, whether secured 20' 
or unsecured, incurred before the management of such tea un-
dertaking or tea unit was taken over; 
(b) shall be a preferential debt within the meaning of 
aection 530 of the Companies Act, 1956, 
and all such debts shall rank equally among themselves and be paid 2S 
in full out of the assets of the tea undertaking or tea unit, unless 
S'llch assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall 
be recoverable from the owner Of the tea undertaking or tea unit as 
arrears of land revenue notwlthsta~ding that the period of manage-
ment or contra! has end~d due to expiry of the period for which it 30 
was taken over or due to cancellation of the order under section 1611 
or in pursuance of the order of any court.". 
5. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), clause (aa) 
shall be re-Iettered as clause (ab) and before that clause as so lI'e-
lettered, the following cla'USe shall be inserted, namely:- 3S 
"(aa) any sum of money including dividend, if any, realised by 
. the Board in carrying out any measure referred to in claUle· (jj) of 
sub-section (2) of .orection 10;". 
1 of 1956. 
~. Section 46 of the p~tincipal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section 
(1) thereofand,- .,.. 4C 
~(a) h'l sub-section~· (1) as so re-llwnb~red, for the words Uthe 
.!Ules , the words Uany . rule OT' ord~ shall be substituted; 

750'1.1976. 
15 of 1980. 
" 3 
(b)' after sub-section '(1) as so re-numbered, the folloWing suD-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government for any damage caused or likely to be' 
S caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended tQ' 
be done under this Act ot' any rule or order made thereunder,", 
7. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, any' 
action or thing (including any order passed or proceeding initiated) taken 
or done or purported to have been taken or done under sub-section (1) 
lo of section 16E of the principal Act at any time after the commencement 
of the Tea (Amendment) Act, 1976, shall be deemed to be as valid and 
effective as if the amendments made by section 3 had been in force at 
the time such action or thing was taken or done. 
8. (1) The Tea (Amendment) Ordinance, 1980, is hereby repealed. 
Valida-' 
tUm. 
Repeal 
and 
15 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken savini. 
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deem-
ed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by 
this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Tea Act, 1953 was amended by the Tea (Amendment) Act, 19'16, 
inteT alia, to enable the Central Government to take over the manage-
mento! a lick and uneconomic tea undertaking or tea unit. Seetion 16E 
which was inserted by the said Amendment Act specified the circum-
staDees in which the Central Government may take over a tea under-
takiDgor tea unit without invest~gation. Under sub-section (1) of the 
aai4 action 16K as originally enacted, the Central Government may, if 
sataft .. trom dooumel1tary or other evidence in its possession in relation 
to a tea undertaking or tea unit, that the persons in charge of such tea 
undertaking or tea unit have by reckless investment or creation of 
iDc:uIDbr'ances on the assets at the tea undertaking or tea unit or by 
diversjon of fupds, brought about a situation which is·Wre1y to afJaDt the 
prQciuction of tea. JnAIlufactur.ed or produced by the tea underUkiDg <or 
tea \Ulit and that immediate action 1$ necessary to p~~such a situa-
tion, wthorise by notified order any person or body of persone to tUe 
over the management of the whole or any part of the tea undertaking 
or tea unit. The intention w .. that the power under this provision 
should be capable of being used where the incumbrances created, irres-
pective of their being recklea or not, have brought about a situation 
likely to affect the production of tea manufactured or produced by the 
tea undertaking or tea unit. The intention was also that the expression 
"incumbrances" should take in all types of liabilities. A contrary view 
was taken by a single Judge at the CalC'Utta High Court to the effect that 
the expression "incumbranc.... would cover only incumbrances which 
have been created recklessly and that it would not cover all liabilities. 
An appeal against this w&s heard by a Division Bench and a stay order 
was granted by it till the disposal of the appeal. This appeal was dis-
missed and an appeal was preferred to the Supreme Court. Pending the 
decision in this appeal before the Supreme Court it was considered 
urgently expedient to amend the section suitably to bring out the in-
tention clearly. Hence the PresirtE'nt promulgat.ed on the 13th October, 
1980 the Tea (Amendment) Ordir.ance, 1980. 
2. The Ordinance amended section 16E of the Tea Act to-
(i) clarify that the word "reckless" in clause (a) of sub-section 
(1) of section 16E governs only "investments" and not "incum-
brances"; and 
(ii) amplify the meaning of "incumbrances" in the said pro-
vision so as to cover all kinds of liabilities which may be recovered 
or satisfied from the assets of a tea undertaking or a tea unit or the 
person owning such undertaking or unit. 
The Ordinance made the necessary validating provision and also inserted 
a new section 16LL relating to debts incurred and investments made by 
authorised persons (that is, persons appointed by the Central Govern-
ment to take over the management of a tea undertakiD~ or a tea unit)" 

•• 
I 
• to live priority to debts incurred and investments made by the autho-
riJed persons for carrying out the management or exercising the func-
tions of control in relation to a tea undertaking or a tea unit over all 
other debts so as to enable the authorised persons to obtain finance from 
financial institutions. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid OrdinaDOe.~rlunity is 
beinJ availed of·to make certain amendments in section&.J.O, 27'uci 46 
at "the ~a A-et. The amendment to section 10 is for the.~ Ql 
elUlbl1hg the Tea Board "to enter into agreements or arrangements wUb 
olber bodies COrporate for the purpose of promoting the deve10pmeDt of ~ 
industry or promotion and marketing of tea. in India or elsewhere. The 
amendment ·tosecUon 27 is cOIUl8qwtl'1ttlllto thia·amandmtmi. The"Untlild-
mentto seotion 46 is for the .purpose of 'pl'oYidbC inlmuaityto the<OeIIdn1 
Government in the same nuumer .. has been. ,.provided iD. ieCtion 28C(~) 
of the Industiies (Development and Reaulatton)' ·A'Ct, 1961. 
NEW bELHI; 
The 2ith. November. 1980. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM· 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 10 of the Tea Act, 1953 so as 
to enable the Tea Board to subscribe to the share capital of, or enter into 
partnership or any other joint venture with, any body corporate tor the 
purpose of promoting the development of tea industry or, for promotion 
and marketing of tea, in India or elsewhere. 
2. The above provision of the Bill, though only enabling in nature, may 
involve expenditure by the Tea Board by way of share capital participa-
tion or any other financial arrangement with any -body corporate for the 
purpose of promoting the development of tea industry or for promotion 
and marketing of tea, in India or elsewhere. As the Tea Board will not 
be in a position to meet this expenditure from its own resources. the 
required funds will have to be made available to the Tea Board from the 
Consolidated Fund of India either as a loan or as an investment. 
3. The amount of expenditure likely to be incurred by Tea Board 
would depend on the specific proposals for partnership, joint venture or 
any nther collaboration arrangement that may be received from time to 
time. It is, therefore, not possible at this stage to specify the recurring 
and non-recurring expenditure that will be involved if this Bill is enacted 
an~ brauiht into operation. 

Memorandum explaining the modifications contained in the Bill to replace 
the Tea (Amendment) Ordina7lCe, 1980 
In addition to the provisions contained in the Ordinance. the Bill COD-
tains three new provisions (vide clauses 2, ~. and 6 of the Bill). 
2. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 10 of the Tea Mt, by In-
serting in sub-section (2), a new clause (jj) to enable the Tea Board to 
enter into agreements or other arrangements with other bodies corporate 
for the purpose of promoting the development of tea industry or for pro-
motion and marketing of tea in India or elsewhere. Clause 5 of the Bill 
seeks to make the necessary consequential amendment in section 27 of 
the Act to provide that any sum of money including dividend realised by 
the Board as a result of such agreements or arrangements shall be credit-
ed to the Tea Fund. Clause 6 seeks to amend section 46 of the Act to 
provide immunity to the Central Government in the same manner as has 
been provided in section 29C (2) of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951. 

Functions 
oftbe 
Board. 
Power to 
take 
over tea 
undertak-
in&' or tea 
unit 
without 
investiga-
tion under 
certain 
circum-
stances. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Fund 
Protection 
cf action 
taken in 
good 
1.aith. 
• 
H. (1) 
~NlJ{URE_ 
~ nQM, '1M 'r.. AcE; W 
(,2& 01' 1~3). 
• • • 
• • 
• • ., 
(Z)· WJtaout, p'ejw1ice· tp. tbe .. p1lel'aUty of·tlle pm.v1aioPII Qt. sub-
~iQD (l},·tile meuurea .te.fc'ed. to tb.entin. mw·, pto~. foJ':'P'"' 
• • • • • 
HE. (1) Without pre'juclice ~ any other ~vt8ioR ef this Aet, if, 
from the documentary or other mdeBce in its poPeIBIen, the- Central 
Government is sattsfted, m relation to a tea uDderia1dDg or tea wt, 
tbat-
(a) the persons in charge of such teaund~ ~ tea unit 
have, by reckless investments or creation of incumbrances on the 
assets of the tea undertaking or tea unit, or by diversion of funds, 
brought about a situation which is likely to aftect the production of 
tea, manufactured or produced by the tea undertaking or tea untt, 
and that immediate action is necessary to prevent such a situation; or 
(b) it has been closed for a period of not less than three months 
(whether by reason of the voluntary winding up of the company 
owning the tea undertaking or tea unit or for any other reason) and 
such closure is prejudicial ttl the concerned tea undertaking or tea 
unit and that the financial condition of the company owning the tea 
undertaking or tea unit and the plant and machinery of such tea 
undertaking or tea unit are such that it is possible to restart the tea 
undertaking or tea unit and such restarting is necessary in the in-
terests of the general public, 
it may, by notified order, authorise any person or body of persons to 
take "ver the management of the whole or any part of the tea under-
taking or tea unit or to exercise in respect of the whole or any part of 
the tea undertaking or tea unit such functions of control as may be 
specified in the order. 
• • • • • 
27. (1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Tea Fund, and 
there shall be credited thereto-
• • • • • 
46. No suit, prosecution or othf:r legal proceeding shall lie apinst 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
• • • • • 
8 

BILL 
further _ amerlld the Tea Aet, 1963. 
(Shf'i pra'll4b KumClf' Mukhe.f'jee. 
Minister of Comm.ef'oe .NI 
Steel 4"4 Mi,,"). 