THE GAZETTED OFFICERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
(COMPULSORY NATIONAL DISASTER RESPONSE TRAINING)
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI GAJENDRA SINGH SHEKHAWA T, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory national disaster response training for all able-bodied
gazetted officers of the Central Government and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Gazetted Officers of the Central Government
(Compulsory National Disaster Response Training) Act, 2015.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a)  " gazetted officer" means  a Group ‘A’ or Group ‘B’ gazetted officer, below the
age of forty-five years, of the Central Government and includes officers belonging to
Bill No. 205 of 2015
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
All India Services but does not include officers of Indian Police Service, Central Armed
Police Forces and Armed Forces; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of five years from the date of
selection or promotion, as the case may be, to a gazetted post provide national disaster
response training to all able-bodied Gazetted Officers for a period of not less than three
months.
(2) The national disaster response training referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be
imparted in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall establish such number of institutions and take
such other necessary steps, as it may deem fit, to give effect to the provisions of
sub-section (1).
4. Every gazetted officer who successfully completes training under sub-section (1) of
section 3—
(i) shall be awarded a certificate to that effect by the Central Government; and
(ii) may, in situations of the natural and civil emergencies, be deputed to assist
the Armed Forces, police or disaster management personnel.
5. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Compulsory
national
disaster
response
training to
Gazetted
Officers of the
Central
Government.
Awarding of
certificate on
completion of
training.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is definitely a good idea to have a well trained civilian as well as a trained National
Disaster Response Force. Compulsory national disaster response training to all able-bodied
Gazetted Officers of the Central Government will make them more smart, fit, mature and
motivated. Such a step will provide trained volunteers whose services can be utilized during
civil or natural emergencies like earthquake, tsunami, cloudburst, hailstorm or floods in an
efficient manner.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for compulsory national disaster response training
to all Gazetted Officers of the Central Government with a view to develop a more strong sense
of loyalty, duty and self-discipline among them and prepare a trained manpower in reserve to
meet any eventuality or natural calamity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAJENDRA SINGH SHEKHAW AT
July 7, 2015.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for national disaster response training to be imparted to all
able-bodied gazetted officers of the Central Government. It further provides for setting up of
training institutions for the purpose of imparting national disaster response training. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore will be incurred per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory national disaster response training for all able-bodied gazetted
officers of the Central Government and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1458LS(S-3)—21-07-2015.