AS INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SABHA

97 Ny. 2001

Bill No. 205 of 2000.

THE POLITICAL PARTIES (ASSISTANCE AND REGULATION) BILL, 2000
By
Apv. UrtaMrao DHIKALE, M.P.
A
BILL *

to provide for assistance to political parties and their candidates by the Central
Government for ensuring their effective functioning and for promoting sound
democratic polity and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— .

1. (7) This Act may be called the Political Parties (Assistance and Regulation) Act,
2000. के

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

, 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Commission” means the Election Commission of India constituted under
article 324 of the Constitution;

(6) “political party” means an association or body of individual citizens of
India recognized by the Commission as a political party in accordance with the
provisions contained in the Representation of the People Act, 1951; and

Definitions.


Constitution of

Election Fund.

National
political parties

cilities to
political panties
during
elections

Facilities to
candidates
during elections,

Restriction on
political parties
during elections

Potitical party
shall maintain
accounts,

2
(०) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.

3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known as “Election
Fund” which shall have an initial capital of rupees one thousand crore.

(2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contribute such sum
of money every year to the fund, as may be prescribed.

i ery political party at the national level which has been registered with
the Election Commission shall be entitled to following facilitis

(i) rent free accommodation for office use in the National jital Territory

of Delhi and in the capital city of every State with one rent free telephone in
each place;

(ii) free electricity and water facilities in the accommodation upto such
estent as may be prescribed.

(b) Every political party which has been recognized at the State level shall be entitled
to following facilities—

(i) rent free accommodation in the capital city of the State coricerned with
one rent free telephone;

(ii) free electri
extent as may be prescribed.

ics in the accommodation upto such

5. During elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assembly of a
State every political party shall be entitled to free air time on Doordarshan and
All India Radio and also on private television channels for such time as may be
prescribed,

6. During elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assembly of a
State every candidate set up by a recognised political party shall be entitled to following
facilities during election campaign.

(i) such quantity of petrol and diesel as may be prescribed;

(ii) such quantity of paper for printing his election literature and the identity
slips for distribution to voters.

7. During the period of elections to the House of the People or Legislative Assembly
Skate, no party or candidate shall—

(i) use loudspeakers during campaign;

(ii) campaign after 10,00 PM. in the night;

(iii) paste posters or pamphlets or deface walls with election material; and
(iv) use more number of vehicles than allotted for campaign.

8. (1) Every political party to which assistance has been granted under section 4 and
5 shall prepare and maintain proper accounts and other relevant records in such form and
manner as may be prescribed.

(2) The accounts of a political party shall be audited by an auditor authorised to
audit the accounts of a company under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.

(3) Every political party which has been granted assistance under section 4 and 5
shali submit to the Central Government, within three months from the date of such grant
or such extended period, a certified copy of the audited accounts together with the audit
report thereon,

(4) The Central Government shall prepare for every election a report on the assistance
granted 19 the political parties.

20

25

30

35

38 of
40


3

(5) A copy of the report under sub-section (4) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.

9, (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Commission, by a
al Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

5 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the particulars required to be given in an application for grant of assistance

to a political party;

(b) the factors to be taken into account in granting the assistance;

10 (c) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, assistance shall
be granted to a political party;

ind other records under section 8;

(6) the preparation and maintenance of accoun
(e) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.

(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
15 before cach House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in successive sessions and if, before the expiry
of the session in’ which it is so laid or the session immediately following. both Houses
agree that the rule should be either modified or annulled, the rules shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the ease may be; so. however, that
20 any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Parliamentary democracy envisaged in the Constitution of India can develop and
succeed only when the political parties in the country function in an orderly manner and
under public scrutiny.

Credibility of political parties in the eyes of people has considerably been eroded.
Most of the political parties which are unable to bear the expenses of their candidates in
the elections adopt unhealthy methods and seek assistance from bodies/organisations in
the country and outside the country. It is also found that the political parties and individual
candidates seek money from the big houses and multinationals. Such illegal practices
encourage generation of black money and proliferation of small parties setting up their
candidates thereby putting unnecessary burden on the public resources, The circulation of
black money and influence of multi-nationals and big houses in the elections cause a great
set back to the smooth fiznctioning of the parliamentary democracy in the country. With a
view to check these tendencies and to set a healthy practice, it will be necessary for the
Government to bear the expenditure incurred or to be incurred by a political party on its
candidates for undertaking campaigning in the elections to the Lok Sabha or State Assembly.

Certain facilities should be given to recognised political parties for their effective
functioning and the facilities should be given in kind rather than in cash.

Certain regulations should also be imposed on political parties for orderly campaign
during election period.

The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.

New DELHI; UTTAMRAO DHIKALE
November 22, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

‘The Bill seeks to provide for assistance to political parties in respect of rent free
ommodation, telephone to recognised political parties. It further provides for certain
+ facilities 10 recognised political parties and candidates set up by such parties. The
: Il also seeks to constitute an Election Fund. It is difficult to estimate the precise financial
‘implications at this stage. However, to begin with, a recurring expenditure of rupees five
‘hundred crore per annum will be required. The expenditure will be made from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore will also be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules in consultation
with the Election Commission. The matters for which the tules may be framed are the
Particulars to be contained in an application of a political party for the grant of assistance,
factors to be taken into account for determining the quantum of assistance to be granted to
political party, etc. The delegation of legislative power, therefore, is of a normal character.

1


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for assistance to political partics and their candidates by the Central
Government for ensuring their effective functioning and for promoting sound
democratic polity and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Adv. Uttamrao Dhikale, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5333LS—08-12-2000.