As Inrropucep tn Low Sasia

१६0६५ :991

~ Bill No. 205 of 1991

THE CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991

A
BILL °

further fo amend the Customs Act, 1962.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India ag follows: —

1, (1) This Act may be called the Customs (Amendment) Act, 1991.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
5 may, by notification in the Officia! Gazette, appoint.

52 of 1962. 2, In section 27 of the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as

the principal Act),—

(i) in sub-section (1), for the word “duty”, wherever it occurs,
the words “duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty” shall be
10 substituted; i

f (ii) in sub-section (2), except in clauses (d) and (e) of the
first proviso, for the word “duty”, wherever it occurs, the words
“duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty” shall be substituted.

2. Section 47 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section
15 (1) of that section and after sub-section (7) as so re-numbered, the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: —

(2) where the importer fails to pay the import duty under sub-
section (1) within seven days from the date on which the bill of entry

Short

title and
commence=
ment,

Amend-
melt of
section 27.

Amend-
ment of
section 47.


ment of
section 48,

Amend-
ment of
section 57,
58, 60
and 67.

Amend-
ment of
section 59,

Insertion

of new
section 598.

Condi-
tions for
warehous-

ing of

certain

8००१३.

कलर 2

i (४) in the ame section, for the words

is returned to him for payment of duty he sI
such rate, not below twenty per cent, and not e
Per cent. per annum, as is for the time being fixed by 1
such duty till the date of payment of the said dut,
Provided that where the bill of entry is returned
duty before the commencement of the Customs (५
1991 and the importer has not paid such duty before ;
ment, the date of return of such bill oi entry to him
to be the date of such commencement for the ]
section.”. e a

4, In section 48 of the principal Act—
(® in the marginal heading, for the words “two
“thirty days” shall be substituted;

words “thirty days” shall be substituted.

\
5. in sections 57, 58, 60 and 67 of the p

“(1) The importer of any
section (1) of section 61,
assessed to duty
binding himself

by the Board; and

(©) to discharge all
provisions of this Act and the

such goods.”.
7. Aiter section 59 of the principal Act, the
inserted, namely:— “ao

“S9A. (1) Notwithstanding anything
(2) of section 23 and in any other pro
importer of any dutiable goods sp
of sub-section (1) of section 61, which have been
housing and assessed to duty under section 17


15

20

25

30

35

3

deposit fifty per cent, of the assessed duty and execute a bond bin-
ding himself in a sum equal to twice the amount of the balance of
such assessed duty and interest leviable on such balance,—

(a) to observe ail the provisions of this Act and the rules and
regulations in respect of such goods;

(b) to pay on or before a date specified in a notice of
demand,—

(i) all duties, and interest, if any, payable under sub-
section (3) of section 61; \

(i) rent and charges claimable on account of such
goods under this Act, together with interest on the same
from the date zo specified at the rate of six per cent. per
annum or such other rate as is for the time fixed by the
Board;

(©) io discharge all penalties incurred for violation of the
provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations in respect of
such goods,

(2) The duty paid under sub-section (J) shall be adjusted to-
wards the duty finally payable.

(3) A bond executed under this section by an importer in respect
of any goods shall continue in force notwithstanding the transfer

of the goods to any other person on the removal of goods to another
warehouse:

Provided that where the whole of the goods or any part thereof
are transferred to another person, the proper officer may accept a fresh
bond from the transferee in a sum equal to twice the amount of duty
and interest, if any, payable on the goods transferred and there-
upon the bond executed by the transferor shall be enforced for a sum
mentioned therein, less the amount for which a fresh bond is
accepted from the transferee.”,

8. In section 61 of the principal Act,—

(0) in sub-section (1) —

(a) in clause (b), for the words “three months”, the words
“thirty days” shall be substituted; |

(b) in the first proviso—

(A) in clause (i), for the words “three months”, the

words “thirty days” shall be substituted;
(B) in clause (४), the words “or three months, as the

case may be,” shall be omitted;

(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely: — है
“(2) Where any warehoused goods, specified in clause (a)
of sub-section (1), remain in a warehouse beyond a period of one
year, by reason of extension of the aforesaid period or other-

Amend-
ment of
section 61.


ment of
sections
60, 72
and 73.

Amend-
ment of
section
1298,

“section 59", wherever they occur, the words, figures and letter “scction

wise, interest at such rate as specified in
payable on the amount of duty on the wareho
the period from the expiry of the period of one
date of the clearance of the goods from the warehouse,

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in se
on any warehoused goods specified in clause
sub-section (/), the importer shall pay interest on the
of duty at such rate as specified in section 47, for the period f1
the expiry of seven days from the date on which the bill
entry is returned to the importer for warehousing the goods
under section 59A, till the date of clearance of the goods from
the warehouse: aye ae

Provided that the Board may, if it considers it necessary so
to do in the public interest, waive, by such order and under
circumstances of an exceptional nature, to be specified in such 15°
order, the whole or part of any interest payable under this
section in respect of any warehoused goods.”,

9. In sections 60, 72 and 73 of the principal Act, for the word and figures,

59 or section 59A” shall be substituted. 20

10, In section 129E of the principal Act, for the word “duty”, wherever
it occurs, the words “duty and interest” shall be substituted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

This Bill aims at amending the provisions mainly relating to ware-
housing of goods after import without payment of duty under the Customs
‘Act, 1962. Under the present law the imported goods may be stored
in bonded warehouses till their actual clearance for home consumption
on payment of appropriate duty or their re-export without payment of
duty to any foreign port. 318

2, Existing provisions permit warehousing for three months and
charging of interest at the rate of 18 per cent, on delayed clearance which

are being misused by the importers hy blocking large amounts of
revenues. * a

3. Besides, at present, there is no time limit for payment of duty
under section 47 of the Customs Act, 1962 and also for payment of
interest for delayed payment of duty. |

4, This Bill उलट to curtail the period of warehousing, prescribe the
increased rate of interest on duty leviable on the warehoused goods,

ensure prompt payment of duty and impose interest on delayed pay-
ments of duty.

5. The proposed amendments will expedite the realisation of
revenue and discourage indiscriminate warehousing of imported goods
and ensure prompt payment of duties, “iy

6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI; MANMOHAN SINGH.
The 10th December, 1991.

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND
274 (1) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter dated the 13th December, 1991 from Dr, Manmohan
Singh, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.]

The President having been informed of the subject matter of the
Customs (Amendment) Bill, 1991 recommends under clause (1) of article
117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution, the introduction of the
above Bill in Lok Sabha. ४


हू ANNEXURE

_ Extracts Rom THE Customs Act, 1962
(52 oF 1962)

* * * * *
ate 27. (1) Any person claiming refund of any duty—
for
satu. (i) paid by him in pursvance of an order of assessment; ar
of duty.

(i) borne by him,

may make an application for refund of such duty to the
Co:lector of Customs— ’

(a) in the case of any import made by any individ
his personal use or by Government or by any educational,
or charitable institution or hospital, before the expiry of one

(0) in any other case, before the expiry of six months,

from the date of payment of duty, in such form as may be
the regulations made in this behalf and the application 5
panied by such documentary or other evidence (including

been passed on by him to any

Provided that where an application re E
the commencement of the Central Excises and Cu:
ment) Act, 1991, such application shall be deemed to
under this sub-section and the same shall be deall with in
with the provisions of sub-section (2):

the case may be, shall not apply where any duty has been
protest.

Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, “the dat
ment of duty”, in relation to a person, other than the impo

(2) If, on receipt of any such application, the Assistant Ct
Customs is satisfied that the whole or any part of the duty pai
applicant is refundable, he may make an order accordingly
amount so determined shall be credited to the Fund:

Provided that the amount of duty as determined by the
Collector of Customs under the foregoing provisions of this


7

shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to the applicant, if
such amount is relatable to—

(a) the duty paid by the importer, if he had not passed on the
incidence of such duty to any other person;

(0) the duty on imports made by an individual for his personal
use; |

(०) the duty borne by the buyer, if he had not passed on the
incidence of such duty to any other person;

(d) the export duty as specified in section 26;
(e) drawback of duty payable under sections 74 and 75;

(f) the duty borne by any other such class of applicants as the

Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,

specify:

Provided further that no notification under clause (f) of the first
Proviso shall be issued unless in the opinion of the Central Government
the incidence of duty has not been passed on by the persons concerned
to any other person.

* * * * *

48. If any goods brought into India from a place outside India are
not cleared for home consumption or warehoused or transhipped within
forty-five days from the date of the unloading thereof at a customs
station or within such further time as the proper officer may allow or
if the title to any imported goods is relinquished, such goods may, after
notice 10 the importer and with the permission of the proper officer be
sold by the person having the custody thereof:

Provided that—

(a) animals, perishable goods and hazardous goods, may, with
the permission of the proper officer, be sold at any time;

(6) arms and ammunition may be sold at such time and place
and in such manner as the Central Government may direct,

Explanation —In this section, “arms” and “ammunition” have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Arms Act, 1959,

* * * * *

57. At any warehousing station, the Assistant Collector of Customs
may appoint public warehouses wherein dutiable goods may be deposited
without payment of duty.

58. (1) At any warehousing station, the Assistant Collector of Customs
may license private warehouses wherein dutiable goods imported by or
on behalf of the licensee, or any other imported goods in respect of
which facilities for deposits in a public warehouse are not available, may
be deposited without payment of duty. $

(2) The Assistant Collector of Customs may cancel a licence granted
under sub-section (1)—

(०) by giving one month’s notice in writing to the licensee; or

Proce-
dure in
case of
guods not
cleared,
ware-
housed,
or tran-
shipped
within
two
months
after
unload-

Appoint-
ing of
public
ware-
houses.
Licensing
of pri-
vate
ware-
houses.


(b) if the licensee has contra y pro
or the rules or regulations or committed breach of a1
ditions of the licence:

Provided that before any licence is cancelled under clau
licensee shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being

(3) Pending an enquiry whether a licence granted under,
(1) should be cancelled under clause (b) of sub-section (2), the
Collector of Customs may suspend the licence.

Ware- 59. (1) The importer of any dutiable goods which have been
housing for warehousing and assessed to duty under section 17 or secti
६ shall execute a bond binding himself in a sum equal to twice the amou

of the duty assessed on such goods,—

(@) to observe all the provisions of this Act and the rules
regulations in respect of such goods;

(b) to pay on or before a date specified in a notice of
all duties, rent and charges claimable on account of such gi
this Act, together with interest on the same from the
specified at the rate of six per cent. per annum on such ०
as is for the time being fixed by the Board; and

(०) to discharge all penalties incurred for violation of the
visions of this Act and the rules and regulations in respect ०
goods. 7

* कर * *

कर 60. When the provisions of section 59 have been
t y make

* * *
main (0) in the case of any other goods, till the e

housed. after the date on which the proper officer made an
permitting the deposit of the goods in a warehouse: ~

Provided that—

(i) in the case of any goods which are likely
aforesaid period of one year or three months, as |

may be reduced by the Collector of Customs to such
as he may deem fit; ॥

(ii) in the case of any goods which are not likely to
the aforesaid period of one year or three months, as the
may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the
of Customs for a period not exceeding six months and by #1
for such further period as it may deem fit:


9

Provided further that when the licence for any private warehouse, is
cancelled, the owner of any goods warehoused therein shall, within seven
days from the date on which noticg of such cancellation is given or within
such extended period as the proper officer may allow, remove the goods
from such warehouse to another warehouse or clear them for home
consumption or exportation,

(2) Where any warehoused goods remain in a wareholse beyond the
period of one year or three months specified in clause (a) or clause (b)
of sub-section (1) by reason of the extension of the aforesaid period or
otherwise, interest at such rate, not exceeding eighteen per cent. per
annum as is for the time being fixed by the Board, shall be payable on
the amount of duty on the warehoused goods for the period from the
expiry of the period of one year or, as the case may be, three months,
till the date of the clearance of the goods from the warchouse:

Provided that the Board may, if it considers :t necessary so to do in
the public interest, waive, by special order and under circumstances of
an exceptiona’ nature to be specified in such order, tha whole or part of
any interest payable under this sub-section in respect of any warehoused
goods.

* * * * *

67. The owner of any warehoused goods may, with the permission of
the proper officer, remove them from one warehouse to another, without
payment of duty, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed for the

due arrival of the warehoused goods at the warehouse to which removal
is permitted.

72, (1) In any of the following cases, that is to say. —

(a) where any warehoused goods are removed from a warehouse
in contravention of section 71;

(b) where any warehoused goods have not been removed from
a warehouse at the expiration of the period during w
permitted under section 61 to remain in a warehouse;

h gcods are

(०) where any warehoused goods have been taken under section
64 as samples without payment of duty;

(०) where any goods in respect of which a bond has been exe-
cuted under section 59 and which have not been cleared for home
consumption or exportation are not duly accounted for the sat'sfac~
tion of the proper officer;

the proper officer may demand, and the owner of such goods shal] forth-
with pay, the full amount of duty chargeable on account of such 0015

together with all penalties, rent, interest and other charges payable in
respect of such goods,

(2) If any owner fails to pay any amount demanded under sub-section
(7), the proper officer may, without prejudice to any other remedy, cause
to be detained and sold, after notice to the owner (any transfer of the
goods notwithstanding) such sufficient portion of the 80078, if any, in the
warehouse, as the said officer may select,

Removal
of goods
from one
ware-
house to
another,

Goods
improper-
ly remov-
ed from
ware-
house,
ete.


Cancel-

return
of ware-
housing

Deposit,
pending
appeal of
duty de-
manded
or
penalty
levied,

under section 59 have been cleared for

or are Meee duly accounted for, and when,
count of goods have been paid, the proper
bond as discharged

he person who has executed or is entitled to

= * *

123E. Where in any appepl under this Chapter, the
appealed against relates to any duty demanded in resp
are not under the control of the customs authorities or
under this Act, the person desirous of appearing against st
order shall, pending the appeal, deposit with the proper
demanded or the penalty levied:

Provided that where in any particular case, the
the Appellate Tribunal is of opinion that the d
or penalty levied would cause undue hardship to 5
tor (Appeals) or, as the case may be, the Appellate Tri
with such deposit subject to such conditions as he or i
impose so as to safeguard the interests of revenue.

* *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India

—