1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SATYA PAL SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In article 15 of the Constitution, clause (5) shall be omitted.
3. The existing article 26 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) thereof
and after clause (1) as so renumbered, the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 25, the State shall not control,
administer or manage, whatsoever, any institution, including its properties, established
Bill No. 205 of  2019
Short title.
Amendment of
article 15.
Amendment of
article 26.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
or maintained for religious or charitable purposes by a religious denomination or any
section thereof.
(3) All laws in force in the territory of India in so far as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of this article shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(4) The State shall not make any law which enables it to control, administer or
manage, whatsoever, any institution, including its properties, established or maintained
for religious or charitable purposes by a religious denomination or any section thereof,
and, any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of such
contravention, be void.
(5) In this article the expressions "law" and "laws in force" have same meaning
as respectively assigned to them in clause (3) of article 13.".
4. The existing article 27 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) thereof
and after clause (1) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, the Consolidated Fund
of a State, the Contingency Fund of India or the Contingency Fund of a State or out of
the fund of any public body shall be appropriated for advancement or promotion of a
section of citizens solely or primarily on the basis of their religious affiliation or
belonging to one or more religious or linguistic denomination.".
5. In article 28 of the Constitution, after clause ( 3), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(4) Nothing in this Constitution shall be deemed to forbid the teaching of traditional
Indian knowledge or ancient texts of India in any educational institution, wholly or partly
maintained out of State Funds.".
 6. In article 29 of the Constitution, in the marginal heading, for the words "interests of
minorities", the words "cultural and educational rights" shall be substituted.
7. In article 30 of the Constitution—
(a) in the marginal heading for the word "minorities", the words "all sections of
citizens, whether based on religion or language", shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (1), for the word "minorities", the words "sections of citizens" shall
be substituted;
(c) in clause (1A) for the words "a minority", the words "a section of citizens"
shall be substituted; and
(d) in clause (2), for the words "a minority", the words "a section of citizens"
shall be substituted.
Amendment of
article 27.
Amendment of
article 28.
Amendment of
article 29.
Amendment of
article 30.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As per our Constitution, the State has no religion. The State has to treat all religions
and religious people equally and with equal respect without, in any manner, interfering with
their right to freedom of religion, faith and worship. As evident from the sub-text of the
debates of the Constituent Assembly, the rights assured for the majority were only made
explicit to the minorities as an assurance to the latter in the backdrop of the peculiar
circumstances then prevailing in the aftermath of partition. In any case, it was never the
intention of the makers of our Constitution to deny to the majority the rights expressly provided
to the minority. Yet, it gradually led to interpretations that only the minorities were given
rights withheld from the majority generating an unhealthy feeling of discrimination among
the majority community. It goes without saying that nursing any real or perceived grievance
against the State by any section of citizens, majority or minority, is detrimental to the unity
and integrity of the country.
Article 26 bestows rights on all religious denominations, irrespective of majority or
minority, to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes, to manage
their own affairs, and to own, acquire and administer property thereof. In a catena of
judgements, the Supreme Court iterated the same. In Ratilal Panachand Gandhi  v. State of
Bombay, it was held "in regard to affairs in matters of religion, the right of management
given to a religious body is a guaranteed fundamental right which no legislation can take
away. On the other hand, as regards administration of property which a religious denomination
is entitled to own and acquire, it has undoubtedly the right to administer such property but
only in accordance with law. This means that the State can regulate the administration of
trust properties by means of laws validly enacted; but here again it should be remembered
that under article 26(d), it is the religious denomination itself which has been given the right
to administer its property in accordance with any law which the, State may validly impose. A
law, which takes away the right of administration altogether from the religious denomination
and vests it in any other or secular authority, would amount to violation of the right which is
guaranteed by article 26(d) of the Constitution". The apex Court in Pannalal Bansilal Pitti
v. State of Andhra Pradesh opined "While articles 25 and 26 granted religious freedom to
minority religions like Islam, Christianity and Judaism, they do not intend to deny the same
guarantee to Hindus. Therefore, protection under articles 25 and 26 is available to the people
professing Hindu religion, subject to the law therein. The right to establish a religious and
charitable institution is a part of religious belief or faith and, though law made under
clause (2) of article 25 may impose restrictions on the exercise of that right, the right to
administer and maintain such institution cannot altogether be taken away and vested in other
party; more particularly, in the officers of a secular Government".
There has been widespread legitimate grievance and feeling of discrimination among
Hindus that despite the Constitutional provisions and judicial decisions, Hindu temples and
religious and charitable institutions are routinely taken over by  the secular State on the
pretext of maladministration, mismangement, etc., whereas mosques and churches of the
minorities are allowed to be exclusively managed by the respective communities even though
article 26 confers right equally upon all sections of citizens. Hindus also genuinely feel that
such State control results in despoiling the Hindu religious centres, large scale
misappropriation of the temples' income and properties and its redirection to secular purposes
by the State, which is a major factor in the grinding poverty afflicting most Hindu temples,
priests and their families. In order to maintain the secular character of the State and prevent
it from usurping the religious and charitable institutions of any religious denomination or a
section thereof, it is felt necessary to amend article 26 of the Constitution.

Article 27 provides that no person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds
of which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion or
maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination. Hon'ble Prime Minister
Shri Narendra Modi as the then Chief Minister of Gujarat had in his speech to the National
Developmental Council on 19th December 2007 took the stand that discrimination amongst
the eligible beneficiaries based on religion will not help the cause of taking the people of
India together on the path of development, and the correct criteria for flow of funds for
various schemes  and programmes should be based on principles of equity by taking only
socio-economic criteria alone. In the interest of maintaining true secular character of the
State, there is imperative need for amendment of article 27 forbidding expenditure from the
Consolidated or Contingency Fund of Union or any State or from the funds of any public
body for any purpose premised solely or primarily on the religious affiliation or language.
Language as a primary or sole consideration should also be excluded as certain languages
have exclusive association with certain religions which may be used as subterfuge to
circumvent the proposed embargo.
Article 28 rightly keeps religious instructions out of public educational system in the
country. However, it was never the intention of the framers of the Constitution to keep the
study and learning of traditional knowledge systems and civilizational heritage including
study of such great texts like the V edas, the Upanishads, the Mahabharata, the Ramayana,
etc. from out of public education system, yet, these have been completely kept out of education
system leading to deracination of Indians from their cultural and civilizational moorings
which does not augur well for the future of the country. There is thus a case for amendment
of article 28 to provide for teaching of our traditional knowledge and ancient texts.
Article 29 confers cultural and educational rights to all sections of citizens, majority
or minority, having distinct language, script or culture of their own. However, the word
'minorities' in the marginal heading of article  29 is incongruent with the body of its contents
as also with the group heading 'cultural and educational rights'. Such incongruence has the
potential for misunderstanding as if these rights are conferred only on minorities. It is,
therefore, felt necessary to amend article 29 to remove any doubts.
Our Constitution mandates that the State shall not discriminate on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them. Article 30, as it stands, confers educational
rights on religious and linguistic minorities without saying anything about the majority. If it
had not assumed the same rights for the majority, it would not had been passed by the
Constituent Assembly. An eleven-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in T.M.A. Pai
Foundation v. State of Karnataka expressed an expansive opinion when it said, "The right to
establish and maintain educational institutions may also be sourced to article 26(a), which
grants, in positive terms, the right to every religious denomination or any section thereof to
establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes, subject to public
order, morality and health". Further, the aspirations for conserving and communicating
religious and cultural traditions  and language to succeeding generations is legitimate and
applies to all groups, big or small. It is, therefore, felt that the scope of article 30 of the
Constitution should be widened to include all communities and sections of citizens who
form a distinct religious or linguistic group. Consequent to such proposed amendment,
clause (5) of  article 15, inserted by the Constitution (Ninety-third) Amendment Act, 2005,
loses its relevance and accordingly it is proposed to omit clause ( 5) of article 15 of the
Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SATYA PAL SINGH
July 18, 2019.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * * * * *
15. (1) This State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
* * * * * * * * * *
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent
the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.
* * * * * * * * * *
26. Subject to public order, morality and health, every religious denomination or any
section thereof shall have the right—
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes;
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
27. No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are specifically
appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion or maintenance of any particular
religion or religious denomination.
28. (1) No religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly
maintained out of State funds.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educational institution which is administered
by the State but has been established under any endowment or trust which requires that
religious instruction shall be imparted in such institution.
(3) No person attending any educational institution recognised by the State or receiving
aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in any religious instruction that may be
imparted in such institution or to attend any religious worship that may be conducted in such
institution or in any premises attached thereto unless such person or, if such person is a
minor, his guardian has given his consent thereto.
29.  (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory if India or any part thereof
having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the
same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained
by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them.
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.
Freedom to
manage
religious
affairs.
Freedom as to
payment of
taxes of
promotion of
any particular
religion.
Freedom as to
attendance at
religious
instruction or
religious
worship in
certain
educational
institutions.
Protection of
interests of
minorities.
5

6
30. (1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any property
of an educational institution established and administered by a minority referred to in
clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such
law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the
right guaranteed under that clause.
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against
any educational institution on the ground that it is under the management of a minority,
whether based on religion or language.
* * * * * * * * * *
Right of
minorities to
establish and
administer
educational
institutions.

MGIPMRND—2676LS(S3)—22.10.2019.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr.  Satya Pal Singh, M.P .)