THE INDIAN DIASPORA  AND EDUCATION INFRASTRUCTURE
(BRAIN DRAIN CESS) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
BASIS OF CHARGE
3. Charge of cess.
4. Identification of non-resident citizens.
5. V oluntary contribution to the Funds.
6. Income received in the previous year.
7. Registration.
8. Deductions for contributions to research and charity.
9. Calculation of cess.
10. Exemption for tax relief beneficiaries.
11. Tax relief upon re-entry.
CHAPTER III
T
AX MANAGEMENT
12. Tax Authorities.
13. Rectification of mistake.
14. Notice of demand.
15. Recovery of taxes.
16. Advance payment of taxes.
17. Differences in tax brackets.
18. Revision of tax brackets and tax rates.
Bill No.  206 of  2017
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

(ii)
CLAUSES
CHAPTER IV
COOPERATION WITH DESTINATION COUNTRIES
19. Agreements with host countries.
20. Disambiguation of authority.
21. Freedom of emigration.
22. Tax liability for transfer from resident to an assessee.
CHAPTER V
I
NDIAN NATIONAL SCHOLARSHIP AND RESEARCH FUND
23. Collection and distribution authorities.
24. Corpus fund.
25. Need based scholarship distribution.
26. Reservation.
27. Eligible universities in India
28. Scholarship abroad.
29. Eligible universities abroad.
30. Eligible fields of study.
31. Scope of expansion of eligible fields of study.
32. Service obligation requirement.
33. Research fund.
34. Selection criteria.
35. Compliance and penalties.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROVISIONS REGARDING CAPITAL CREATION
36. Distribution of funds to the Fund of Funds for Startups.
CHAPTER VII
PENALTIES AND PROSECUTIONS
37. Notification in passport.
38. Additional Penalty.
39. Exceptions for special circumstances.
40. Disclosure of income and taxes.
41. Application of Act No. 22 of 2015.
CHAPTER VIII
G
ENERAL PROVISIONS
42. Service of notice generally.
43. Authentication of tax authority.
44. Rounding off of income, value of asset and tax.
45. Return of income not to be deemed invalid.

(iii)
CLAUSES
46. Cognizance of offence.
47. Condone delays in approval.
48. Income Tax papers to be available for the purposes of this Act.
49. Amendment of Income Tax Act, 1961.
50. Power to remove difficulties.
51. Power to make rules.

1
THE INDIAN DIASPORA AND EDUCATION INFRASTRUCTURE
(BRAIN DRAIN CESS) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the imposition of a temporary cess to be levied on the foreign country
income tax payments of ordinarily non-resident Indian citizens; the procedure for
dealing with the collection of such cess, and to provide for the establishment of a
Scholarship and Research Fund subject to service obligation and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Diaspora and Education Infrastructure (Brain
Drain Cess) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 206 of  2017
5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "assessee" means—
(i) all non-resident Indian citizens residing or intend to reside in other
countries, States and territories, notwithstanding of the meaning as defined under
clause (6) of section 6 of the Income Tax Act, 1961; or
(ii) non-resident Indian citizens holding a valid work permit, if applicable;
or
(iii) non-resident Indian citizens holding a valid immigrant visa, if
applicable; or
(iv) non-resident Indian citizens working as part of a contract with foreign
Governments, entities, and organizations, if applicable; or
(v) every person who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of
this Act; or
(vi) every person who is deemed to be an assessee in default under any
provision of this Act;
(b) "assessment year" means the period of twelve months beginning on the
1st day of April every year, unless otherwise specified by the Central Government in
this behalf;
(c) "Board" means the Indian National Scholarship and Research Board
established under section 22;
(d) "host country" means the country of residence for the assessee in question;
(e) "income" as defined under clause (24) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and shall
apply to all assessees;
(f) "Income-tax Officer" means a person appointed to be an Income-tax Officer
under section 117 of the Income Tax Act, 1961;
(g) "India" means the territory of India as referred to in article 1 of the
Constitution, its territorial waters, sea-bed and sub-soil underlying such waters,
continental shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone or any other Maritime Zone as referred to
in the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime
Zones Act, 1976 and the air space above its territory and territorial waters;
(h) "resident" means a person defined as resident under clause (42) of section 2
of the Income Tax Act, 1961;
(i) "non-resident citizens" means all Indian citizens who not defined as "non-
resident" under clause (30) of section 2 of the Income Tax Act, 1961;
(j) "person" includes individuals; and
(k) "legal immigrant status" refers to, by the assessee, the obtaining of,
inter alia, the following:—
(i) work permit;
(ii) immigrant visa;
(iii) Optional Period of Training (OPT) certificate;
(iv) Government contract;
(v) private entity contract;
(vi) private or non-profit organization contract;
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.

3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(vii) International organization contract;
(viii) any other visa that allows for full employment; and
(ix) any other document issued in relation to legal employment in host
country.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Income Tax Act, 1961 and the Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets (Imposition of Tax)
Act, 2015 shall have the meanings, respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
B
ASIS OF CHARGE
3. (1) There shall be charged  on every assessee for every assessment year or until
the year as provided in this Act, after the commencement of this Act, subject to the
provisions of this Act, a cess in respect of his total foreign income tax liability of the
previous year at the rate as provided under section 9.
(2) The resulting revenue from the levy of the cess as mentioned under sub-section
(1) and as collected by tax authorities under section 12 shall only be used for the purposes
and in the manner as prescribed under section 24 and section 36.
4. (1) Every assessee who is non-resident citizen and is subject to the provisions of
this Act shall be identified as:
(a) an assessee who migrate from India to another country, by obtaining legal
immigrant status in the host country, through an official document issued by the host
country, on a temporary or permanent basis, after the commencement of this Act, for
upto five years since the date of migration;
(b) an assessees income of whom is subject to taxation, notwithstanding section
6 and 7 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, including any income accrued or is likely to be
accrued within or outside the territory of India;
(2) Every assessee identified under sub-section (1) shall be contacted by the
Ministry of External Affairs for the execution of the provisions of this Act which shall
maintain a register of non-resident citizens as per provisions of section 7:
Provided that the employees of State Governments and Union territories as per
the requirements of their job, who leave the territory of India for work related activities
and Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) shall be excluded from being subject to the
provisions of this Act:
Provided further that the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, update or amend the list of persons to be excluded from the provision of this
Act at any time after the commencement of this Act.
5. Every citizen, including ordinarily non-resident citizen, notwithstanding their
status as an assessee, may voluntarily contribute to the Funds listed under section 24
or the Funds or trusts listed under section 8.
6. In the absence of notarized income tax returns filed by the assessee as per
section 7, the following incomes shall be deemed to be received in the previous year :—
(i) the annual accretion in the previous year to the balance at the credit of an
employee participating in a recognised provident fund, to the extent provided in rule
6 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1961 and the corresponding
law in the host country;
(ii) the transferred balance in a recognised provident fund, to the extent provided
in sub-rule (4) of rule 11 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1961
and the corresponding law in the host country;
43 of 1961.
22 of 2015.
Charge of cess.
Identification
of non-resident
citizens.
V oluntary
contribution to
the Funds.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Income
received in
previous year.
43 of 1961.

4
Registration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(iii) the official figure cited in the filing of income tax returns made by the
assessee, as obtained from the tax collection agency of the host country, as per the
provision of section 24.
7. Every assessee, upon obtaining legal immigrant status, as  mentioned under section
4 shall,—
(a) register with the Ministry of External Affairs, as per provisions of Section 4;
(b) upon receiving income tax returns from the host country shall report to the
Ministry of External Affairs a notarized copy of the income tax returns, along with the
payment of cess, if applicable in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) In computing the total liability of an assessee through his notarized copy of his
income tax returns as per provisions of section 7, there shall be deducted, in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of this section, the sums specified in sub-section (2).
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely:—
(a) any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to a research association
within the territory of India, which has as its object the undertaking of research in
social sciences or stastical research or scientific research or to a University, college
or other institution within the territory of India to be used for scientific research:
Provided that such association, University, college or institution is for the time being
approved for the purposes of clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 of the Income
Tax Act, 1961;
(b) any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year after furnishing the
certificate referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A) of section 35CCA of
Income Tax Act, 1961 from such association or institution within the territory of
India—
(i) which has as its object the undertaking of any programme of rural
development, to be used for carrying out any programme of rural development
in India; or
(ii) which has as its object the training of persons forimplementing
programmes of rural development;
(c) any sum paid by the assessee in any previous year ending on or before the
31st day of March, 2002 to an association or institution, which has as its object the
undertaking of any programme of conservation of natural resources or of afforestation,
to be used for carrying out any programme of conservation of natural resources
or of afforestation approved first time for the purposes of section 35CCB of the
Income Tax Act, 1961;
(d) any sum paid by the assessee in any previous year ending on or before the
31st day of March, 2002 to such fund for afforestation as is notified by the
Central Government under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 35CCB of the
Income Tax Act, 1961;
(e) any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to a rural development
fund set up and notified by the Central Government for the purposes of clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of  section 35CCA of the Income Tax Act, 1961;
(f) any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to the National Urban
Poverty Eradication Fund set up and notified by the Central Government
for the purposes of clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 35CCA of the
Income Tax  Act, 1961;
(g) any sums paid by the assessee in the previous year as donations to—
(i) the National Defence Fund set up by the Central Government; or
Deductions for
contributions to
research and
charity.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.

5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(ii) the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund referred to in the Deed of
Declaration of Trust adopted by the National Committee at its meeting held on
the 17th day of August, 1964; or
(iii) the Prime Minister's Drought Relief Fund; or
(iv) the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund; or
(v) the National Children's Fund; or
(vi) any Zila Saksharta Samiti constituted in any district under the
chairperson of the Collector of that district for the purposes of improvement of
primary education in villages and towns in such district and for literacy and
post-literacy activities; or
(vii) the National Blood Transfusion Council or to any State Blood
Transfusion Council which has its sole object the control, supervision, regulation
or encouragement in India of the services related to operation and requirements
of blood banks; or
(viii) any fund set up by a State Government to provide medical relief to
the poor; or
(ix) the Army Central Welfare Fund or the Indian Naval Benevolent Fund
or the Air Force Central Welfare Fund established by the armed forces of the
Union for the welfare of the past and present members of such forces or their
dependants; or
(x) the Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister's Cyclone Relief Fund, 1996; or
(xi) the National Illness Assistance Fund; or
(xii) the Chief Minister's Relief Fund or the Lieutenant Governor's Relief
Fund in respect of any State or Union territory, as the case may be;
(xiii) the National Sports Fund to be set up by the Central Government; or
(xiv) the National Cultural Fund set up by the Central Government; or
(xv) the Fund for Technology Development and Application set up by the
Central Government; or
(xvi) the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities constituted under sub-section (1)
of section 3 of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999; or
(xvii) the Eastern Assam Social Habitat Welfare And Relief set up by the
Central Government; or
(xviii) the Swachh Bharat Kosh, set up by the Central Government, other
than the sum spent by the assessee in pursuance of Corporate Social
Responsibility under sub-section (5) of section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013;
or
(xix ) the Clean Ganga Fund, set up by the Central Government, where
such assessee is a resident and such sum is other than the sum spent by the
assessee in pursuance of Corporate Social Responsibility under sub-section (5)
of section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013; or
(xx) the National Fund for Control of Drug Abuse constituted under section
7A of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985; or
(xxi) any other fund or any institution to which this section applies; or
44 of 1999.
18 of 2013.
18 of 2013.
61 of 1985.

6
Calculation of
cess.
Exemption for
tax relief
beneficiaries.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(xxii) the Government or any local authority, to be utilized for any charitable
purpose; or
(xxiii) an authority constituted in India by or under any law enacted either
for the purpose of dealing with and satisfying the need for housing,
accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or improvement
of cities, towns and villages, or for both; or
(xxiv) the Government or to any such local authority, institution or
association as may be approved in this behalf by the Central Government, to be
utilized for the purpose of promoting family planning.
(3) No deduction shall be allowed under this section in respect of any sum exceeding
the total cess liability of the assessee.
(4) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any assessment
year in respect of any payments of the nature specified in sub-section ( 2), deduction shall
not be allowed in respect of such payments under any other provision of this Act for the
same or any other assessment year.
9. (1) If the Central Government provides that the cess specified under section 3 shall
be charged for any assessment year at any rate or rates, cess at that rate or those rates shall
be charged for that year in accordance with, and subject to the provisions (including provisions
for the levy of additional cess) of this Act in respect of the total income tax payments of the
previous year of every assessee, whereas upon the commencement of this Act, the cess
rates as specified under the Schedule to this Act shall apply:
Provided that where by virtue of any provision of this Act, cess is to be charged in
respect of the income tax payments for a period other than the previous year, cess shall be
charged accordingly.
(2) In respect of income chargeable under sub-section (1), income-tax shall be deducted
at the source or paid in advance, where it is so deductible or payable under any provision of
section 24.
(3) The Tax authorities specified under section 11 shall receive all necessary information
from the Ministry of External Affairs under the provisions of section 7 about the assessee for
the execution of the provisions of this Act.
(4) Tax authorities specified under section 11 shall present an annual report, including
the recommendations for cess rates, to the Central Government, which shall include:—
(a) comparative inflation between India and major host countries, as provided
under section 18;
(b) foreign exchange rates, and the purchasing power parity between India and
major host countries, as provided under section 18;
(c) revision of tax brackets for the imposition of cess, according to the change in
income distribution of assesees; and
(5) The Central Government shall, by notification, amend the cess rates at any time.
10. Every assessee obtaining tax-relief from host countries for taxes paid in India
shall be exempted from the provisions of section 3, if the tax authorities, as specified
under section 11, receives and verifies information as obtained under section 7.
11. (1) Every assessee returning to reside in India, within a period of ten years
from the date of migration, on a permanent basis, shall receive the benefits of twenty
per cent. rebate on the total cess paid by the assessee, if he files tax returns under the
provisions of Income Tax Act, 1961,—
(a) an employee of the Central Government, a public or private company
registered under the Indian Companies Act, 2013, organization, local or State
Tax relief upon
re-entry.
43 of 1961.

7
Tax Authorities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
Government, or non-profit  entity, and any similar entity or organization within the
territory  of India; or
(b) self-employed person within the territory of India;
(c) business owner or investor within the territory of India,  as defined by the
Income Tax Act, 1961.
(2) The Central Government shall, by notification, change the rebate on the total
cess under the provisions of sub-section (1) in such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
TAX MANAGEMENT
12. (1) The income-Tax authorities specified in section 116 of the Income Tax Act shall
be the tax authorities for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every Income-Tax authority shall in cooperation with the corresponding host country
tax authority, exercise the powers and perform the functions of a tax authority under this Act
in respect of any person within his jurisdiction, and subject to the provisions of sub-section (6).
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) and (6), the jurisdiction of a tax authority
under this Act, in addition to the jurisdiction granted under the Income-tax Act, 1961 by
virtue of orders or directions issued under section 120 of that Act (including orders or
directions assigning the concurrent jurisdiction), will also include the jurisdiction over non-
resident Indian citizens, subject to provisions of section 19.
(4) The tax authority having jurisdiction in relation to an assessee who has no income
assessable to income-tax under the Income Tax Act shall be the tax authority having
jurisdiction in respect of the area in which the assessee resides or carries on its business or
has its principal place of business.
(5) Section 118 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and any notification issued thereunder
shall apply in relation to the control of tax authorities as they apply in relation to the control
of the corresponding income-tax authorities, except to the extent to which said authorities
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise direct in respect of any tax authority.
(6) The Tax authorities shall coordinate with the respective host country tax authorities
either unilaterally or through the Ministry of External Affairs in the execution of the provisions
of this Act.
(7) The Central Government, shall, by notification, make rules to update the jurisdiction
of tax authorities, or establish a body exclusively for the purposes of executing the provisions
of this Act.
13. (1) The tax authority may amend any order passed by it under this Act so as to
rectify any mistake apparent from the record.
(2) No amendment under this section shall be made after a period of four years from
the end of the assessment year in which the order sought to be amended was passed.
(3) The tax authority shall not make any amendment, which has the effect of enhancing
the cess liability owed under the provisions of section 3 or reducing a refund or otherwise
increasing, the liability of the assessee under the provisions of Section 3 of this Act, unless
the authority concerned has given to the assessee adequate opportunity for appeal.
(4) The tax authority concerned may make an amendment under this section—
(a) on its own motion; or
(b) on the application made to it by the assessee or, as the case may be, by the
Assessing Officer.
(5) Any application received by the tax authority for amendment of an order shall be
decided within a period of six months from the end of the month in which such application is
received by it.
Rectification of
mistake.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
40

8
Notice of
demand.
Differencies in
tax brackets.
Revision of tax
brackets and
tax rates.
Agreements
with host
countries.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(6) In case where the order has been made in an appeal or revision, the power of the tax
authority to amend the order shall be restricted to matters other than those decided in appeal
or revision.
14. Any sum payable in consequence of any order made under this Act shall be
demanded by a tax authority by serving upon the assessee a notice of demand in such form
and manner as provided under section 19 and section 42.
15. The tax authorities shall execute the provisions of this Act in relation to the
recovery of cess liability from assessees as per the Central Acts passed in accordance
the provisions of section 18.
16. The tax authorities shall, in coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs,
provide for advance payment of cess liability for assessees subject to the provisions of
sections 3, 7, and 8, through a collection mechanism determined by the tax authorities
under section 17.
17. The tax authorities shall, by notification make rules in addition to the provisions of
section 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 21 of this Act.
18.  (1) The tax authorities, as identified under the provisions of section 12 shall make
recommendations to the Central Government on the revision of cess rates and tax brackets
for the purpose of executing the provisions sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 9.
(2) The Central Government shall, by notification, make rules according to the
recommendations sent by the tax authorities, for the purpose of executing the provisions of
this Act.
CHAPTER IV
C
OOPERATION WITH DESTINATION COUNTRIES
 19. (1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of
any other country for—
(a) recovery of tax under this Act and under the corresponding law in force in
that country:
(b) setting up mechanism for the cooperation between the tax authority under
the provisions of section 12 and the corresponding tax collection authority in the host
country:
(c) granting of relief in respect of —
(i) income on which tax has been paid both under this Act and under the
corresponding law in force in that country: or
(ii) cess chargeable under this Act:
(d) avoidance of double taxation of same income under this Act and under the
corresponding law in force in that country;
(e) exchange of information for the execution of the provisions of this Act;
(f) exchange of information for the prevention of evasion or avoidance of tax on
foreign income chargeable under this Act or under the corresponding law in force in
that country, or investigation of cases of such evasion or avoidance:
(g) carrying out any other purpose of this Act not expressly covered under clauses
(a) to (d) or the corresponding law in force in that country.
(2) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of any
specified territory outside India for the purposes specified under sub-section (1).
Recovery of
taxes.
Advance
payment of
taxes.

9
Disambiguation
of authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, make such provisions as may be
necessary for implementing the agreements referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2).
(4) Any specified association in India may enter into an agreement with any specified
association in the specified territory outside India for the purposes of sub-section (1) and the
Central Government may by notification make such provisions as may be necessary for
adopting and implementing such agreement.
20. Any term used but not defined in this Act or in the agreement referred to in sub-
sections (1), (2) or sub-section (4) of section 24 shall, unless the context otherwise requires,
and is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the agreement, have the meaning
assigned to it in the notification issued by the Central Government and such meaning shall
be deemed to have effect from the date on which the said agreement came into force.
21. None of the provisions of this Act, or any other rules made thereunder shall deny
any citizen of India, the freedom to emigrate from the country, subject to reasonable
restrictions, including the provisions of section 37 and the provisions under the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
 22. (1) Where on transfer of assets by virtue or in consequence whereof, either alone
or in conjunction with associated operations, any income is payable to an assessee, the
following provisions shall apply—
(a) where any resident has, by means of any such transfer, either alone or in
conjunction with associated operations, acquire any rights by virtue of which he has,
within the meaning of this section, power to enjoy, whether forthwith or in the future,
any income of an assessee which, if it were income of the first- mentioned person, may
be chargeable to income-tax, that income shall, whether it may or may not have been
chargeable to income- tax apart from the provisions of Section 93 of the Income Tax
Act, be deemed to be income of the first-mentioned person for all the purposes of this
Act;
(b) where, whether before or after any such transfer, any such resident receives
or is entitled to receive any capital sum the payment whereof is in any way connected
with the transfer or any associated operations, then any income which, by virtue or in
consequence of the transfer, either alone or in conjunction with associated
operations, has become the income of an assessee shall, whether it may or may not
have been chargeable to income-tax apart from the provisions of Section 93 of the
Income Tax Act, be deemed to be the income of the first-mentioned person for all the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Where any person has been charged to cess on any income deemed to be his under
the provisions of this section and that income is subsequently received by him, whether as
income or in any other form, it shall not again be deemed to form part of his income for the
purposes of this Act.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply if the resident in sub-section (1)
shows to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer that—
(a) neither the transfer nor any associated operation had for its purpose or for
one of its purposes the avoidance of liability to taxation; or
(b) the transfer and all associated operations were bona fide commercial
transactions and were not designed for the purpose of avoiding liability to taxation.
Freedom of
emigration.
Tax liability for
transfer from
resident to an
assessee.
45 of 1860.
43 of 1961.

10
Collection and
distribution
authorities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
CHAPTER V
INDIAN NATIONAL SCHOLARSHIP AND RESEARCH FUND
23. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by the notification
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established a Board to be called
as the Indian National  Scholarship and Research Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) Union Minister of Human Resource Development, Chairperson,
ex-officio;
(b) the Secretary, Union Ministry of Human Resource Development; member,
ex-officio;
(c) the Chairperson, University Grants Commission, member, ex-officio;
(d) three persons one to represent the Union Ministry concerned with technical
education, another to represent the Union Ministry of Finance and the third to represent
any other Union Ministry to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed, Members;
(e) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of
the People from among its members and one by the Council of States from its members,
members;
(f) two members to be nominated by the State Governments, on a rotational
basis, member;
(g) three other members having expertise in the field to be nominated by
the Ministry of Human Resource Development on a yearly basis, member:
Provided that at least four members of the Board shall be women:
Provided further that one of the person nominated under clause (d) shall act as the
member-Secretary of the Board.
(3) The Board shall meet at least once a month to discuss the progress of the
implementation of the provisions of this Chapter, and the minutes of the meeting shall be
made available to the public on the website of Ministry of Human Resource Development
within one week of the meeting.
(4) The Board shall, with its power by order, make rules in addition to the provisions
of sections 24, 25 26, 27, 28, 29 and 34 of this Act.
24. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute the following funds, with an initial corpus of  not less than fifty per cent. of
the tax revenue generated from the cess imposed under section 3 and any additional
funds where the Central Government may allocate from time to time:—
(a) National Scholarship Fund of India;
(b) International Scholarship Fund of India;
(c) National Research Grant Fund of India;
(2) The corpus Fund in the National Scholarship Fund of India constituted under
sub-section (1) shall be allocated by the Board towards need-based merit scholarships,
as per the provisions of section 25 and section 26 in Universities within the territory of
India as per the provisions of section 27 to eligible Indian citizens, if,—
(a) the student enrolls in a field of study prescribed under section 30 in one
of the Universities listed under section 27 of this Act;
Constitution of
funds.

11
Need based
scholarship
distribution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(b) the student signs an agreement with the Board, to be administered by the
Ministry of Human Resource Development, to complete a service obligation, as provided
under section 32 within the territory of India, immediately upon completion of the
field of study mentioned under clause (a).
(3) The corpus fund in the International Scholarship Fund of India constituted under
sub-section (1) shall be allocated by the Board towards international education scholarships,
as per the provisions of section 25 and 26 in Universities outside the territory of India as
per the provisions of section 28 to eligible Indian citizens, if,—
(a) the student enrolls in a field of study prescribed under section 30 in one of
the scholarship programs in the universities listed under section 28 of this Act;
(b) the student signs an agreement with the Indian National Scholarship and
Research Board, to be administered by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development, to complete a service obligation, as provided under section 32 within
the territory of India, immediately upon completion of the field of study mentioned
in clause (a).
(4) The corpus fund in the National Research Grant Fund of India shall be allocated by
the Board in a manner prescribed under section 33.
25. (1) The Board shall determine the recipients of the need-based scholarship,
established under the sub-section (2) of section 24 in a manner that considers,
inter-alia , the following criteria, only with  adequate material evidence, as determined
by rules created by the Board after the commencement of this Act:—
(a) financial ability (or inability) to pay the tuition, room and board fees of
the university;
(b) the academic rank obtained in the corresponding entrance exam or
higher secondary school examination results;
(c) the field of study undertaken under section 30.
(2) The Board shall, by notification, add any other criteria under sub-section (1) which
it claims fit.
(3) The financial ability (or inability) mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall
be determined by the Board considering, among others, the annual income of the family,
movable assets and number of dependents in the family in relation to the total cost of
attendance of the university or institute mentioned under section 27 and 29.
26. The Board shall, within its powers, in coordination with the  administration of the
universities listed under section 27, provide for reservations of seats in universities, in fields
of study prescribed under section 30, separately for the beneficiaries of the National
Scholarship Fund of India.
27. The provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 23 shall apply to the following
universities in India, subject to change by the Central Government, by order, at any time
after the commencement of this Act, notwithstanding the provisions in Institutions of
Technology Act, 1961, The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
Act, 2006, The University Grants Commission Act, 1956. National Institutes of Technology
Act, 2007, and any such acts that may arise from the changes to this Section made by the
Board:
(1) Indian Institute of Technology, Madras;
(2) Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi;
(3) Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur;
(4) Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay;
Reservation.
Eligible
universities in
India.
45
59 of 1961.
29 of 2007.
3 of 1956.
5 of 2007.

12
Scholarship
abroad.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(5) Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur;
(6) Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee;
(7) Birla Institute of Technology and Science;
(8) Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati;
(9) National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli;
(10) National Institute of Technology, Warangal;
(11) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore;
(12) Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi;
(13) University of Delhi;
(14) Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore;
(15) Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad;
(16) Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta;
(17) National Law School of India University, Bangalore;
(18) Nalsar University of Law, Hyderabad;
(19) National Law University, Jodhpur;
(20) West Bengal National University of Juridial Sciences, Kolkata.
28. The Board shall, within its power, in accordance with the universities listed under
section 29, set up undergraduate and postgraduate private scholarship funds to a specified
number students studying abroad according to the rules prescribed by the Board, in the
respective universities, in fields of study specified under section 30 according to the
administration of the university and not in contradiction of this Act or any other Act, to
Indian citizens in accordance with the provisions of section 24.
29. The provisions of section 28 of Chapter V shall apply to the following universities
outside India, subject to the change made by the Central Government, by order, at any time
after the commencement of this  Act, notwithstanding any such acts that may arise from the
changes to this Section made by the Central Government:
(1) Harvard University, United States of America;
(2) Yale University, United States of America;
(3) Columbia University, United States of America;
(4) Stanford University, United States of America;
(5) Princeton University, United States of America;
(6) ETH Zurich Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, Switzerland;
(7) Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States of America;
(8) University of Oxford, United Kingdom;
(9) University of Cambridge, United Kingdom;
(10) London School of Economics, United Kingdom;
(11) University of Chicago, United States of America;
(12) California Institute of Technology, United States of America;
(13) University of California, Berkeley, United States of America;
(14) University of Pennsylvania, United States of America;
Eligible
universities
abroad.

13
Eligible fields
of study.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
(15) University of California, Los Angeles, United States of America;
(16) University College London, United Kingdom;
(17) Johns Hopkins University, United States of America;
(18) Duke University, United States of America;
(19) Cornell University, United States of America;
(20) Northwestern University, United States of America;
(21) University of Michigan, United States of America;
(22) University of Toronto, Canada;
(23) Carnegie Mellon University, United States of America;
(24) National University of Singapore, Singapore;
(25) University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom;
(26) Peking University, People's Republic of China;
(27) LMU Munich, Germany;
(28) New York University, United States of America;
(29) Georgia Institute of Technology, United States;
(30) University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
 30. The Board shall determine the eligible fields of study, subject to a of  yearly review
by the Board under the provision of section 31, for the executions of provisions of this
Chapter, which shall include. inter-alia, undergraduate, post-graduate and research degrees
in these broad disciplines:
(1) Science, Technology, Mathematics and Engineering (STEM);
(2) Law, Government, Public Policy and Politics;
(3) Research in Social Sciences;
(4) Medical Sciences, Health Administration, and Biotechnology.
 31. The Board shall have the power to add or remove fields of study including the
broad disciplines listed under section 30.
32. The recipients of the scholarship fund as provided under sub-section (2) and (3) of
section 23, shall meet the following service requirement obligation requirement for a minimum
of five years, subject to revision by the Board:
(a) the recipient must reside within the territory of India;
(b) the recipient shall, if applicable, be employed in a multinational corporation,
only if the income accrued from the employment is within the territory of India;
(c) the recipient shall, if applicable, be employed in the Central Government of
India in Public sector undertakings, or in any company registered under the Companies
Act, 2013;
(d) The recipient shall, if applicable, be self-employed, in a partnership, sole-
proprietor, partial or full owner of a company within the territory of India;
(e) any economic or non-economic activity within the territory of India as deemed
eligible by the Board:
Scope of
expansion of
eligible fields
of study.
Service
obligation
requirement.

14
Research fund.
Selection
criteria.
Notification in
passport.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Provided that the following exceptions shall apply to the service obligation requirement,
if after the,—
(a) the recipient has obtained a short-term research and development fellowship,
or any work-related project, on-site visit, assignment or a similar position, in a reputed
international university, organization, or entity, for a period of not less than two years;
(b) the recipient has been admitted into a post-graduate program or research
degree program in a reputed international university, the duration of said program
shall not be longer than six years.
33. The Board shall, within its powers, constitute a Fund to be known as Research
Grant Fund of India to allocate the funds in the research projects taking place in
universities, public and private institutions within the territory of India through a
public competitive selection process, subject to revision by the Board, as per the selection
criteria listed under section 34.
34. The Board shall consider, among other factors as determined by the Board, the following
criteria in the selection of research projects under the provision of sections 24 and 33:—
(a) importance to scientific advancement;
(b) importance to poverty alleviation;
(c) importance to national defence.
35. The Board shall make rules by order, in order to provide for the  expansion of the
Fund, to revise and update the eligible institutions, individuals and recipients, to provide for
strict compliance policies with penalties and other amendments to this Sections that the
Board shall deem necessary, only through a unanimous decision by the members of the
Board.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROVISIONS REGARDING CAPITAL CREATION
36. (1) The Fund for startups, as established by the Start Up India Action Plan by
the Central Government, shall receive, a pr edetermined proportion by the Central
Government, but not less than forty per cent. of the tax revenue generated from the
cess imposed under section 3 and any additional funds which the Central Government
may allocate, from time to time.
(2) The Central Government shall, by notification, make rules in addition to sub-
section (1) to specifically distribute the funds to startups functioning in the fields
prescribed in section 30.
CHAPTER VII
P
ENALTIES AND PROSECUTIONS
37. If an assessee has failed to comply with the provision of sections Notification in
12, 14, 15, 19, 24, and 33, after reasonable effort has been made to inform passport, the
assessee of his failure to comply through the Central Government of India or the respective
Government of the host country and a grace period of six months has lapsed, a notification
on his passport shall be issued by the Ministry of External Affairs, which shall prevent him
from extending his visa status in any foreign country, as per provisions under section 19, and
prevent him from leaving the territory of India, if applicable:
Provided that the notification may if removed within a period of twenty-four hours if—
(1) The Central Board of Direct Taxes, after review of the Online- Appeal Form,
as set up under section 45, dismisses the notification; or
(2) payment of tax plus penalty under section 38 is made;
Compliance
and penalties.
Distribution of
funds to the
Fund of Funds
for Startups.
45

15
Additional
Penalty.
Application of
Act No. 22 of
2015.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(3) medical emergency as specified under section 39;
(4) the provisions of the Act, as mentioned under this section, are fulfilled, and
an application for removal has been processed by the Indian National Scholarship and
Research Board.
38. The Assessing Officer may, direct that, in a case where tax has been computed
under sections 12 and 19, in respect of foreign income and tax payments, and the assessee
has failed to pay his obligation, if any, as identified by the authorities under section 12, he
shall pay by way of penalty, in addition to tax—
(1) twenty-five per cent, tax penalty on the failed tax payment if paid within six
months of non-payment of tax payment;
(2) seventy five per cent, tax penalty, on the failed tax payment if paid within one
year of non-payment of tax payment;
(3) three times the failed tax payment, or a surcharge of $10,000, whichever is
higher, upon reentry into the country.
 39.  No penalties provided under sections 37, 38, and 41 of this Act shall apply
of,—
(a) a medical emergency for the assessee or an immediate family member, as
ascertained by medical professionals, or if the assessee produces a verifiable medical
certificate proving requirement of travel either to and from the country, then a temporary
removal of the notification under section 37 shall apply for thirty calendar days and
upon the cessation of said period thirty days the notification will automatically be
reapplied; or
(b) a medical emergency requires immediate significant medical expenses, and
the assessee produces (i) medical certificate proving requirement of travel (ii) medical
certificate showing significant expenses the a temporary removal of the notification,
allowing international travel, shall apply for thirty calendar days and upon the cessation
of said period of thirty days the notification will automatically be reapplied.
40. Notwithstanding clause (6) of section 6 of the Income-tax Act, an assessee is
required to furnish a return of his income for any previous year, notwithstanding sub-section
(1) of section 139 of the Income-tax Act or by the provisions to that sub-section, and who at
any time during such previous year.
(i) held any asset (including financial interest in any entity) located outside
India as a beneficial owner or otherwise; or
(ii) was a beneficiary of any asset (including financial interest in any entity)
located outside India; or
(iii) had any income from a source located outside India, and fans to furnish
such return before the end of the relevant assessment year, the Assessing Officer may
direct that such person shall pay, by way of penalty, a sum of ten per cent. of the value
of such asset:
Provided that this section shall not apply in respect of an asset, being one or more
bank accounts having an aggregate balance which does not exceed a value equivalent to
five hundred thousand rupees at any time during the previous year.
41. The provisions of sections 44,1 45, 46, 47, 52, 53, 54, and 55 the Back Money
(Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of  Tax Act, 2015.
Exceptions for
special
circumstances.
Disclosure of
income and
taxes.
43 of 1961
43 of 1961

16
Service of
notice
generally.
Authentication
of tax
authority.
Rounding off
of income,
value of asset
and tax.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
CHAPTER VIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
42. (1) The service of any notice, summons, requisition, order or any
other communication under this Act (herein referred to in this section as generally
communication") may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof, to the person
named therein,—
(a) by post or by such courier service as may be approved by the assigned tax
authorities, as mentioned under section 12;
(b) in such manner as provided under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the
purposes of service of summons;
(c)  in the form of any electronic record as provided in Chapter IV of the Information
Technology Act, 2000; or
(d) by any other means of transmission of documents, including fax message or
electronic mail message, as may be prescribed.
(2) The tax authorities mentioned in section 12 of this Act may make rules providing for
the addresses including the address for electronic mail or electronic mail message to which
the communication referred to in sub-section (1) may be delivered or transmitted to the
person named therein.
(3) In this section, the expressions "electronic mail" and "electronic mail message",
shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in the Explanation to section 66A of the
Information Technology Act, 2000.
43.  (1 ) A notice or any other document required to be issued, served or given for the
purposes of this Act by any tax authority shall be authenticated by that authority.
(2) Every notice or other document to be issued, served or given for the purposes of
this Act by any tax authority shall be deemed to be authenticated, if the name and office of a
designated tax authority is printed, stamped or otherwise written thereon.
(3) In this section, a designated tax authority shall mean any tax authority authorized
by the Central Board of Direct Taxes to issue, serve or give such notice or other document
after authentication in the manner as provided in sub-section (2).
44. (1) The amount of cess liability computed in accordance with Section 3 of this Act
shall be rounded off to the nearest multiple of one hundred rupees.
(2) Any amount payable or receivable by the assessee under this Act shall be rounded
off to the nearest multiple of ten rupees.
(3)The method of rounding off under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2), shall be
such as may be prescribed.
45. No return of income, assessment, notice, summons or other proceeding, furnished
or made or issued or taken or purported to have been furnished or made or issued or taken in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid or shall be deemed to be
invalid merely by reason of any mistake, defect or omission in such return of income,
assessment, notice, summons or other proceeding if such return of income, assessment,
notice, summons or other proceeding is in substance and effect in conformity with or according
to the intent and purpose of this Act.
46. No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class
shall try any offence under this Act.
Return of
income not to
be deemed
invalid.
Cognizance of
offence.
5 of 1908
2 of 2000
1 of 2000

17
Condone
delays in
approval.
Income Tax
papers to be
available for
the purpose of
this Act.
47. Where, under any provision of this Act, the approval of the Central Government or
the tax authority as defined under Section 11 of this Act, is required to be obtained before a
specified date, it shall be open to the Central Government or, as the case may be, the authority
to condone, for sufficient cause, any delay in obtaining such approval.
48. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income Tax Act, 1961, all information
contained in any statement or return made or furnished under the provisions of that Act
or obtained or collected for the purposes of said Act may be used for the purposes of this
Act.
49. The Central Government shall, upon the commencement of this Act, pass necessary
amendments to sections 5 and 6 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, if any such amendments are
required, for the purpose of executing the provisions of this Act.
50. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may. by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date on which the provisions of this Act come into force.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
51. (1) The Central Board of' Direct Taxes, in compliance with Section 11, Section 12
and Section 18 of this Act may, subject to the approval of the Central Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters:—
(a) the manner of determination of the value of cess liability referred to in
section 3;
(b) the tax authority to be prescribed for any of the purposes of this Act;
(c) the form and manner of service of a notice of demand under section 51 ad 54;
(d) the form in which any appeal, revision or cross-objection may be filed under
this Act, the manner in which they may be verified and the fee payable in respect
thereof;
(e) the form in which the Assessing Officer may draw up the statement of tax
arrears under all Sections under Chapter III of this Act;
(f) the manner in which the sum is to be paid to the credit of Central Government
under the provisions of this Act;
(g) the formation, rules and regulations for an Online Appeal Form.
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give
retrospective effect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier than the date of
commencement of this Act and no retrospective effect shall be given to any rule so as to
prejudicially affect the interest of assessees.
(4) The Central Government shall cause every rule made under this Act to be laid as
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
Amendment
of Income Tax
Act, 1961.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
43 of 1961
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
43 of 1961

18
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The issue of growing emigration of high-skilled labourers from India to highly developed
countries has increased manifold in recent times, most of the times, such non-resident fails to
file return of income tax. The bill also directs the Central Government to use the revenue
generated from the said cess in the creation of a scholarship and research fund and an
addition of funds to the Fund for Funds for Startups (FFS) set up by the Central Government.
High-skilled labourers in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
industries possess a higher degree of mobility as compared to every other worker, and
therefore are able to easily relocate to countries that offer them the highest salaries. While as
Indian citizens they are entitled to the freedom of movement, and as guaranteed by the UN
declaration of human rights, they have the right to emigrate from their own country, high-
skilled emigrants create a pressing public policy crisis in India.
First, by moving out of the country, the high-skilled emigrants deprive India of
innovation, research and industrial development that gets created in the developed destination
countries. Second, they create a massive loss in tax revenue that is essential to provide to
measures of poverty alleviation, and for the development of the country. Therefore, in order
to justifiably impose the responsibility that the emigrants bear to contribute to the growth of
the country, but at the same time respect their right to emigrate, a globally-levied domestic
development cess is required, the need, is, therfore to introduce a brain drain cess on such
non-resident Indian citizen.
The Brain drain cess is justified on following:
(i) Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) have the rights extended to every citizen of India.
including, the right to vote in local, State and national elections. However, under the Income
Tax Act, these residents do not pay taxes to the Indian Government if they live outside India
for more than 180 days per year. This has led to a situation of "representation without
taxation", meaning they enjoy the benefits of an Indian citizenship without the obligations
that come with it.
(ii) the Indian Government subsidizes science and technology education through
institutions like the Indian Institute of Technology, Indian Institute of Management, and
other public universities in order to cultivate domestic technological innovation and research.
However, as argued above, the engineers and scientists that graduate from these universities
access their right to emigrate to better opportunities and move out of the country, rendering
the public investment without fruit. This could address the particular problem by instituting
a service obligation requirement for recipients of scholarships and research funds, which
requires them to reside within the territory of India for a specified period of time. This is done
only to recipients of scholarships, similar to a policy in Singapore, because a large-scale
imposition of such a service obligation would be unconstitutional.
(iii) High-skilled emigration creates a large distributional issue in taxation within the
country. The NRI population, who typically fall in the top 1% of the income distribution in
the country, fail to pay their fair share of taxes, leaving more of the tax burden on the poorer
parts of the country. By including a cess that is applied to non-resident Indians, poorer
Indians can be provided with a tax relief, thereby making our tax policy more just.
The revenue arising from the cess, estimated to be in the vicinity of ten thousand crore
rupees, can then be used to address serious issues within our country that contributes to the
19

20
reasons high-skill labourers have when choosing to leave the country, such as, inter-alia,
lack of high-paying engineering and technology jobs and lack of research and development
funding and infrastructure.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
July 3, 2017.
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 (1) AND 274 (1)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of Letter No. 370152/51/2017-TPL dated 13 November, 2017 from Shri Arun Jaitley,
Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Indian Diaspora and Education
Infrastructure (Brain Drain Cess) Bill, 2017 by Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, Member of Parliament,
recommends under articles 117(1) and 274(1) of the Constitution, the introduction of the Bill
in Lok Sabha.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to provide for establishment of Indian National Scholarship
and Research Board. It also provides for appointment of members to the Board. The Bill
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees twenty crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
21

MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-section (3) of Section 6 empowers the Ministry of External Affairs to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of that Section and make rules in addition to the provisions of
that Section.
Sub-section (2) of Section 10 empowers the Central Government to change the rebate
on the total cess under the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 10 and add rules in
addition to Section 10.
Sub-section (7) of Section 11 empowers the Central Government to make rules in
addition to Section 11, to update the jurisdiction of tax authorities, or establish a body
exclusively for the purposes of executing the provisions of this Act.
Section 16 empowers the tax authorities to make rules in addition to the provisions of
Section 11, Section 12, Section 13, Section 14, Section 15, Section 16, Section 17, Section 18
and Section 20 of this Act.
Sub-section (2) of Section 17 empowers the Central  Government to make rules according
to the recommendations sent by the tax authorities, for the purpose of executing the provisions
of this Act.
Sub-section (5) of Section 22 empowers the Indian National Scholarship and Research
Board to make rules in addition to the provisions of Section 23, Section 24, Section 25,
Section 26, Section 27, Section 28 of this Act, as provided under Section 34 of this Act.
Section 34 empowers the Indian National Scholarship and Research Board to make
rules in addition to all Sections of Chapter V of this Act  in order to provide for the expansion
of the Fund, to revise and update the eligible institutions, individuals and recipients, to
provide for strict compliance policies with penalties and other amendments to this Sections
that the Board shall deem necessary, only through a unanimous decision by the members of
the Board.
Sub-section (2) of Section 35 empowers the Central Government to, by notification,
make rules in addition to Section 35(1) to specifically distribute the funds to start-ups
functioning in the fields prescribed in Section 29 of this Act
Sub-section (2) of Section 41 empowers the tax authorities mentioned in Section 11 of
this Act to make rules providing for the addresses including the address for electronic mail or
electronic mail message to which the communication referred to in sub-section (1) may be
delivered or transmitted to the person named therein.
Sub-section (1) of Section 44 empowers the Central Board of Direct Taxes, in compliance
with Section 11, Section 12 and Section 18 of this Act, subject to the approval of the Central
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
As the matter in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters of procedure
and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself, the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
22

THE SCHEDULE
[see Section 9(1)]
SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES
1. Calculation of tax revenue:
The number of non-resident citizens of India is estimated to be close to 10 million
people, the vast majority of whom live in the United States, United Kingdom,  Australia and
the Middle East. Particularly, the high-skilled emigrants that pertain to the scope of this bill
reside in developed countries in North Atlantic, predominantly employed in the high-tech
service and financial service industries. According to our calculations, in the last five years
alone, 320,000 people have emigrated to the United States on a temporary work visa and
permanent residency, and a further 130,000 citizens are studying and conducting research in
universities in the United States. The minimum salary condition for a temporary work visa in
the United States is $65000, which serves as an indicator of the distribution of income of
high-skilled non-resident Indian citizens.
Since we have placed a limit of five years since emigration, and a minimum salary
requirement, the total number of non-resident citizens, living in all countries outside India,
that would be impacted by the passage of this bill is estimated to be around 1.9 million
citizens. The average tax revenue from the salient tax brackets introduced in the bill is
detailed below. Given that the income is normally distributed across the income brackets,
with a skew towards the high-end, the estimated generation of revenue is $1.5 billion per
year, or approximately 10,000 crore rupees per year.
2. Brain Drain Cess rates, as per income brackets:
Income in USD Marginal Brain Approximate V alue in Indian
(equivalent Drain Cess Liability to Rupee
value) (on tax liability, Government of (INR)
approximated India (in USD)
from 2017
US tax code)
$0-$65000 0% 0 0
$65,000 - $100,000 3% $167-$310 Rs. 10800-Rs. 20100
$100,000 - $200,000 5% $510-$2325 Rs. 33150-Rs. 151000
$200,000 + 7% $2325 + Rs. 151000-Rs. 151000 +
23

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the imposition of a temporary cess to be levied on the foreign country
income tax payments of ordinarily non-resident Indian citizens; the procedure for
dealing with the collection of such cess, and to provide for the establishment
of a Scholarship and Research Fund subject to service obligation and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1122LS(S3)—07.12.2017.