1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF AGRICULTURAL
EDUCATION IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of agricultural education in all educational
institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Agricultural Education in
Educational Institutions Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 206 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council for Agricultural Education
constituted under section 6;
(b) "agricultural education" includes imparting knowledge and understanding
of basic matters relating to agriculture, farming, cultivation, agronomy, husbandry and
horticulture;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(d) "educational institution" means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a
senior secondary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name
such institution is called, but does not include a minority educational institution;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify, the agricultural education shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all
educational institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central
Government on the recommendation of the Advisory Council.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of agricultural education in all
educational institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such matters, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching agricultural education in educational institutions.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
the Compulsory Teaching of Agricultural Education in Educational Institutions, Act 2016,
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Agricultural
Education.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of agricultural education, as the Central
Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of agricultural education
for each class upto senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the
agricultural education shall be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching agricultural education;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in agricultural education for the purpose of
their appointment in educational institutions; and
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
agricultural
education in
educational
institutions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
agricultural
education in
educational
institutions.
Appointment
of teachers
for
agricultural
education.
Constitution
of Advisory
Council for
Agricultural
Education.
Functions of
the Advisory
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and educational institutions
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize an educational institution which
does not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf,  provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Derecognition
of educational
institutions
for non-
compliance
of the
provisions of
the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Half of India's population is directly dependent on agriculture. However, when we
analyse the level of education imparted for agriculture, it gives a disappointing picture.
Agricultural education is part of some school curriculum till higher secondary, however there
is little emphasis from the Government and the school authorities. The majority of students
are those who leave their regular education and end up in agricultural domain. However,
there are neither sufficient avenues to officially study agriculture nor any exams which can
help to monitor its performance. Thus, we are stuck in traditional ways of agriculture. Today,
agricultural education is available both as an optional subject and a vocational course.
However, just two percent of higher secondary students take up agricultural education.
There is an urgent need to focus on agricultural education, especially in relation to job
creation and skill development. This alone can lead to real impact on the sorry picture of
agriculture in our country. The country  today  is debating the introduction of entrepreneurship
in education. However, linking entrepreneurship to agriculture can bring the much needed
innovation to provide transformational results in this sector. The recently concluded Paris
Climate Change summit (Conference of Parties 21) also pressed for more adaptation and
mitigation in the agriculture sector.
Creating a vibrant syllabus in agricultural education for schools and linking to job
creation will not only increase basic knowledge but also make students naturally interested
for advance careers in agricultural sector. The Government's intervention is thus needed to
lead societal focus on this issue.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
July  1, 2016

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for imparting agricultural
education in educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of an Advisory
Council for agricultural education by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment
of adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore will
be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of agricultural education in all educational institutions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1482LS (S3)—27.07.2016.