1
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 206 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act),:—
(i) the existing clause ( a) shall be re-numbered as clause ( aa) and before
clause (aa) so as re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(a) "Board" means the Central Board for the Prevention, Control and
Abatement of Light Pollution constituted under section 17A;’;
(ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ea) "light pollution" means unwanted illumination by outdoor lighting
fixture, which is dispersed outside the areas to which intended, particularly in
cases when directed over the horizon level and/or induces negative effects on
living organism;’;
(iii) after clause ( f ), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(fa) "outdoor lighting fixture" means any type of fixed or movable lighting
equipment designed or used for outdoor illumination including billboard lighting,
street lights, searchlights and other lighting used for advertising purposes and area
lighting but does not include lighting equipment that is required by law to be installed
on motor vehicles or lighting required for the safe operation of aircraft;’; and
(iv) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(h) "shielded" in relation to outdoor lighting fixture means a fixture that is
covered in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the
lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running
through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.’.
3. In the principal Act, after Chapter III, the following new Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
"CHAPTER IIIA
PREVENTION, CONTROL  AND ABATEMENT OF LIGHT POLLUTION
17A. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into
force of the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 2015, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Board to be known as the Central Board for the Prevention, Control
and Abatement of Light Pollution for effective implementation of the provisions of the
Chapter.
(2) The Board shall consist of Chairperson and such other members to be appointed
by Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of services
of Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
17B. (1) The Board shall be responsible for prevention, control and abatement of
light pollution in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Board may
perform all or any of the following functions, namely:—
(a) advise the Central Government on any matter concerning improvement of
the quality of night sky and the prevention, control or abatement of light pollution.
(b) plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for the prevention,
control and abatement of light pollution;
(c) plan and organise training of persons engaged or to be engaged in
programmes for prevention, control and abatement of light pollution on such terms
and conditions, as the Board may specify;
Constitution
of Central
Board.
Insertion of
new
Chapter IIIA.
Amendment
of section 2.
Functions of
Central
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
29 of 1986.

3
(d) organise through mass media a comprehensive programme regarding
prevention, control and abatement of light pollution;
(e) collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to light
pollution and the measures devised for its effective prevention, control and abatement
and prepare mannuals, codes or guides relating to prevention, control and abatement
of light pollution;
(f) lay down standards for the quality of atmosphere and night sky in respect of
light pollution;
(g) collect and disseminate information in respect of matters relating to light
pollution; and
(h) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
17C. (1) The Board shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, prescribe guidelines for
shielded outdoor lighting fixtures.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of forgoing provisions, the
guidelines shall provide for—
(a) compulsory shielding of all public outdoor lighting fixtures using prescribed
power consumption;
(b) replacement of unrepairable shielded outdoor lighting fixtures; and
(c) restricted use of shilded outdoor lighting fixtures for outdoor recreational
facility from midnight till 0500 hrs. except for national or international events.
17D. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilised for the
purpose of this Act.
17E. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to—
(a) existing shielded outdoor lighting fixtures which were legally installed prior to the
commencement of the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 2015;
(b) navigational lighting systems at airports and other lighting necessary for aircraft
safety;
(c) outdoor lighting fixtures necessary for national safety; and
(d) outdoor lighting fixtures necessary for safety of workers engaged at farms, dairies,
industries, mining, oil sector and natural gas facilities.
17F. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Chapter shall, for a first offence, be
issued a warning, and for second or subsequent offence be punished with a fine, which shall
not be less than one lakh rupees.
17G. The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force.".
Guidelines for
outdoor
fixtures.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Exemptions.
Penalty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The unrestricted use of artificial lights and human's dependence on electricity has
resulted in problems that we have become oblivious to. Though we may have conquered the
demons of darkness and illuminated our cities, towns and villages, we have done so at a
huge expense. We have surpassed levels of light hundreds and thousands of time higher
than the natural level during the night thereby causing light pollution.
The biggest victim of light pollution is science of astronomy. Sky glow (the scattering
of light in the atmosphere) reduces the contrast between stars and galaxies and the sky itself,
making it much harder to see fainter objects. Astronomers need to have a clear view of the
stars and planets above. Dark sky friendly lighting does not mean dark ground. Light pollution
not just concerns astronomers but also animals and plants. It poses a serious threat to
nocturnal wildlife. About thirty per cent. of vertebrates and more than sixty per cent. of
invertebrates are nocturnal and many of the rest are crepuscular-active at dawn and dusk.
Light pollution is known to have caused confusion to animal navigation and changed predator-
prey relations amongst other things. Thus light pollution has an endangering effect on the
ecosystem around us.
The Bill aims to ensure that outdoor light at night is illuminated at an appropriate
lighting levels or use fully shilded, light efficient fixtures aimed downward where it is needed.
The relatively simple act of shielding our lights, installing or retrofitting lamp fixtures that
direct light downward to its intended target, represents our best chance to control light
pollution. While we seldom leave our interior light bare, most of our outdoor lighting remains
unshilded, sending light straight into the sky, into our eyes, into our neighbours' bedrooms.
Moreover, shielded lights do their job more efficiently as they shine more brightly on what
want to be lit. More efficient lighting also saves energy, reduce costs and conserve natural
resources.
In various countries, there are laws to preserve and enhance country's dark sky. But
light pollution is hardly discussed in our country and in fact it is nobody's responsibility.
The problem of light pollution is worsening as our country is becoming increasingly affluent
and urbanized. It is, therefore, high time that matter may be regulated before the situation
becomes alarming.
N
EW D ELHI; SUPRIYA SULE
June 29, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert sections 17A to 17G in the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986. Proposed section 17A provides for constitution of a Central Board to prevent,
control and abate light pollution. Proposed sections 17B provides for steps to be taken by
the Central Board for such training, mass media programme and compilation of data relating
to prevention, control and abatement of light pollution. Proposed section 17C provides for
replacement of existing lamps after being irreparable. Proposed section 17D provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to carry out the purposes of the Bill. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about fifty hundred crore will be incurred per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1448LS(S3)—21-07-2015.