AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

7 904

23 Feo 200

Bill No. 206 of 2000.
ete lela

THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (PRICE DETERMINATION OF THE
PRODUCTS MANUFACTURED IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR)
BILL, 2000

By
Dr. V. Sarosa, M.P.
A
BILL

17 provide for setting up of a Bureau for determination of prices of products
‘manufactured in the private sector and for matters connected therewith,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection (Price Determination of the
Products Manufactured in the Private Sector) Act, 2000.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India,

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazetie, appoint

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(4) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by the rules made under this Act:

in (0) “private sector’ means production of goods by agencies which are not
under the control of the State;

Short title,
extend and
commence-
ment

Definitions,


Price determina-
tion of the
products
manufactured in
the private
sector.

Establishinent
of the Bureau
for the price
determination
of products
manufactured
in the Private
Sector.

Bureau shall
determine the
prices of
products
manufactured in
the private
sector.

Prices fixed for
different
products shall
be published in
newspapers,
ete

Punishinent

Power to make
rules

(0) ‘product’ means and includes any goods including any grocery item,
including oil, ghee, milk, bread, any cosmetic item, or any such item which is used
for daily use by common public but does not include vegetables, seasonal fruits and
finished goods or services; and हि

(d) ‘State’ means the Government of the Union or of a State or bodies Solely
under their control.

3. Nowwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the State shall determine the price of the products manufactured in the private sector
through an Agency set up under section 4

4. (1) The State shall establish, for achieving the object mentioned in section 3,
an Agency to be called the ‘Bureau for the price determination of the products
manovfactured in the Private sector’ (hereinafter referred to as Bureau) on the pattern
of the Bureau of Indian Standards meant for quality control.

(2) The Bureau shall consist of such number of officers and staff, as may be
prescribed, for carrying out the functions of the Bureau,

5. (1) The Bureau shall determine the prices of products manufactured in the private
sector,

(2) The Bureau may, before fixing the prices, take into relevant factors especially,—
(i) quality of products;
(ii) demand and supply of products;
(iii) cost of production;
(iv) loss during production;

(४) prices of accessories or which directly or indirectly affect the price factor
of the products;

(vi) any other relevant factor as may be deemed necessary,

(3) The Bureau may fix different prives for different products in different States and
in accordance with quality of the product.

(4) The Bureau shall from time to time afier taking into relevant factors revise the
prices fixed for different products.

6. The Bureau shall cause published in newspaper, radio/television network about
the prices fixed for diflerent products.

7. If any manufacturer in the private sector contravenes any decision of the Bureau,
he shall be punished with three years simple imprisonment and a fine which may extend
upto rupees fifty thousand.

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act

10

Is

20

25

30

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS:

Of late, the Government of India has come out with a praise-worthy action on
| protection front. It is heartening to note that the Government have brought
forward several legislative measures on consumer protection. These would help consumer
fight for his rights and may be helpful in checking the mal-practices and rise in price to a
certain extent only. Much requires to be done.

‘The main purpose of bringing forward this legislation is to check the carefree attitude
of the Private Sector producing bulk of the products, especially in the consumer section.
There is hardly any check on their price determination. It has been seen that a one percent
increase in the taxation or even for no reason, these unscrupulous manufacturers would
enhance price of their products, sometimes, mani-fold. There is hardly any relationship
between the quality and quantity of their product, on the one hand, and the price, on the
other.

This problem is very acute in the rural areas. In villages, commodities of much
inferior quality are being sold at exorbitant prices. Rural people are innocent by nature.
They may not be able to fight this element in the private sector without some amount of
effective State involvement.

In order to determine the prices of products manufactured by the private agencies, it
has been proposed that a Bureau shall be set up in every State. The Bureau, apart from
determining the price of products, shall also act as a check when the agencies increase
that prices at their own will, Since the functions and policies of the Bureau are regulated
by the Central Government, the prices of the product will be uniform throughout the
country to some extent.

Hence this Bill.

New DeLur, V. SAROJA
November 22, 2000.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for setting up of a ‘Bureau for the price determination
of the products manufactured in the private sector’ at the Centre and in every State. The
Bureau established by the Centre would look after the Union territories.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India, As for setting up of Bureau in States, the respective State Governments
would incur expenditure from their Consolidated Funds,

It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill gives powers to the Central Government to make rules for
| out the purposes of the Bill, The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as
such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

to provide for setting up of a Bureau for determination of prices of products
manufactured in the private sector and for matters connected therewith.

(Dr: ४ Saroja, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)i4AND—S3481 S—08 12.2000. zi