1
Bill No. 206   of  2018
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF INDIAN SPIRITUAL AND
HUMAN SERVICE PHILOSOPHY EDUCATION IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory teaching of Indian Spiritual and Human Service
Philosophy Education in educational institutions and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Indian Spiritual and Human
Service Philosophy Education in Educational Institutions Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "educational institution" means an institution imparting primary, middle,
secondary or higher secondary level education to children, by whatever name such
institution is called, but does not include a minority educational institution; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify,  the Indian spiritual education and human service philosophy shall be taught as a
compulsory subject in all educational institutions in such form and manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Council.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue direction for compulsory teaching of Indian spiritual education and
human service philosophy in all educational institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. The appropriate Government shall, in such number as it may deem necessary and
as specified by the Central Government appoint qualified teachers to provide Indian Spiritual
and human philosophy education in every educational institution.
6. The appropriate Government shall derecognize schools not complying with the
provision of section 3 but before taking any decision regarding derecognition of the affiliation
of any school, after giving such institution a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf,  provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
8. The Central Government may direct any State Government falling under the
jurisdiction of this Act to implement any provision or any rule made thereunder which it finds
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament,  while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
Indian spiritual
education and
human service
philosophy.
Appropriate
Government to
issue direction
for compulsory
teaching of
Indian spiritual
education and
human service
philosophy in
educational
institutions.
Appointment
of teachers to
provide Indian
Spiritual
education and
human service
philosophy
education.
Derecognition
of educational
institutions for
non-compliance
of the
provisions of
this Act.
Central
Government to
provide
adequate funds.
Power to
direct.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
India is a land of wisdom and the rumination on the form and relations between life and
the world is being done since ages according to the capacity of human beings. As a result,
the world along with India gained many welfare ideas. There are many ideas like 'Vasudheva
Kutumbkam', 'Satyamev Jayyate', etc. which are still the basis of Indian institutions. But the
education being imparted by the various educational institutions at present is related to the
development of interpretation and understanding of implementation related things due to
which a unidirectional approach towards life is being evolved. But in order to understand the
life holistically it is extremely necessary to have a spiritual approach and knowledge of
human service philosophy. If a student pursues spiritual education and human service right
from his childhood, not only his but also societies actual development would be possible
where the noble human values may get the rightful place and there may be a check on the
present social evils like terrorism, corruption, sexual violence, intoxication,  illiteracy,
communalism, etc. Keeping in view the various benefits of philosophy of spiritualism and
human service and to make India the land of wisdom once again its teachings in various
educational institutions is inevitable.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
November 9, 2018
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides appointment of teachers to provide Indian Spiritual
education and human service philosophy education. Clause 7 provides for Central
Government to provide adequate funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give exact
estimate of expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, which will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted into a law. However, it is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory teaching of Indian Spiritual and Human Service
Philosophy Education in educational institutions and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2324LS(S3)—17 -12-2018.