MGIPMRND—2734LS(S3)—22.10.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh for the purpose
of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, persons
belonging to the Other Backward Classes and agricultural labourers and
for the development of infrastructure and for the exploitation
and proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Sudheer Gupta, M.P .)

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh to meet the costs of such
schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of Government
of India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of
India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh. As the sums
of moneys which will be given to the State of Madhya Pradesh as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The State of Madhya Pradesh is socially and economically backward. Problem of
poverty, unemployment and literacy are required to be addressed immediately. Besides,
measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker sections and new development
schemes are also required to be undertaken in a time-bound manner to solve the problem of
backwardness in the State.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh for its all round development including the
welfare of weaker sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast natural
resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh
would go a long way in building a strong and vibrant nation.
N
EW DELHI; SUDHEER GUPTA
July 29, 2019.
3
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF MADHY A
PRADESH BILL, 2019 BY SHRI SUDHEER GUPTA, M.P.
[Copy of letter No. 42(22)/PF-S/2019-20 dated 7 October, 2019  from Shrimati Nirmala
Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs, to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Special Financial
Assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh Bill, 2019 By Shri Sudheer Gupta, M.P., has
recommended the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the
Constitution.
————
————

2
2.  There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of
India, every year,  as Parliament may by due appropriation provide,  as special financial
assistance to the State of  Madhya Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India for the purpose of:—
(i)  promoting the welfare of the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes;
(ii) implementing welfare schemes aimed at improving the conditions of
agricultural labourers;
(iii)  allocation of adequate funds for specific development projects;
(iv)  development of necessary infrastructure; and
(v)  development, exploitation and proper utilization of the resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Madhya
Pradesh.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10

1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
MADHYA PRADESH BILL, 2019
By
SHRI SUDHEER GUPTA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh for the
purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
persons belonging to the Other Backward Classes and agricultural
labourers and for the development of infrastructure and for the
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the SeventiethYear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of
Madhya Pradesh  Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 206 of  2019
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5