                                                            Bill No. 206 of 2022
THE PREVENTION OF TORTURE
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent  the custodial torture, ensure award of  compensation to the victims
and making the erring public officials liable for the punishment and
for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1)This Act may be called the Prevention of Torture Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act shall have
the same meanings respectively as assigned to them in the Indian Penal
Code, 1860; and
(d) any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof
shall in any area in which such enactment or provision is not in force be
construed as a reference to the corresponding law or the relevant provision
of the corresponding law if any, in force in that area.
3. (1) Whenever a person is arrested by a police officer, intimation of
such arrest along with the place of detention shall be immediately
communicated by the concerned police officer to a relative, if such relative is
present at the time of arrest or, in his absence, to such other person as mentioned
by the person who is being arrested in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2)The intimation under sub-section (1) shall be communicated by
telephone or by such other means which shall be recorded by the police officer
and the signature of the arrested person be obtained in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(3)After the arrest of a person under sub-section (1), the police officer
shall prepare a custody memo and body receipt of the person arrested duly
signed by him and by two witnesses of the locality where the arrest has been
made and forward a copy of such custody memo and body receipt to a relative,
if such relative is present at the time of arrest or, in his absence, to such other
person as mentioned by the person who is being arrested in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(4) The custody memo prepared under sub-section (3) shall contain
the following particulars:–
(i) name of the person arrested and father’s or husband’s name;
(ii) address of the person arrested;
(iii) date, time and place of arrest;
(iv) offence for which, the arrest has been made;
(v) property, if any, recovered from the person arrested and taken
into charge at the time of the arrest; and
(vi) any bodily injury which may be apparent at the time of arrest.
4. During the interrogation of the arrested person his legal practitioner
shall be allowed to remain present.
5. It shall be the responsibility of the police officer to inform the person
arrested, as soon as he is brought to the police station, of the contents of the
section under which he has been arrested and shall make an entry in the police
diary about the following facts:
(a) the person who was informed of the arrest;
(b) the fact that the person arrested has been informed of the
reasons of his arrest; and
5
10
15
20
Definitions.
Intimation of
arrest of a
Person.
45 of 1860.
Presence of
legal
practitioner.
Entry in police
diary regarding
arrest.
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) the fact that a custody memo has been prepared under
sub-section (3) of section 3.
6. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 357 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, where the court convicts a public servant for an
offence committed by him resulting in death or bodily injury of a person in
his custody, such public servant shall be liable to pay such amount of
compensation to the person who has sustained bodily injury or has died during
the period of custody as may be awarded by the Court.
(2) The court while awarding compensation under sub-section (1)
shall order that the appropriate Government under which such public servant
was employed at the time when such act was committed, be liable jointly and
severally with such public servant to pay, by way of compensation such amount
as may be specified in the order.
(3) An order for payment of compensation under sub-section (2) may
also be made by an appellate court or by the High Court or Court of Session
while exercising powers of revision.
(4) While awarding compensation in any subsequent suit relating to
the same matter, the court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered
as compensation under this section.
(5) The amount of compensation to be awarded under this section
shall not be less than,–
(a) rupees two lakh in the case of bodily injury, not resulting in
death;
(b) rupees ten lakh in case of death or such higher amount as
decided in the judgment of decree.
(6) The Court shall, while fixing the amount of compensation under
this section, take into account all relevant circumstances, including (but not
limited to) the following:
(a) the type and severity of the injury suffered by the victim;
(b) the mental anguish suffered by the victim;
(c) the expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on the
treatment and rehabilitation of the victim;
(d) the actual and projected earning capacity of the victim and
the impact of its loss on the persons entitled to compensation and
other members of the family;
(e) the extent, if any, to which the victim himself contributed to
the injury; and
(f) the expenses incurred in the prosecution of the case:
Provided that in case of death or permanent disablement of the victim,
the court may take into account the estimated annual income of the victim as
multiplied by the number of years of his estimated span of life.
(7) The Court may, pending final determination of the proceeding,
award, by way of interim relief, such compensation as it may think proper in
the circumstances of the case at any stage of the case, even before judgment
of conviction is passed.
Compensation
in custodial
offences.2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(8) The appropriate Government may recover any amount paid by it
as compensation under this section wholly or partly as it may think proper,
from the delinquent public servant in such manner as may be prescribed.
7.  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period
of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Complaints of abuse of power and torture of suspects in custody by the
police and other law enforcing agencies have been the concern of the
society. Custodial crimes and torture of persons in police custody are
heinous and revolting as they reflect betrayal of custodial trust by a public
authority against the defenseless citizen. Such practices violate fundamental
rights and human rights. There is a pressing need to control this malady.
Investigation of crime and apprehension of an offender is extremely
necessary to ensure peace and order. For the implementation of laws and
maintenance of law and order, police and other law enforcing agencies are
necessary, but no civilised country can permit the use of torture and third
degree methods during interrogation and investigation of an offence. The
police and other Governmental agencies, while enforcing the law, are required
to respect the constitutional commitment to the individual’s fundamental rights.
The existing law is inadequate and ineffective in dealing with the custodial
crimes and in many cases the erring officers go scot-free on account of the
complainants inability to prove the case against them. The Supreme Court
has commented upon the inadequate statutory provisions dealing with the
custodial crimes in India and it has made several suggestions for reforms in
the existing laws. Besides this the victims of custodial crime should be given
adequate compensation, and the erring officials should be liable for due
punishment.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                              E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER
10 August, 2022
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate
to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to prevent  the custodial torture, ensure award of  compensation to the victims
and making the erring public officials liable for the punishment and
for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, M.P .)