1
THE POPULATION (STABILIZATION & PLANNING) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy towards stabilizing the population of the country by
providing voluntary and safe access to methods of contraception, establishment of a
Population Planning Agency, promotion of schemes that incentivizes the small family
norm, creating awareness on family planning and providing access of education to
empower every girl child and for all matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India, as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population (Stabilization and Planning) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) " Agency" means the National Population Planning Agency constituted
under section 3;
Bill No. 207 of 2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) " appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) " hospital" means any private and public healthcare institutions that provides
general, critical care or specialized healthcare;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "small family" means a family having two living children or less.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year of the coming into force of this
Act constitute an Agency to be known as the National Pupulation Planning Agency for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2)  The Agency shall consist of:—
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare — ex-officio, Chairperson;
(b) Chairperson, National Commission for Women—ex-efficio member;
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development —ex-officio member;
(d) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment—ex-officio, member;
(e)  Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development—member; and
(f)   two persons, with experience of at least fifteen years in the social sector, one
of whom shall be a women;
(3)  The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Agency.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and terms and conditions of services of the
members, officers and staff of the agency shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Agency shall:—
(a) conduct nation-wise surveys at an interval of every five years to assess the
growth in population and trends;
(b) ensure dissemination of proper information regarding safe family planning
methods such as contraception and spacing between births;
(c) include in school curriculum a proper syllabus on the importance of pupulation
stabilization;
(d) formulate schemes to provide for education up to college level for the first
child and to the second child only  if gap between the two is greater than three years;
(e) establish recreational centres at panchayat level to host traditional art forms
and also use them as medium to disseminate messages regarding family planning;
(f) undertake, promote and publish studies relating to the Indian pupulation;
(g) conduct awareness campaigns relating to medical procedures regarding birth
control; and
(h) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
5. The Agency shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish Family Planning Quality Assurances
Committees at the State and District level.
(2)  The Committee shall,—
(a) ensure quality care in family planning services through accreditation of
every hospital or clinic providing such services;
Constitution
of a National
Population
Planning
Agency.
Functions of
the Agency.
Meetings of
the Agency.
Establishment
of Family
Planning
Quality
Assurance
Committees
at State and
District level.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) conduct regular inspections to ensure that services are disseminated in
accordance with standards established by the committee; and
(c)  establish a citizen's grievance redressal mechanism to assess into faulty
disservice at any clinic or hospital.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, every
person, who adopts the small family norm, shall be entitled to—
(a) one additional increment as incentive if the person is employed with the
Central or the State Government;
(b) free healthcare at all the public healthcare institutions for the entire family;
(c) subsidised education for the children at public schools; and
(d) receive such other benefits as may be precribed by the Central Government
from time to time.
8. The appropriate Government shall ensure that people have access to quality and
affordable contraceptive devices, medicines and healthcare pertaining to family planning
and matters incidental and consequential thereto.
9. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) ensure that measures are taken to secure the right to education of good
quality for women and girls, on an equal basis with men and boys, and that they
complete a full course of primary education; and
(b) review efforts to improve and expand the education of girls and women at all
levels, including at the secondary and higher levels, as well as vocational education
and technical traning, in order to, inter alia. achieve gender equality, empowerment
of women and poverty eradication.
10. The Central  Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, from time to time, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
 11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Incentive
based
population
control
measures.
Access of safe
and voluntary
family
planning
measures.
Access to
quality
education to
the girl child.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
40

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the third most populous country in the world despite the fact that it was the
first country to enact a national population control policy. Conversely, India's population
has grown steadily since independence. Studies suggest that the country could surpass
China's population by the year 2030, therefore, becoming the most populous country in the
world.
A high human population can impact natural resources and social infrastructure, which
in turn places pressure on a country's sustainability. Indian population accounts for twenty
per cent. of the total world population, however, the Indian land area is only 2.5 per cent. of
the total. In a developing country such as India where a large section of the population still
lives in abject poverty with little to no resources, the need for stabilization of the population
growth becomes crucial. A stabilised  population ensures that every citizen can get access to
the right amount of resources to live a life of dignity.
Adopting a rights-based approach, the need is to provide for voluntary and safe
access to family planning services. The increase in access will empower women. Additionally,
access to these services allows spacing of pregnancy which can reduce pregnancy related
health risks in women. It would also ensure that the infant is healthier thereby reducing
infant mortality rate in the country. Therefore, a comprehensive policy for population
stabilisation can help in moving towards a healthier population.
N
EW DELHI; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
November 19, 2018.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Population Planning Agency.
It also provides for appointment of persons with experience in social sector as members,
officers and staff to the Agency. Clause 6 provides for establishment of Family Planning
Quality Assurances Committees at the State and District level by the appropriate Governments.
Clause 7 provides for  certain incentives for small family norm. Clause 8 provides for access
to quality and affordable contraceptive devices, medicines and healthcare  pertaining to
family planning. Clause 9 provides for access to quality education to the girl child. Clause 10
provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds carrying out the purposes
of the Act. The, Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore
per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy towards stabilizing the population of the country
by providing voluntary and safe access to methods of contraception, establishment
of a Population Planning Agency, promotion of schemes that incentivizes the
small family norm, creating awareness on family planning and providing
access of education to empower every girl child and for all matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Anurag Singh Thakur, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2325LS(S3)—17-12-2018.