1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR GIRL CHILD BORN TO
PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAMESH CHANDER KAUSHIK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for financial protection and security to girl child born to parents living
below poverty line and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Financial Assistance to Girl Child Born to Parents
Living Below Poverty Line Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 207 of  2017
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "girl child" means any female child born to parents living below poverty line
and who has not attained the age of twenty years; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Fund to be known as
the Girl Child Development Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall deposit a sum of fifty thousand rupees in the
bank account of every girl child born to parents living below poverty line within one month
of her birth.
(4) The deposit shall mature when the girl child attains the age of twenty years or
such after the expiry of period as may be fixed by the appropriate Government and such
proceeds may be used by the girl child for education and other welfare measures.
4. The appropriate Government shall within six months of coming into force of this Act,
issue directions to the nationalised and private sector banks and insurance companies, to
formulate suitable schemes which provide benefits of fixed or term deposit and insurance
benefits to the girl child.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save as aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force giving benefits to the girl child.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Constitution
of Girl Child
Development
Fund.
Schemes to be
formulated by
banks and
insurance
companies.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Even after the completion of sixty-eight years of Independence, no clear-cut policy for
the overall development of girl child belonging to Below Poverty Line (BPL) family has been
formulated in our country so far. Today, a girl child of a poor family has to face problems at
every stage. This includes, problems relating to poverty, upbringing, malnutrition, education,
employment, vocational training, healthcare and problems faced at the time of her marriage.
There is no institutional mechanism to harness the potential and channelize the energy of girl
child of BPL family for the betterment of the country. There is no proper planning for
comprehensive development of girl child. The plight of girl child belonging to Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes is even worse. Apart from all the
problems as mentioned above, they also have to face social ostracisation. Birth of a girl child
is still considered to be a curse. Even now the birth of a girl child is not considered auspicious
in society.
There is a need to instill a sense of belongingness among the female children by
providing them all opportunities for their development so that they can contribute to the
progress of the country to their full potential. The facilities should be provided to them as a
matter of right and not as a privilege. The steps taken in this direction will not only uplift the
conditions of girl child but will also create a better society leading to a civilized and stronger
nation. The Government should take responsibility of depositing one lakh rupees or as may
be prescribed in financial institutions like banks and insurance companies in the name of new
born girl child of BPL family, which will become a handsome amount after twenty years or so
which can be used for the purpose of education, etc. of the girl child.
In this way, financial protection and security to girl child of BPL family must be ensured.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH CHANDER KAUSHIK
July 11,  2017.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Girl Child Development Fund. It also
provides for deposit of sum of fifty thousand rupees in the bank account of every girl child
of parents living below poverty line. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees two thousand five hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand five hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial protection and security to girl child born to parents living
below poverty line and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2174LS(S3)—07-12-2017.