1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2019
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“16A. Notwithstanding anything in sections 14, 14A and 15, the Election
Commission shall, in consultation with the State Governments, endeavour to conduct
elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of all States
simultaneously.”.
Short
title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  207  of  2019
Simultaneous
elections to
the House of
the People
and
Legislative
Assemblies of
all States.
Insertion of
new section
16A.
5
10
3 of 1951

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Election is a mandatory process in any vibrant democracy. Healthy and fair
elections are the foundation of democracy. It has always been a challenge to conduct a
free and fair election in a large country like India. If we look at the election process in
our country, we find that elections are held every year in one or another State. The
country always remains in electoral mode due to this continuity of elections. This not
only affects administrative and policy decisions, but also places a heavy burden on the
country's treasury.
One country, one election is not a unique experiment, as it has happened in the
years 1952, 1957, 1962, 1967, when the elections to the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies
were held simultaneously. This sequence was broken when the Assemblies of some
States were dissolved prematurely in 1968-69 due to various reasons.
While on the one hand, some experts believe that now the country's population
has increased so much, so that it is not possible to hold all elections simultaneously, on
the other, some analysts say that if the country's population has increased, then
technology and other resources have also developed simultaneously. Therefore, the
possibility of one country one election cannot be ruled out.
One country one election is a development-oriented idea. Due to frequent
elections, the model code of conduct has to be implemented repeatedly in the country.
Because of this, the Government is unable to take necessary policy decisions and faces
problems in implementing various schemes. Due to this, development work is affected.
The model code of conduct is designed to maintain the fairness of elections.
Under this, the announcement of a project, the introduction of new schemes or financial
approval and the appointment process by the ruling party are forbidden after the Election
Commission issues election notification. Therefore, if the Lok Sabha and the State
Assemblies elections are held in the country at one go, then the model code of conduct
will remain in force for some time, and after this, the development work can be completed
uninterrupted.
Conducting simultaneous elections will reduce the huge expenditure incurred in
the repeated elections. It is worth-noting that due to frequent elections, the exchequer
would bear additional financial burden. Constant increase in expenditure on elections
is a proof that it is not good for the economic health of the country.
Holding elections together will help in curbing black money and corruption. By
conducting this type of elections simultaneously, such corruption can be overcome.
By holding elections together, there will be no need to repeatedly deploy
Government employees and security forces on election duty. The services of teachers
and Government employees are sought to conduct elections, which affects their official
work. This will save their time and they will also be able to perform their duties properly.
In addition to deployment of the large number of police and security forces, life of the
general public is also affected by the frequent elections.
Keeping in mind the time consuming and expensive process of elections and the
deployment of excessive manpower in it, the general elections for the House of the
People and the State Legislative Assemblies not to be held simultaneously. Therefore,
there is a need to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951 to achieve the aforesaid
objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
July 16, 2019.

MGIPMRND—2836LS(S3)—23-10-2019.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
—————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)