1
THE OVERSEAS WORKERS (MANAGEMENT AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI JANARDAN SINGH 'SIGRIWAL', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for management and welfare of Indian citizens employed outside the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Overseas Workers (Management and Welfare) Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  207 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Fund" means the Overseas Workers Welfare Fund constituted under
section 6;
(b) "overseas worker" means any Indian citizen who is employed outside India
by a person who is not an Indian citizen or any company or any enterprise or any
vessel which is not registered in the territory of India but does not include Indian
citizens working in the organs or agencies of the United Nations Organization (UNO);
and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall prepare and maintain a Register of all overseas
workers containing names and such other particulars including the country in which they
are employed, in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government may, from time to time, undertake or cause to be
undertaken, using agencies as it may consider necessary, studies in the countries where
there are substantial number of overseas Indian workers with a view to assess the following
in regard to overseas Indian workers:—
(i) access to basic human rights;
(ii) access to health facilities;
(iii) access to legal remedies; and
(iv) ability to live in a safe and secure manner.
5. (1) The Central Government shall formulate and implement welfare schemes for
overseas workers in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such schemes
shall also provide for,—
(a) insurance and disability cover;
(b) old age protection;
(c) orientation and skill upgradation; and
(d) such other provisions as the Central Government may consider necessary.
6. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Overseas Workers' Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the Fund  as the Central Government may think
fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. It shall be mandatory for all persons or agencies involved in the recruitment or
placement of Indian citizens for employment with foreign nationals or companies outside the
country to get themselves registered with such authority, as may be designated by the
Central Government for the purpose.
8. Whoever, in contravention of section 7 recruits any person for employment outside
the country, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years and with fine which may extend upto rupees five lakh or with both.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Definitions.
Maintenance
of Register of
Overseas
workers.
Assessment
study.
Formulation
of welfare
schemes.
Overseas
Workers'
Welfare Fund.
Compulsory
registration of
recruiting
agencies.
Punishment.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect at only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are about five million Indians employed outside the country. More than ninety
per cent. of this work force is in the Gulf countries. There has been a consistent and steady
increase in the number of persons going abroad in search of employment.
The problems being faced by Indian overseas workers are manifold. Non-payment or
delay in payment of wages, harsh working and inhuman living conditions, substitution of
contracts, retention of passport, cheating by intermediaries, incidents of physical abuse and
sexual exploitation, etc. are common. In most of the countries, access to legal remedy is
denied to Indian workers. In many cases Indian workers do not get the benefit of social
security contribution paid during their employment abroad, after they return to India, due to
various reasons.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for a legislation providing for the management and
welfare of Indian citizens working abroad. The Bill. inter-alia seeks to provide for:—
(i) registration of all Indian citizens who migrate from the country in search of
employment;
(ii) empowering the Central Government to frame welfare schemes for overseas
workers; and
(iii)  compulsory registration of recruitment agencies etc. and for punishment for
those agencies who carry out the business of recruiting persons for overseas
employment without registration.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JANARDAN SINGH 'SIGRIWAL'
July  4, 2016
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the maintenance of a register of overseas workers.
Clause 4 provides for an assessment study in the countries where there are overseas Indian
workers. Clause 5 provides for formulation and implementation of welfare schemes for welfare
of overseas workers. Clause 6 provides for constitution of a Overseas Workers' Welfare
Fund for welfare of overseas workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expendiutre
from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of
expenditure likely to be invloved as the exact amount of expenditure likely to be involved will
depend upon the number of schemes formulated by the Government. However,it is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for management and welfare of Indian citizens employed outside the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Janardan Singh 'Sigriwal', M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1424LS(S3)—27.07.2016.