As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
• 
Bill No. 208 {If 1!:t85 
T~ B4NKING .LAW,S (AME~DMENT.) BILL, 1985 
.\ 
BILL 
further to amend ~he Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the State Bank of 
India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India (Subsid'iary Banks) Act, 
1959, the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 
• 1961, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970, the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (Amendment and Miscella~eous Provisions) 
Act, 1978, ·the Banking Companies (Acquisift:on and Transfer of Under 
takings) A('t, 1980, the Export-Import Bank of Indio. Act, 1981 and the 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Devel.opment Act, 1981. 
HE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-51xth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHI\PTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, Short title 
IRS:" lind com-
mencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
mAy. by notitic.ati,on in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates 
may be app.Qint~ ~or different proviSions of this Act. 

Amcnd· 
mento!" 
Act 2 of 
1934. 
Amend· 
ment of 
Act 23 of 
J955. 
Amcnd· 
ment of 
Act 38 of 
1959. 
Amend· 
mentof 
ICction 2. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 32. 
Amend· 
mCfttof 
section 3. 
2 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMKNT TO THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 19"J4 
2. In section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in clause (4A). 
in the proviso, for the words "ninety per cent. of the paid-up shar~ capi-
tal", the words "twice the paid.up share capital" shall be substituted. 5 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENT TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 195t 
3. In section 40 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, in sub-section 
(4), the woras "while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised'in one sesS'ion or in two or more successive 10 
"Iessions" shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENT TO THE STATE BANK OF INDJ,!\ (SUBSIDIARY BANKS) 
ACT, 1959 
4. In section 43 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act. I~ 
1959. in sub-section (3), the words CI, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty.days which may ~ comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions" shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENTS TO THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE :}o 
CoRPORATION ACT, 1961 
5. In section 2 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corpo-
ration Act, 1961 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation Act).. in clause (g), after sub-clause (i), the 
following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely: - !l5 
II (ia) any amount due on account of any deposit with any insured 
bank which has been specially exempted in this behalf by the Cor· 
poration with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank; or". 
n In section 32 of the Deoosit Insurance Corporation Act, in sub-section 
(2), the words u. while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days go 
wnich may be comprised in one session Or in two or more successive 
sessions" shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENT TO THE B~NKING COMPANIF.!'! (Acc;mIsmON AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1970 35 
'1. In section 3 of the Banking Companies (AcqUisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings' Act, 1970 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the 
Bank Nationalisation Act) .. after sub-section (2), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely: - . ,;, 
"(ZA) Notwithstanding anything ronta;ned in sub-section (2). 40 
ti.e paid-up capital of every corre<lJHlndi_ new i bAnk ~onstituted. 
under IJub-spdion (1) may from time to time be increased by-
(a) Nch amounts a!ll the Board of Diredors of the Cfn'rl"S-
JJOndin, pew bank may, after eonsultat;on witb tbe Rp.~erve 
47 ot 1961. 
5 of 1970 

3 
&ank and with the previous sanctioa of the Central ; Govemmcnt, 
transfer from the reserve fund established by such bank to such 
paid-up capital; 
(b) such amounts as the Central Govemment may, in eon-
S sultation with the Reserve Bank, contribute to such paid-up 
capital: 
Provided that the paid-up capital of any-such bank shall in no 
case be in excess of one hundred crores rupees." 
... 8. In section 9 of the Bank Nat:onalisation Act, in 8ub-section (2), in 
10 clause (a), for the words "fifteen crores", the words "one h~dred croros" 
shall be substituted. 
9. In section 10 of the Bank Nationalisation Act, in sub-section (8), 
the words Ie. while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in -one session or in two or more successive sessions" 
15 shall be omitted. . 
10. (1) The corresponding new bank known as the "Unitef;i Commer-
cial Bank" constituted' under section 3 of the Bank Nationalisation Act 
shall be renamed as "UCO Bank", and accordingly in the First Schedule 
to the said Act, in column 2, for the words "United Commercial Bank". 
20 the letters and word "UCO Bank" shall be substituted. 
(2) The change of name of United Commercial Bank by sub-section 
(1) shall not affect any rights and obligations of that bank or render 
defective any legal proceedings by or against it, and any legal proceedings 
which might have been continued or commenced by or ag~inst that bank 
25 by its former name may be continued or commenced by or against it by 
its new name. 
CHAPTER VII 
AMENDMENT TO THE RmxONAL RURAL BANKS A~, 1976 
11. Section 20 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 shall be renum-
go bered as sub-section (1) thereof and after SUb-section (1) as so renumber-
ed, the follOWing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) The Central Government shall cause every aUditor's report 
and report on the working and activities of each Regional Rural Bank 
to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received. before each 
35 House of Parliament.". 
CHAPTER VIII 
AMENDMENT TO THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE OORPORATION (AMENDMEN'l' AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT, 1978 
Amend-
ment of 
section 9. 
Amend· 
mentof 
section 10. 
Change of 
name of 
United 
Commercial 
Bank and 
consequen-
tial amend· 
ment of 
the First 
Schedule, 
etc. 
Amend· 
mentof 
Act 21 of 
1976. 
12. In the Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment and Miscella· 
40 neous Provisions) Act, 19'78. Chapter IV' shall be omitted. 
Amend· 
mentor 
Act 21 pof 
1978. 

Amend-
mcntof 
section 3. 
Amend- . 
Dlcntof 
Itdion 9. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 10. 
Amead-
mont of 
·Act 28 of 
1911. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 6. 
4 
CHAPTER IX 
AMM'ilDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMl'.I\.NIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1980 
13. In section' 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1980 [hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the 5 
Bank (Second) NationaLsation Act], after sub-section (2), the following 
sUb-section shall be inserted, namely: - ' 
"(2A) Notwithstanlding anything contained in Su~ection (2), 
the paid-up capitnl of every corresponding new bank constituted 
1DIder sub-scrtion (1) may from time to time be increased by-
(a) such amounts as the Board of Directors of tbe corres-
pondini new hank may, arter consultation with 'the Reserve Bank 
and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, trans-
fer from the reserve fund established by· such bank to such paid-
up capital; 
(b) such amounts as the Central Government may, in consul-
tation w;th the Reserve Bank, contribute to such Paid-up capital: 
Provided that the pBid'-up capital of any such bank' shall in no case 
be in excess of rupees one hundred cr6res:'. 
IO 
15 
14 In section 9 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act, in sub- 20 
section (2), in dause (a), for ,the words "fiIteen crores", thle words "one 
hundred crores" shall be subsftuted. 
15. In section 10 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act, in sub-
section (8), the words ", while it is in session, for a total period of ihirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 25 
sessions" shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER X 
AMENDMENT TO THE EXN>RT-IMPORT BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1981 
16. Iu section 6 of the Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981, in sub-
section (2), for the wOl'ds "three years", the words "five years" shall be 30 
substituted. 
CHAPTER XI 
AMENDMENTS TO THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL 
DEVELOPMEN'1: ACT, 1981 
17. In section 6 of the National Bank for Agriculture and RUral Deve- 35 
lopment Act, 1981 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the National 
Bank Act),-
(a) in sub-section (2). the proviso shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (3),-
(i) in the' opening portion, the words "and the Board" shall 40 
be omitted; 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted. 
" of ]980 
Blof 1981. 

, . 
US. III section 7 of the National Bank Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), the proviso shall be omitted; 
(b) after sUb-section (1), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
~) .. (1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), the Central Government shall have the right tot~dninate 
the term of office of the Chairman at any tiple before the' expiry 
of th~term specified un~er that sub-section by giving him a 
notice of 'not less than three months in 'writing or three months' 
II- salary and allowances in lieu of such notice.". 
Amend· 
ment of 
·section 1. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Banking Laws were last amended through the Banking Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1983 which was brought into force in early 1984. Since 
then, in the course of administering the various Banking Laws, a need 
has arisen for some further amendments to the Acts governing, Reserve 
Bank of India, State Bank of Indi$ and its Subsidiaries, Deposit Insurance 
and Credit Guarantee Corporation, Nationalised Banks, Regional Rural 
Banks, Export-Import Bank of India and National Bank for Agriculture 
and Rural De~elopment to achieve the following objectives:-
(i) To implement the recommendations of the Committee on 
Paperss laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha regarding laying of Audi-
tors' Report and Annual Report of the public sector banks and finan-
cial institutions on the Tables of the two Houses. 
(Iii) To enable the Government to increase the paid-up capital 
of the nationalised banks so a'S to improve the banks' debt equity 
ratio and profitability. 
(iii) To bring the provisions including appointment and term of 
office of the Chairman, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development. on par with the provisions governing these matters 
in the case of Chief EXecutives of public sector banks and financial 
institutions. 
(iv) To change the name of United Commercial Bank to UCO 
Bank so as to avoid confusion in the international operations of the 
bank in view of the existence of a bank with the same name set up 
in Bangladesh. 
(v) To enable the Reserve Bank of India to retain the functions 
as the Government agency to settle claims against advances notified 
as in default on the date the Credit Guarantee Scheme for small scale 
industries was handed over by Reserve Bank of India to Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation. 
(vi) To bring the term of Chairman and Managing Director of 
Export-Import Bank of India on par with the Chief Executives of 
other banks and financial institutions. 
(vii) To enable the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee 
Corporation to exempt any amount due on account of any deposit 
with an insured bank. 
(viit) To make consequential amendment in the Reserve Bank of 
fndia Act to enable the State Financial Corporations to borrow loans 
and advances not exceeding twice the amount of their paid-up share 
capital from Reserve Bank of IndIa. 
?:lEW DELHI; VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
The 10th December, 1985. 
6 

'1 
• PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 1/3S/8S-BO-I. dated the 11th December, 
1985 from Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, Minister of Finance to the 
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Bill further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, _he 
State Bank of India Act, 1955.. the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act. 1959. the Deposit Insurance and Credit GUarantee Corpora-
tion Act, 1961. the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970, the Regional Rural Banks Act, 19'76. The De-
posit Insurance Corporation (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Act, 1978. the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer, of Under-
takings) Act, 1980, the Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981 and the 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act. 19'81 re-
commends under clause (1) of article 117 and clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India. introduction, and consideration of the above 
,am ill Lok Sabha, . 

• 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clauses 7 and 13 of the Bill enable the Central Government to increase 
the paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank as are specified in 
column 2 of the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts 1970 and 1980 from time to time. At 
present, nlC said Acts provide that the pa'id-up capital of the said banks 
shall not exceed Rs. 15 crores. Clauses 8 and 14 of the Bill increase the 
present statutory limit from Rs. 15 crores to Rs. 100 crores. This would 
enable the Government to contribute to the paid-up capital of the said 
banks from time to time so as to improve their profitability and debt 
equity ratio. A sum of about Rs. 250 crores is expected to be contributed 
by the Central Government during the current financial year in pursuance 
of this upward revision of the statutory ceiling. The expenditure will be 
met from out of the Consolidated Fund of India and will be of a non re-
curring ns.tu,re. The contribution is proposed to be got 'invested by the 
said banks in special securities and WOUld, therefore, come back into the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure of 
a recurring or non-recurring nature. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACT FROM nu: R~n: B4lJK OF INDIA Al:r, 1934 
(2 OJ'l~) 
• • • • • 
17. The Bank s~al1 be authorised to carry on ~d transact the several 
kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely:-
• • • • • 
(4A) the making to any State Financial Corporation, of loans 
IJl}P advances repaYi!-b1e on ~e expiry of fixed ~Jiods not excef!ding 
pighteen ~ont1)s from the date of such loan or advance, a~inst 
It~~ufities of tht: Ceptrij.l Government or of any State Government, 
of any maturity, or against bonds i!-nd debentures i$SUed by that Cor-
pOl"Jltion and guaranteed by the State Gov~nment concerned and 
maturing within a period not exceeding eighteen months from the 
date of such loan or advance: 
Provided that the previous approval of the State Government 
shall be obtained for the borrowing by the ,State Financial Corpora-
tion and the amount of loans and advances granted to that Corpora-
tion under this clause shall not, at any time, exceed in th~ aggregate 
ninety per cent. of the paid-up share capital thereof . 
• • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA A/:;T, 1955 
(~ OF 1955) 
• 
40. (1) • 
• • • 
• 
• • • 
• 
(4) Tbe Central Government shall cause the auditors' report and, the 
report by the CltQtral Board on the working and activities of the State 
Bank to ~ laid, 8$ soon as may be after they are received, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period· of thirty days 
which may be compr!sed in one session or iq two or mqre successive 
sessions. 
• • • * • 
ExTRACT FROM THE STATE B~ oF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS) 
Ar;:r, 1959 
(3& Q~ 1959) ~ 
• • • • • 
43. (1) • • * • • 
(:1) The Central Government shall cause the auditors' report and the 
rep,ort by the Board of directors on the 'wor~ing apd activities of the 
s\lbsidiary bank to be laid. as soon as may be after tQey are received. 
9 
Business 
which tile 
Baatmay 
transact. 
Returns. 
Returns to 
'befumilh-
cd by a 
'subsidiary , 
bank.' 

Definilion!'!. 
Anoual 
accounts 
imd 
reporl~. 
Hstablish-
ment of 
10 
oefore each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions. 
* • • • * 
.i!:XTRACTS FROM THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CumT GUARANTEE CORPORATION 
ACT, 1961 
(47 OF 19(1) 
* • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(g) "deposit" means the aggregate of the un-paid balance due to 
a depositor (other than a foreign Government, the Central Govern-
ment, a State Government a corresponding new bank, a Regional 
. Rural Bank or a banking company or a co-operative bank in respect 
of all his accounts, by whatever name called, with a corresponding 
new bank or with a Regional Rural Bank. or with a banking company 
or a co-operatIve bank and includes credit balances in any cash credit 
account but does not include,-
(i) where a banking company at the commencement of this 
Act or where an eligible co-operative bank at the commence-
ment of the Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 
1968 is working under a scheme of compromise or arrangement 
or of reconstruction sanction~ by any competent authority pro-
viding for the acceptance of fresh deposits, any amount due to 
the depositor in respect of his deposit before the date of the 
coming into force of the scheme to the extent It is not credited 
after the said date under the provisions of that scheme; or 
• • • • • 
32. or'· • • • • 
(2) The Central Government shan cause every auditor's report and 
report of the working of the Corporation to be laid as soon as may be 
al'ter they are received before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session. for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
seRsion or in two or more successive sessions . 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND 
'1'RANSFER OF UNDZrrrAKlNGS) 
ACT, 1970 
(5 OF 1978) 
• • • '" • 
3. (1) • • • '" '" 
t:orrespond-I. . (2) The paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted 
In~ new ·lm)ier SUb-section (1) shall, until any provision is made in this behalf 
hanks and in ·any scheme made under ~tion 9, be equal to the paid-up capital of 
business the existing bank in relation to which it is the corresponding new bank. thfOreof. 
• • • • '" 

II 
9.(1) ... ... 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the fol-
iuwing matters, namely:..:-
(a) the capital structure of the corresponding new bauk, so 
however that' the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not be in 
excess of rupees fifteen crores; 
• • • • ... 
)0. (1) ... '" • ... '" 
(8) The Central Government shall cause every aUditor's report and 
report on the working and activities of each corresponding new bank to 
be lai d as soon as may be after they are recehned before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions. 
• • • '" • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2, 3 and 4) 
Existing bank Corresponding new bank 
• 
Column 1 Column 2 
II< '" '" ". ... '" '" '" * 
II< ". ... II< United Commercial Bank. 
II< '" '" ... ... ... ... '" ... 
'" 
EXTRACT FROM THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976 
(21 OF 1976) 
28. Every Regional Rural Bank shall, within sixty days from the date 
of closure of its accounting year, send to each of its shareholders a re-
port as to its working and activities during the accounting year imme-
diately preceding together with a copy of its balance-sheet. profit and loss 
account and the auditor's report in relation to accounts of the said ac-
counting year. 1 ~ • .. 
• • • ... ... 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
scheme. 
Closure of 
accounts 
and dis-
posal of 
profi&s. 
AnDual '1 
report 
to be 
furnisbr 
totlae 
shaff 
hold, 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 2 of 
1934. 
Establish-
ment of 
corres-
ponding 
new 
Bank aDd 
business 
dJereof. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern:. 
ment to 
make 
acmes. 
Closure of 
accounts 
and dis-
posalof 
profits. 
III 
EXTRACT FROM THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CoRPORATION (AMENDMDT 
AND MIsCELLUfEOUS PROVISIONS) 
ACT, 19'78 
(21 OF 1978) 
• • • • • 
CHAPrERIV 
AMENDMENl: TO THE ~PVE BANK Of INDIA Acr, 1934 
9. In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in section 17, in clause 
(l1A), sub-clause (a) shall be omitted. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THe BANKING CO:M:PANII'S (AcQmSITlON AND 
TRtoNsna OF UNDEIlTAKINGS) 
ACT, 1980 
(~ OF 1980) 
3. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted 
under sub-section (1) shall, until any provision is made in this behalf 
in any scheme made under section 9, be equal to the paid-up capital of 
. the e~~tin~ bank in ~lation to which it is the corresponding new bank. 
• • .. • • 
t. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the following 
matteJ.'s, namely:-
(a) the capital structure of the corresponding new bank, so how-
ever that the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not be in excess 
of rupees fifteen crores; 
• • • • • 
10. (1) • • • • • 
(8) The Central Government shall cause every auditor's report and 
report on the working "and act.ivities of each co1Tesponding new bank 
to be laid as soon 8Smay be after they are received before each Flouse 
of Parliament, whUe It is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions . 
• • • • • 

6. (1) 
13 
EX'IRACT FROM THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF INBIA 
ACT, 1981 
(28 OF 1981) 
• • • • 
• • • • 
• 
(2) The Chairman and the managing director shall hold office for 
such term, not exceeding three years, as the Central Government may 
Ilpecify in this behalf and any person so appointed shall be eligible fpr 
re-appointment. 
• • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND 
RURAL DEvELoPMENT 
ACT, 1981 
(61 OF 1981) 
• • • • • 
6. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Chairman and other directors shall be appointed by the 
Central Ooyerru,nent in consij.ltation with the R~serve ]3p.nk: 
~. . .. ' . .. . . ..' . \. . 
Provided that the Central Government shall also consult the Board 
with regard to any appointment (except appointment to the first Board) 
to the offtce of Managing Director. 
(3) Where the Central (i()vernm,ent is satisfied, i~ consultation with 
,the ~rv~. B~k and the Board, that it is necessary 80 to lip, it may 
app'~int on~ or mor~ whole-time directors with such desiptione as may 
~ deemed appr~priate by that Government and any :whol~time director 
so apPOinted shall also be a member of the Board: 
Provided that consultation with the Board shall not be necessary in 
the case of the appointment of a whole-time director to the first Board. 
C.onstitu-
lion of 
Board. 
Board of 
Directors. 
7. (1) The Chainnan shall hold office for such term not exceeding Term of 
five years and shall· receive such salary and allowances as the Centra] office of 
Government may, at the time of appointment. specify: Cbairman 
Provided that the Chairman shall notwithstanding the expiration of 
his term continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his oftke. 
• • • • • 
and other 
directors, 
retirement 
and pay-
ment of 
tee~, 

LOK SABHA 
·A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the State Bank of 
India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
.1959. the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 
1961, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970, the Regional Rural Banks Act. 1976, the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Act, 1978, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Underta.k1ngs) Act, 1980, the Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981 
and the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 
1981. 
(Shri Vishw4fJ4th Pra.t4p Siln9h, 
Minister of Fi1lCZMe.) 