LDK SABRA 
ill RRI u-.liNDA 
to 
THE AIDP'lION 0 F A~ILDREN blL1,~ 980 
(To be/As introdu~" in 10k sabha) 
1. Page 8,-
• • 
a,a1nst line 3" insert the following marginal. c1 tation -
'45 0 f 166 0 • " 
2. Page 10,-
, 
1n the marginal heading to cl!IU3e a4-,-
[or ''Provi sionnal" ~ "provisional n 
3. Page 1 3 ,line 7,-
for "oonsti tu tion" ~ "the insti tu tion " 
4. Page 13, line 21,-
for 'lne ce s sary" read ''me rcenaryn 
5. Page 14,- . 
.tb r Ii ne 18 fro m be t tom, re ad -
"Cl au sa 8. -- Thi s cl au se pm vi de s fo r 00 n se n t 
eT'Efle parent or guardian " 
e. Page 14, line 9 from ~ttnm,-
fa r "The" re a' IIThi s II 
NEW D]LHI; 
December 12~ 1980 
Agrahayana 1, 1902 ( SBka) 

• • 
As lNTRoDucm IN LoK SABHA OK 
~, ", ..J ~ '" ,JtlU' • 
THE ADOPTION OF CHILDREN BILL, 1980 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commeDCement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Act not to apply to Muslims and not to affect operation of Act 
78 of 1956, etc. 
4. Adoptions to be regulated by this Act. 
5. Power to make adoption C'rdera. 
6. Persons who may adopt 
7. Persons who may be adoptefl 
8. Consents. 
9. Court having jurisdictioI' to Itlltertain applications. 
10. Procedure before the court, ste-
ll. Interim orders 
12. Matters to be considered in making adoption orders. 
13. Appeals. ' , 
14. Effect of adoption order. 
15. Special provision for pr')tectiOll of adopted children. 
16. Licensing Authority for Adoption Institutions. 
17. Licensing of institutions. 
18. Revocation of licence. 
19. Appeal against orders of Hcenaing authority. 
20. Penalties. 
21. Prohibition of certain payments. 
22. Restrictions upon advertisements. 
23. Restrictions on removal of child for adoption outside India. 
24. Provisional adoption by pl'rson domiciled outside India. 
25. Power to make rules. 
, 

BiU No. 208 fJf 1980 ',f-",)'" -"", ._ 
THt ADOPTION OF CHILDREN BILL, 1980' ... 
A 
BILL 
to provide fOT the adoption of children and m.Cltt~rs con~cted 'tJter'wit1( 
. ", 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- . JI 
. ."-, 
:.,f "t',-";" 
]1"(". \ .:.1 ;~'l 
Jl \' I ~:, ~ 
... ,. 1. ~" 
Itli't .(' 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Adoption of Children Act,~9aO .. !! \ Short 
title, 
(2) It ext~ndsto tne wh&le "f India except the State ot jammu ~cr exteQt and 
5 Kasnroir. com.-' ,:.' 
10 
IS 
. ' " . f" 
(3) It shall come into force on r.:uch date as the Centra! Government 
may, by notification in the Offtcial Gazette, appoint. " 
, ' 
" I 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "adoption order" mca'~s an order made under seqtion, 5 : tor , 
the adoption of a child; 
(b) "child" ·means a 'persw, whether male or female, Who, '~' or 
before the date on which an ,'lpplication for an adoption ordelo M 
respect of such person is maell', has not completed the age of eighteen , : II 
, years; 
(c) "disttictcourt" means in any area for which there ,:isJ a 
city civU court, that court,. lind in any other area, the' i FiDdpd, .... 
dvil court of original jurladiction: 
In ~nce-..~ t I 
rnentl;;! ~'~:. I 
.1J '!<!" 
i/.\: 
Definit-
ions. 
,,'I· .,~~ 

Aetnotto 
apply to 
Mualblla 
and not 
to 
..rect 
operation 
of Act'78 
of 1 .... 
etc:. 
AdoptlOflI 
to be 
reaulated ., thll 
Act. 
::rto 
dDpUon 
erc!eta. 
PeraoDi 
'Who may 
... 
, . 
2 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, empower, subject to such conditions and res-
trictions as may be specified in the notification, any other civil court 
to exercise the powers and discharge the fun'Ctions and duties of 
the district court in respect r)( all or any of the matters dealt with S 
in this Act and a civil court :::0 empowered shall also be deemed to 
be a district court for the purposes of this Act in respect of the 
matters and subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in 
such notification; 
(d) "guardian" means a person having the care of the person J'I 
of a child or of both his pers('ln and property and includes-
(i) a guardian appointed by a will or other instrument 
executed by the child's father or mother, and 
(ii) a guardian appointed or declared by a court; 
(e) "institution" means a body of persons licensed as a social 15 
welfare institution under seetion 17; 
(f) "licensing authority", in relation to any State, means the 
Licensing Authority for Adoption Institutions for that State under 
section 16; 
(g) "parent", in relation to an adopted child, means the adop- 20 
tive parent; 
(h) "prescribed" means lJrescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
3. (1) No adoption order shall be made in respect of a Muslim child 
or for adoption by a Muslim of any child (whether Muslim or not) 25 
under this Act. 
(2} Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the operation of the 
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 relating to ado!,tion 
alDQllgHindus or the operation of any custom relating to adoptM.'n 
among others: 30 
Provided that notwithstanding the Hindu Adoptions and Mainten-
ance Act, 1956 or such custom, n.' adoption made in accordance with 78 of 1956. 
the provisions of this A~t shall h-:: void merely on the ground that 
'Such adoption has not been, madp. in eccordanee with that Act or custom. 
4. (1) Save as provided in 'lp.rtion 3, no adoption shall b. made 35 
except in accordance with the provisions of this Act and .any adoption 
made in contravention of such provisions shaH be void and of no ~ect. 
(2) An adoption which is voin Fhal1 neither create any rights in 
the adoptive family in favour of eny person which he or she would 
not have acquired except by reR:;:on of the adoption, nor destroy the 40 
rights of such pers'.)n in the family of ,his or her birth. 
S. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the district court may, upon 
an application made in the prescribed form and manner by a person for 
the adoption of a· child, make nn adoption order in respect ot such' ~ild. 
•. (1) Any person who has completed the age of twenty-five years 45 
and is of sbund mind may adopt a r:~lild under this Act. 
E~laMtion.~In the case of Rcioption ~f a child by spouses the 
te~ment·"s to age under thiR ~lb·~ction shall be ~eemd to~ave 

•• 
3 
b~~.~ti~d if eitherpf tpe,spo'Jses hascomplet~d tP.e. of.twe.qty-. 
fl'(~ 1~rs. . . . , . . , 
(2) A ~rson who is married .. hall not be entitled to adopt hims~ 
or,ber~~lf;f\lpf1e ~ child., but .the hl,.l.sband and wifeJ and~e,·~.are 
S ~~e. ,\}'iyes:than. ~pe.,;~nyone ofjlhe wives, mayjahltly adopt a..uel. 
and 10 no ot~~r.~~e .~hall more tt)lU1one:.~s!ln ,Qe ,nUtlecl join~ly ,w 
adopt a child. 
(3) The person or each of th,. persons seeking to adopt a child shall 
be older than the child by at le8st twenty-one years: 
10 '. Provided that the district court may dispense with the' reqUirements 
of this sub .. section in any case if H is 'satisfied that' ther~are any '~1 
cil'CUrtlstances which render it necessary so to do. " , 
(4) NotwIthstanding the forelloing provisions of this ~.ijon, the 
mother or 1atherof a child npt born in lawful wedlock may, eit~er ~ne 
15 or jointly with her or his spouse. as the. case ~ay be, adoptsuch,~hild 
whether or not such mother, fatht:!l' or spouse-
(a) has completed the Ilge ,of twenty-five years; ,pr 
(b) is older than the chUd by twenty-one years. 
7. (1) Any child who is not 3]ready adopted or married, may be 
20 taken in adoption. 
(2) No adoption order shall b€' made where the' sole applicant for 
an adoption order is a male ono tl-te chi1d to be adopted iSI a>:teidale. 
unless the district court is satisfi"j that the apIDlicant is thefatber of 
the child or that there are othl'r5pecial circulllstances which 'j~",fy 
:.!5 the making of an adoption order. 
8. (1) An adoption order in respect of a child shall not be made-
(a) in any case, except with the consent of every ;peJ;WOD .wh. 
is ~ rarent or guardian of the cl,ild; and 
(b) where the child is in the care of an institJ+tiQJl, ~'Fcep~, with, 
30 the consent of the institution ;:!iven on its behalf by all the persons 
. el;1,trustcd with" or in charge nf, its management: ' 
Provided' that the con Rent of trp. father of a child npt I ~q~n .. in tawful. 
wedlock shantn no ca~e. be req'1irf"'rl in. the cr:~e_!;lf a?ORtion of .1!I~!t~ 
child.· . . , . 
. . (2) The time when and the ml'lOner in which the cOnsent ~fefNd' 
35 to in sub-section (1) may be ll!v'O'n .and other matters ~ela.ting to~h 
consent shall be such as rnav he prescribed. 
40 
45 
(3) The district court may di~;pense with any consentrequtred by 
sub-section (1) if it is satisfied fh'-!t th0 person whose consent is tq.be 
dispensed with- : 
(a) has abandoned, ne~lected orpersistentIy m .. treatedthe 
child or has persistently failr!d. without reasonable cRUJe, to dis-
charge ~he obligation" of a DJ':'Cut or guardian of 'thecl1ild; or, . , 
(b) cannot be found or if. incapable m givi,ngconaentor 14 
wJthholdfng 'consent unrea·soTlRbly. . " 
•. 'J" 
J: " 
;'.1;'1': 
. ~,·td,' 
.d 
Persona 
who 
may be 
adopted. 
Consents. 

court 
haviq 
jurladic-
tion to 
entla!taln 
applica-
tiona. 
Procedure 
before the 
court, 
etc. 
Interim 
orden. 
.. 
4 
, ·(f)AA"J '<lO!'lsent to an adoptlor, of a . child given UlIUer· this· Section 
shan not be withdrawn except with the permission of the .' cns'trret 
court. 
' •. Bgery applieatiol'l for an adoption order shall be t;nade'to the' 
dtatrietcourt having jurisdiction in the plaee where the child to '·be S 
adopted or tbeapplicant retides on the date of the appUcaUon. ' , :,", . 
,10. (1) Subjeet to the provisionE of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, every application for 3n adoption order shall be heard and 
determined by the district court as nearly as may be inaceordance 
with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, ,1908, 10 5 of 1901. 
to the trial of wits and an adoptio!'l. order made under this Act shall be 
deemed to be a decree for the purposes of the said Code. . 
E.rptan~tion.-Any rules' mad~ for the purposes af this sub-section 
may, in particular, provide for-· 
(a) the transfer of procepdings relating to an application for J 5 
an adoption order pending in a district court to another district 
court (whether such courts are situated in the same or different 
States), and for the circumstances in which and the manner in 
which such transfer may be made; 
(b) the reference to the"d!strict court of an application for an 20 
ado})Uon order to any expert, br agency spe::ified in such rules for 
cae study and report. . 
(2) The provisions of the Indian' Evidence Act, l'B72, shall. subject 1 of 1872. 
to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, apply in 
all respects to the proceedings on such application: :2 5 
Provided that the district court may receive as evidence any report. 
sta.tement, document, information or matter 'that may in its opinion 
assist it to deal effectually with the application, whether or not the 
same would be otherwise relevant or admissible under the Indian 
Evidence A9t, 1872. 3') 1 of 1872. 
(3) For the purpose of an:sr application for adoption of a child under 
this Act and 5UQject to any rulcf; made thereunder. the district ~ourt 
may; if satisfied that it is necessary so to do, appoint some person 'or 
authority to act as guardian ad l;fem of the child upon the hearing of 
the application with the duty of c;':Ifeguarding the interests of the child 35 
before the court: 
Provided that where the application for adoption of a child is made 
by his guardian, the district court ~hall appoint some other per.son or 
authority to aetas ~uardlan ad litf>tn of the child under this sub-section. 
11. (1) Subject to the provisi,.,n~ of this section. the district court· 4() 
may postpone the determination n', an application for an adoption 
order in respect bfa child and may. rf it con!;idersjust and convenient 
so to do. make an interim order «iving' t'tIe care ana cURtody of thf> 
child to the applical'lt for such" perl ad as the court tlunks fit by way of 
a probationary period, upen such terms as regards ~heprovi8ion for 45 
the maintenance and education and the supervision of the tnterests 
and weltarr. of the child and ott-erwise as the court may think fit. 

•• 
5 
Ie .' 
5 
(2) On the application of any person or authority interested, the 
district court may in its discretion modify or revoke an interim order • 
in respect of any chi1d on such terms and conditions as the court thinks 
fit. 
12. (1) The district court, before making an adoption order,-
(a) shall be satisfied thst every person or institution whose 
consent is required under this Act, and whose consent has not been 
dispensed with, has consented to and understands the nature and 
effect of the adoption order for which the application has been 
made and in particular in case of any parent, understands that the 
effect of the adoption order Wll! be permanently to deprive him or 
her of his or her parental rights; 
(b) shall give due consideration to the wishes ot the child, 
having regard to his or her age and understanding; 
(c) shall be satisfied that the order if made, will be for the 
welfare of the child; and 
(d) shall be satisfied that the applicant has not received or 
agreed to receive and that no person has made or given or agreed 
to make or give to the appli<.'ant, any payment or other reward in 
20 consideration of the adoption except such as the court may 
sanction. 
(2) In determining whether an adoption order, if made, will be for 
the welfare of the child, the district court shall have regard (among 
other things) to the health of thl' applicant as evidenced, in such cases 
25 as may be prescribed, by the certificate of a registered medical practi-
tioner. . 
(3) The district" court in making an adoption order may impose 
such terms and conditions as it may think fit and in particular, may 
require the adopter by bond or otherwise to make for the child such 
30 provision, if any, as in the opinion of the court is just and proper. 
Matters 
to be 
consi-
dered in 
makin, 
adoption 
ordera. 
13. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the district court Appeals. 
allowing or dismissing an application for an adoption order may, within 
thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the High 
Court. 
3S (2) The High Court shall subject to the provisions of this Act, 
have the same powers, jurisdiction and authority and follow the same 
procedure with respect to an appeal under this section as if the appeal 
were an appeal frum an original decree passed by the district court. 
14. (1) An adoption order shall take effect on such date as may be 
40 specified th,"fin by the district court or where an appeal has been 
preferred under section 13 against such order on such date as may be 
specified in the appellate order. 
(2) A child in respect of whom an adoption order is made shall be 
deemed to be the child of the adopter or adopters and the adopter or 
04S adopters shall be deemed to be the parent or parents of the child as 
if the child had been born to that adopter or those adopters in lawful 
wedlock, for all purposes (including· intestacy) with effect from the 
date on which the adoption order takes effect and on and from such 
Effect ot 
adoption 
order. 

.. 
6 
date all the ties of the child in the family 01 hiJ or her birt1:l Ib.all be 
• deemed to be severed and replsC€'d by those created by the adoption 
order in the adoptive family: 
Special 
provision 
for 
protection 
of adopted 
children. 
Provided that-
(a) the child shall not be competent to marry any person whom S 
the child could not have married if the child had continued in the 
family of his or her birth; 
(b) Bny property which vested in the adopted ehild immediately 
before the date on which the adoption order takes effect shall con-
titlUe to vest in the adopted chfid subject to the obligations, if any, 10 
attaching to the ownership of sueh ~erty includil1g the obliga-
tions, if any. to maintain the relatives in the 1amny of his or her 
birth; 
(c) the adopted child shall not divest any perlOn ·of any pro-
perty whichve,ded inluch perllon before the date on which the IS 
adct)tion order takes effect. 
(3) .wo~witbst.DdiQ,g anything contained in any other law, where the 
particulars relating to the birth of a chilQiD Niped of whiah·an aQaption 
order ism,ade have been registered under any law relating to registr~­
tiOD of birt~. the officer or authority for the time being empowered to 20 
give certified extracts of such particulars shall, upon an appllcation made 
by or on behalf of the child and upon being satisfied that the adoption 
'erder m refPeCt of the child has taken effect, issue or cause to be issued 
.• eerliftcate of such pattitttlMS ~etttng out the names Of the adoptive 
p8J'et\tsinplace' of the names of the natural parents of the chfld. 2S 
15. (1) The district court,-
(i) upon receiving from any person an ap:Jlication in the pres-
cribed form in this behalf, or 
(U) 1IpMl al'elM)n by .,. "cer ....... riled ill tIIis IKilaoW by the 
9tMe f(lr6nr~*, -
(iii) upon its own knowledge or information, 
may, by notice, require the parent or guardian ofa child apparently 
uDtler thealfe of eighteen yeaN, bdng athild adopted \lnder this Act 
to produce such child on such day as may be specified in the notice if 
the court has reason to believe that the child- 3S 
Ca) is habitua11y neglect~d or subjected to cruel ill-treatment, 
.' 
(b) lives or is made to Jive by begging, 
(t» tifts Ol' is made to live in ciretlmsUmces caI6to1ated to cause, 
en~N«e or favour the seduetJon or pro~tutfon ~e ~d, 
(.~) freqUeD1s fit is allm-/t'd to fre~t the e'omp&ny of. any 40 
fS'05ti-.te,'bI' Of liiIy'mluggJer,or tMef -or df~ c!l'imma1 or, 
(e) hili beenqr ~ beiDa or·is libly. tQbe ~ ... ~,O!fl""r 
an.¥ io:uAor8.1.purpo~ or. for any .~s.~l ,w hit "IftIiIIare 
~a.~~;re~. 

7 .. 
£x~~na~.--tor ~the, purpose~ 'o~ sub-claus~: '(~)",crue(ill~trea~~, I 
ment In relatfon to an adopted ch!ld Includes any ,un8«e' dfsct1thinat1~1':.: ' 
between him and his brothers or sisters in his adoptive family in tlii!' 
mat~rof carel maintenance, p:aining, education, provision offIloney \Qr 
S property or in AAY other ~tter connected with the ,phy~ca1, , ma.te.rlal 
or moral well-being of the child. ' 
(2) On the date fixed for the production of the child under sub-
~ection (1) or on any subsequent date to whi~h" the proceedings may 
be adjourned, the district court may hear and record all evidence which 
10 may be adduced and pass such order as in the opi~ion or the court is 
just and proper in the circumstances of the case for ensuring the welfar~ 
of the child. 
(3) The ptovisions of section 10 shall, so fat as may be, apply in 
respect of proceedings and orden' tinder this section as they apply in 
J S respect of proceedings on applicatjons for adoption orders and adoption 
orders. 
(4) The provisions of this se·.~tion shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, the provisions of any law for the time being in force 
providing for the care, ptotection, maintenance, weUare, training, educa-
2(1 tion and rehabilitation of childrer... 
3') 
35 
16. (1) There shall be a Licensing Authority for Adoption Institutions 
for each State. 
(2) Tile licensing authority for a State sQU consist of the followag 
members, namely:-
(a) a Chairman who shall be a member of the State Social 
Welfare Board, if any, or an officer of the State Government not 
below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that Government, to be 
appointed by the State Go"ernment; 
fb) one member nominated by the Central Government and not 
more than five other members to be appointed by the State Gov-
ernment from amongst persons who, in tile opinion of the Govern-
ment m~kiJ1g such nomination or anpointment, have special know-
ledge or e~perience in regard to matters relating to child welfare 
and administration of child wclfRre institutions: 
Provided that not less th3n one-half of the members under this 
clause shall be women. 
(3) The term of office of, the ~nowances, if ~y, payable to, and the 
other terms and conditions of service of, the Chalrman and other mem-
bers of the licensing authority for a State shall be such as ~y be 
40 determined by the State Government. 
(4) The quorum for the 
States and the procedure, to 
such as may be prescribed. 
meetings of the licensing authorities for 
be f0110wed ,by such authorities shall be 
, '; ;r.:. ~ 
, f" ; . '~ 
'. 'd' . Af' tl..~ l"' ... .:..~'all·",..mv fnr any. State (S)No ,act' orprooee il1IIS'''' u;= _ .......... ' ", ... "" ,L 17' 
hall b invalid by t'e8On ofthe,~~te~ of aQyvacan~y ln" 9l' ~~t 4,:5 e _" . in the composition of, the authonty, 
Licensing 
Authority 
for 
Adoption 
Institu-
tions. 

LiceDsiDl 
." iuri-
tuti0D8. 
Revoca-
tion of 
licence. 
• • • , . 
(6) All members of the licensing authorities shall be deemed to be 
pu.blic servants within the meaatn. of -:cUOIl 21 of the Inc!l.n Penal 
Cdde. . 
17. (1) It shall not be lawful for any body of persons to make any 
arrangements f:lr the adoption of a child unless that body is licensed S 
as a social welfare institution under this Ad: 
Provided that for a period of three months from the commencement 
of tm, Act, this sub-section shan not apply to any body of persons 
engaged in making such arrangem~nts immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act. 10 
(2) An application for being licensed as a social welfare institution 
may be made to the licensing authority in such form and containing 
such particulars as may be prescribed 
(3) On the receipt of an application under sub-section (2), the licens-
ing authority, after making such inquiry as it thinks necessary, shall IS 
by an order in writing either grant the licence or refuse to grant it. 
(4) Where a licence is refu'Sed, the grounds for such refusal shall 
be communicated to the applicant in the prescribed manner. 
(5) A lk:ence, unless sooner revoked, shall be in force for a period 
of three years from the date of the issue of the licence and may, on an 20 
application made in this behalf sixty days before the date of its expiry, 
be renewed for a like period: 
Provfded that a licence may be renewed on an application made with-
in sixty days before the date of expiry of the licence if the licensing 
authority is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not making an 25 
application earlier. 
(6) NotWithstanding anything contained insub-section (5), the licens-
ing authority may, fur reasons to be recorded in writing, grant or renew 
a licence under this section for a period less than three yeaI'lS. 
(7) Every licence granted under this Act shall be in the prescribed 3-
form and shall be subject to the prescribed conditions. 
(8) No fee shall be charged for the grant or renewal of a licence under 
this Act. 
(9) A licence granted under this Act ':Shall not be tr.msferable. 
18. (1) The licensing authorfty may, without prejudice to any other 35 
penalty which may have been incurred under this Act, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, revoke a licence granted under this Act-
(a) if any of the provisions of this Act or any of the rules there-
under relating to the grant of licences 0'1' any of the condition. of the 
licence are contr.lvened; or 40 
(b) if the licensing authority is not 68.tisfied with the conditions, 
management or superintendence of the institution concenled: 
?rovided that before makin& an order of revocation the licensing 
autb¢ity shall g1ve the bolder of· the J.tcoence a l'eMODable opportunity 
to smw c:&UIe why the .1SeeJiee should not 'be revoIIIId. 45·' 

,.. : 9 
. (2) WbMe' a licence' in 1'e8pect' , of- 11ft lristitlltiOu' has Deen revoked' 
under sUb-section (1), such fn~titutjon shall cease to function,- • 
('4) where no appeal has been preferred, against the order of 
revocation, immediately on the ex~iry of the period prescribed ,for 
5 the filing of such appeal; 
(b) where an appeal has been preferred but the order of revoca-
tion has been confirmed, whether with or without any modifications, 
from the date of the appellate order. 
(3) On the revocation of a licence in respect of an institution, the 
10 licensing a'athority may direct th~t any child who is in the care and 
custody of the institution on the date of such revocation shall be-
(a) transferred to another institution; or 
(b) placed in the care alld custody of such person as is in the 
opinion of the licensing authority a fit and proper person to be 
15 entrusted wi'th the care and custody of the child, 
19, (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the licensing authority 
granting or renewing a licence for a period less than three years or re-
fusing to grant or renew a licence or revoking a licence or by a d:jrec-
tion of the licensing authority may, within such time as may be pres-
20 cribed, Qrefer an appeal to the State Government against such refusal, 
revocation or direction, 
(2) The order of the State Government on such appeal, and subject 
only to such order, the order of the licensil'lg authority shall be final 
and conclusive, 
25 20, Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or 
any of the rules made thereunder relating to the grant of licences or 
any of the conditions of a licence, Cir any of the directions issued under 
SUb-section (3) of section 18 shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to on~ yf'ar, or with flne, or with both. 
30 21. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, it shall not be lawful 
3S 
to make or give to any Qerson any payment or reward for or in consi-
deration of-
(a) the adoption by that person of a child; or 
(b) the grant by that person of any consent required in con-
nection with the adoption of a child; or 
(c) the transfer by that parson of the care and custody of a child 
with a view to the adoption of a child; or 
(d) the making by that person of any arrangements for the 
adCQtion of a child. 
4 (2) Any person who' makes or gives or agrees or offers to make or 
o give any payment or reward prohibited by this section or who receives 
or agrees to receive or attempts to ()btain any such payment or reward, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a: term which may extend to 
six months, or witl{fuie,: at with both; and the court may order any 
45 child in res;>ect of whom the offence has been committed, to be removed 
Appeal 
against 
orders of 
licensing 
authOrity. 
Penalties. 
Pr.hibi-
tion of 
certain 
payment •. 

Restric-
tions 
upon 
adverti-
aements. 
Restric-
tions 
on 
removal 
of child 
for 
adoption 
outside 
India. 
Provision-
nal 
adoption 
by 
person 
domiciled 
outside 
India. 
, . 
10 
to a".pl~of safety ~ he oWln be t:estore4._ to his p~en~-~- 'g",~dian 
"or until other .arr~aemen~ can be ma4e for hi~. 
(a> ~ ~cwn does,Qot apply to any _pJUTment m,acle tQ ~ institu-
tioa bya ,parent or iUtUdian ala child or by a person wQo ad.or;ts or 
proposes to adopt a child, being any payment in respect of eXIPenses 5 
reasonably incurred by the institution in connection with the adoption 
of the child or "to any -payment orte-ward authorised by' the court to 
which an 8Qplication for an adoption order in respect of a child is made. 
22. (1) Except with the leave of the court competent to entertain an 
application 'for ~n adoption order in respect of a child, it shall not be law- 10 
ful for any advertisement to be t;Jublished indicating-
(a) that the .,arent or guardian of the child desires to cause the 
child to be adopted; or 
(b) that a person desires to adopt the child; or 
(e) that any person (not being an institution) is willing to make IS 
arrangements for the adoption of the child. 
(2) Any person who causes to be published or knowingly ,?ublishes 
an advertisement in contravention of the provisions of this section shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
23. (1) Except under the authority of an order under section 24, it 20 
shall not be lawful for any person to take or send out of India a child 
who is a citizen of India to ar.y place outside India with a view to the 
adoption of the child by any person. 
(2) Any person who takes or sends a child out of India to any place 
outside India in contravention of silo-section (1) or makes or take~ part 2S 
in any arrangements for transferring the care and custody of a chi~d to 
any person for that purpose shall' be punishable with impriso~ment for 
a term which may eXtend to six months, or' with fine, ~ with both. 
'. . 
(3) In any Qroceeding under this section a report by an Indian con-
sular officer or an Indian diplomatic offi::er or a depositio~ made before 30 
an Indian consular oJlicer or an Indian diplomatic officer and authenti-
cated under . the signature of that officer· ,shall be admissible as eVidente 
of the matters stated therein, and it shall not be necessary to prove the 
signature or official character of the person who appears to have signed 
any such rff,)ort or deposition. 
24. (1) If upon an applicati9n made by a person who is not domiciled 
in India, the district court is satisfied that the applicant intends to adopt 
35 
a child under the-law Qf or withia the country in whit:h he is domiciled, 
and for that Qurpose desires to remove the. child from India eithe!' im-
mediately or after an interval,the court may make an or~er. (in this 40 
section referred ·to as a provisional adoption order) -authorising the ap-
plicant to remove the child for the purpose aforesaid and giving to the 
ap;llicant the care and custody. of the. child pending his a~option as 
aforeSJaid: -
Provided that no application shall be ~tertained unless it is accoJXl- 45 
panied bya certificate by the Central Government to the effect that-
t, " ' • 
(i) the applicant is in its opinion a fit person to adopt the child; 

• • 
II 
, : (ii). the welfare and interests of the child shall be safeguarded 
under the law ot the country of doDii~ile of the appliCant;'~ 
(iii) the applicant has made proper provision by way of deposit 
or bond or otherwise in aCcordance 'with the rules made under this 
5 Act toensble theehild to be repatriated to India, should it become 
necessary for any reason. 
(2) A provisional 'adoption order may be made under this section in 
any ca'3e where an adoption order could be made in respect of the child 
under this Act but shall not be made in any other case. 
10 (3) The provisions of this Act relating to an adoption order Shall, as 
far as may be, apply in relation to a provisional adoption order made 
under this section. 
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, and after consultation with the Supreme Court, make rules for 
IS carrying out the purposes of this Act. ' 
20 
30 
35 
40 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the pro-
visions of sub-section (1), such rules may provide for-
(a) the form and the manner in which an application for an 
adopdon order shall be made under section 5; 
(b) the time when and the manner in which consent may be 
given to the adoption of a child and other matters relating to such 
consent under sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(c) the procedure which may be followed on hearing applications 
by a district court and the circumstances in which and the extent to 
which such applications may be heard and determined otherwise than 
in open court under sub-secti.('In (1) of section 10; 
(d) the quorum for the meetings of licensing authorities and 
the procedure to be followed hy licensing authorities under sub-
section (4) of section 16; 
(e) the form and particulRrs of an application for a licence in 
respect of an institution undpr sub-section (2) of section 17; 
(f) the manner in which the grounds for refusal of a licence 
shall be communicated to the applicant under sub-section (4) of 
section 17; 
(g) the form of licence in respect of institutions and the condi-
tions thereof referred to in sub-section (7) of section 17, the 
qualification of persons who Jr.ay be engaged by institutions to 
make arrangements for adoption, the provisions which should be 
complied with by institutions in regard to reception, care, pro-
tection and welfare of children under their control and the inspec-
tion of records and premises C'f institutions; 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

Ill . 
• 'J ," t, ,'" '.' -. _ ,-: t'" .• ,-. 
(h) the time within which an ~ may'be P1eferre.d.tcitiae 
State novenUnenf Undet" section 19;' 'l ' . • ~. '. . .' 
(i) the form in which, and the authorities to whom, an: applica-
tion for the· ceortificate referred. to in the proviso to 'Sub-section (1) of 
section 24 may be made; the provision which an applicant for such S 
certificate has to make for repatriation to India of the child to which 
the application relates and the conditions which such an applicant 
has to comply with; 
(j) any other matter for which provision has to be or may be 
made by rules. 10 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and it. before the expiry of the ~ession immediately 'following the ses- 15 
sion or the successive sessions aforesaid, both' Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or be>th Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule. 20 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS •• 
In India there is no general law of adOption though it is permitted 
by statute aJDODgSt HiDdus and by custom amongst a few numerically 
insignificant categories of perIOna. In recent years there has beUl a 
growing demand for a general law of adoption in India, particularly 
from ~veral social welfare organisations and social workers who see in 
constitution of adoption an opportunity to provide proper homes and 
families for abandoned, destitute and neglected children. The basis of 
this demand lies embedded in article 39 of the Constitution which pro-
vides inter alia that the State shall direct its policy towards securing 
that chUdhOOd. and youth are protected against exploitation and against 
material and moral abandonment. This Bill seeks to meet this demand. 
2. The salient featares of the Bill may be stated as followSl-
(4) The Bill seeks to provide for an enabling law of adoption 
applicable to all communities other than Muslim community and in 
addition to and not in supersession of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 in so far as it relates to adoption and all 
customary laws permitting adoption. 
(b) It provides for adoption by order of district court. 
(c) It seeks to provide necessary safeguards to prevent 1'n-
suitable adoptions and adoptions with necessary or immoral ob-
jects and to ensure that adoption of a child is allowed only when 
it is in the best interests of the child. 
(d) It permits the adoption of any child (a person who has 
not completed 18 years of agt» who is not already adopted or 
married. 
(e) It permits, subject to ('ertain qualifications and restrictions, 
any person of sound mind who has completed the age of 25 years 
to adopt a child. 
(f) It makes SUitable provisions as to consents of the parents 
of the child to be adopted and of the institutions, if any, taking 
care of the child. 
(g) It seeks to equate as far as possible the status, rights and 
obligations of an adopted child with that of a child bom in lawful 
wedlock. 
(h) It makes special provisions for protection of adopted chil-
dren who are neglected or cruelly ill-treated or exploited or ex-
posed to pernicious influences. 
(i) It makes detailed provisions as to licensing and supervision 
of institutions desiring to mRke arrangements for adoption of 
children. 
(j) It provides for the making of provisional adoption orders 
permitting foreigners to take children out of India for the purpose 
of adoption. 
3. The notes on cla'USes explain in detail the various· provisions of 
the Bill. 
NEW Dam; P. smv SHANJa:a 
The 3t'd Deeember, lB. 

,. , ' I, " J )' • ~ .' i' 
Notes on clatl.Ses 
ClaUSe 3.-Sub-clause (1) pr~vides tbat ,no adop~ion order shan,.be 
mad~· in respect ~f a MUslim child or for adciptipn by a ~uslim of ~ny, 
child (whether Muslimor not) under ibis Bill. 
Sub-clau8e "(2) provides that tb .. provisions of· the· Bill, when enacted,· 
would be available in addition'to and not in supe1'8ession ,of the provi-
sions relating to adoption contained in the Hindu Adoptions and Main-
tenance Act, 1956 and the cl\sto~ary law relating to adoption. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for the application of the provisions 
of the Bill, when enacted, save as provided in clause 3, to all adoptions. 
An adoption made in -contravention of the provisions of the Bill, when 
enacted, will be void and of no e!fect. 
Clause 5.-This clause confers the powers to make adOl?tion orders on 
district court.. 
Clause' 6 . .....;.,Any p4!rson who has completed the age of twenty-five 
years and is of sound mind can adopt a child [sub-clause (1) j. A 
married person can adopt only jointly with his wife. The samr:! child 
cannot be adopted by more than one Qel'Son unless it is by husband and 
wife adopting jointly [sub-clauae (2)]. There should be a minimum 
difference Of twenty-one years bet'.veen the adopter and the child to be 
ada,ted [sub-clause (3)]. All these requirements except the one as to 
the person adopting being of sound mind have been made inEQplicable 
in the case of adoption by a natural parent of his or her illegitimate 
child [sub-clause (4)]. 
Clause 7.-This clause provides that a child not alrE}ady adopted or 
married may be taken in adoption, and that a sole male a:?plicant may 
adopt a female child only if he is the father of the child or there are 
other special circumstances justifying such adoption. 
Clauae 9.-This clause provides that an application for an adoption 
of a child and where the child is in the care and custody of an institu-
tion, of the institution, for the adoption of the child. The clause also 
empowers the court to dispense with the consent of a parent or guar-
dian in cases where SlUch parent or guardian has abandoned, neglected 
or persistently ill-treated the child or cannot be found or is incapable of 
giving his consent or is withholding his consent unreasonably, The 
consent once given cannot be withdrawn except with the permission of 
the court. 
C'ltluse 9.-The clause providES that an application for an adoption 
order may be made to the district court having jurisdiction in the place 
where the child to be adopted or the person desiring to adopt resid~$ on 
the date .of .. applicatioa. . 
Clause 10.- This clause deals with the ~rocedure in accordanr'e with 
which: .ap,pli,catipns fqr. adoption orders shall be heard and determined by 
the 'district courts. '!'he clause also makes pro~qn fo~, tile .. ~PPQjnt-. ,. 
ment, if necessary, of a guardian ad litem of the~c1iild 'to"'be adopted 
for safeguarding the interests of the child before the court. 
'. 

" 
15 • 
. \ 'Cl.a~e ~1.-This clause empowers the district court to postpone the 
determmatlOn of an application for an adoption order in respect of a 
child and make, if the court considers> just and convenient !o to do, an 
iDterim order giving the cate and custody of-the child to the appUcant 
by way-o'f probation. This devicE" will enable the court to satisfy itaelf 
better on the question whether the ad~tion' order, if made, will be in 
the best interests of the chUd. , 
Clause 12.-This clause specifies: the matters which the district court 
has to take into account before making an adoption order in respect of a 
chUd. Among other things, the court will have to give due consideration 
to the wishes of the child to be adopted having regard to his or her age 
and understanding and will have to 'Satisfy itself that the order, if made, 
will be for the welfare of the child 
Sub-clause (3) of the clause empowers the district court to impose 
such terms and conditions as it may think fit in making an adoption order 
and to require the adOl;>ter by bond or otherwise to make for the child 
such provision, if any, as in the opinion of the court is just and proper. 
Clause l3.-This clause provides for appeal to the High Court against 
an order of a district court allowing or dismissing an application for an. 
adoption order. 
Clause 14.-This clause lays dow!) the effects of an adoption order. 
The claUse seeks to assimilate the position of an adopted c¥ld with that 
of a natural born legitimate child to .the maximum extent possible. The 
clause provides that an adopted child shall ,be deemed to be the child 
of his or her ·adoptive parent and the adoptive parent shall be deemed 
to be the parent of the child as if the child had been born to the parent 
in lawful wedlock for all purpose£ with effect from the date on which 
the adoption order takes effect. Provision is also made for the severance 
of the ties of the child in the family of his or her birth, except for the 
purpose of prohibition relating to marriage. Exceptions are provided 
to ensure that as a result of the adoption vested rights of any person 
are not affected vide clause 14(2) proviso. Sub-clause (3) provides for 
issuing of certificate setting out the particulars such as the names of 
the adoptive parents in place of the names of the natural parents of 
the adoptive child for the purpose of changing the entries in the Register 
of Births maintained under the relevant Act. 
Clause I5.-This clause makes ~pecial provision for protecfion of 
children adopted under the provisinns of the Bill. Under the clause the 
district court may require the parent or guardian of an adopted child 
to produce such child before the court if the court has reason to believe 
that the chiId-
(i) ios habitually neglected or cruely ill-treated, or 
(ii) lives or is made to live by begging, or 
(ffi) lives or is made to live in circumstances calculated to cause, 
encourage or favour the seduction or prostitution of the child, or 
(iv) frequents or 16 allowed to frequent the company of any 
prostitute, smuggler, thief or other criminal, or 

1. 
(v) has been or is belng or is likely to be taken ~ut of India f. 
any immoral purpose or for any purpoile detrimental to hilwe1f~ 
and interests. ' , ' 
~ ~ourt &ner hear~g aQ.cJ recording all evid_ .. , wJUcJl IQY ... 
aq.duced, may pass ~u$ order aos in its optJUonis jUit Qd ~r fef 
ensurjng th~ welfare of the chlld. ' 
CkJuses 16 to 20.-Tbese clauses make provisions as to licensing aaei 
supervi03ion of institutions desiring to make arrangements for adopti~ of 
children. .' . 
Clauses 21 and 22.-These are self-explanatory. 
Clause 23.-Tbis clause makes the taking or sending of an Indian chilcl 
outside India for purposes of adoption, ~unishable except where the child 
b so sent or taken out under the authority of a provisional adoption order 
~vide clause 24) made by a distr~ct court. 
Clause 24.-This clause empowers the district court to make a provi-
sional adoption order permitting a person who is not domielled in India 
and who wants to adopt under the l:aw of the country of his domicile a 
child residing in India, to take the child out of India for the purpose. The 
·~ame procedure and the same considerations which apply to tbe muiag 
of an adoption order, apply to the making of a provisional OI'der. JI\u"tber. 
'an application for a provisional adoption order in respect Of a child has 
to- t?e' accompanied by a certificate issued by the Central Government to 
the effect that the applicant is in its opinion' a fit person to adapt lie 
child and that the welfare and interests of the ehild allaU be ..teguarded 
un:der the laWIS of the country of the dom1c!de Of the applicant aad tMt 
the applicant has made P,'Operpro'V'ision to enable the ebtldto be repi. 
trlated. to tndia, if' neeessat'y. "-, 

FI~ANCIAL lI4EM0RJ.\NDUM 
, ' 
Clause 15 of the Bill makes a special provision for Ute pro~o~ of aa 
adopted child. Sub-clause (1) (ii) of that clause enables the $ate Gov-
~~.' ent to aUthoris.e an officer to re.port to th. e dlstq.ct court m~. .tt 
o~ ~ adol?~ed c:hild who needs special protection. As exis~. o~ 
will be authorised this is not likely to involve any' expenditure. ' 
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 16 of the Bill, inter aLia, relates to the 
appointment of a Licensing AuthOrity consisting df a Chainnan aDd 
six members by the State Government. The State Government m 
respect of a Union territory is the Central Government. Some recurring 
e..<penditure will be involved in regard to the payment of allowanceS 
to the Chairman and the memberc; of the Licensing AuthOrity. Some 
recurring office expenditure of a negligible nature may also' be' involved. 
The exact amount of such expenditure would depend upon theD'Umbdr 
of applications for licences, the number of Licenc~ granted and the 
action' to be taken in relation thereto. The estimated expetidfture Oil 
~his and on allowances of the Chllirman and the members' qf tlJie 
Licensing AuthOrity is not likely to exceed Rs. 10;000' per 8Jmum ~ 
~c'h Union temtory. ' 
3. The Bill does not involve any expenditure of a non-recurriAI 
l},tlP'e. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause' 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, 
after consultation with the Supreme Court, rules for carrying out th~ 
purposes of the Act. The matters in respect of which rules may be made 
relate', in.ter alia, to the form and the manner in which applications may 
be made under the Act; the manner in which consent may be given to 
the adoption of a child; the pro.:::edure to be followed on hearing appli-
cations for adoptions including the circumstances in which and the ex-
tent to which such applications may be heard and determined other-
wise than in open court; the care and custody of children awaiting 
adoption; the form and the particulars of an application for a licence 
in respect of an institution; the form of and authorities to whom an 
application for certificate, required to be filed with an application for 
provisional adoption order, shO'Uld be made; the provision which an 
applicant for such certificate shnuld make for repatriation to India 
of the child to which the applicatiC'n relates and conditions which such 
an applicant has to comply with; the manner of communication of the 
grounds for refusal of licence in respect of an institution; the form of 
a licence in respect of an institution and the conditions thereof; the time 
within which appeal may be preferred against an order of refusal or 
revocation of a licence in respect of an institution, etc. 
2. As the various matters in respect of which rules may be made under 
the clause relate to matters of form, procedure or detail, the dele-
gation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
18 ... ' 

· . 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the adoption of children and matters connected there-
with. 
(Shri Shiv Shankar, MiniBter of Law, JUBltice lind Company Affairs.) 