THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the existing proviso, the following provisos shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that no male person or woman under the age of sixteen years
or  above the age of sixty-five years or a mentally or physically disabled person
shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such male
person or woman resides:
Bill No. 209 of 2018
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 160.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
Provided further that while recording the statement, a relative or a friend or
a social worker of the choice of the person whose statement is being recorded
shall be allowed to remain present.’’; and
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Where under this chapter, the statement of a female is to be recorded
either as first information of an offence or in the course of an investigation into
an offence and she is a person against whom an offence under sections 375, 376,
376A, 376B, 376C, 376D, 377 or 509 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 is alleged to
have been committed or attempted, the statement shall be recorded by a female
police officer and in case a female police officer is not available, by a female
Government servant available in the vicinity and in case a female Government
servant is also not available, by a female authorised by an organisation interested
in the welfare of women or children.
(4) Where, under sub-section ( 3), no female police officer or female
Government servant or a female authorised by an organisation interested in the
welfare of women and children is available, the officer in charge of the police
station shall, after recording the reasons in writing, proceed with the recording
of the statement of such female victim in the presence of a relative of such
victim.’’.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Supreme Court in Sakshi vs. Union of India had recognized the inadequacies in
the law relating to rape and had suggested that the legislature should bring about the
required changes. The cases of sexual assault on a woman or a man are heinous crimes which
require a lot of courage on the part of the victim to recite the incident and provide proper
sequence of events. There have been many cases where recording of statements have been
malicious and the victims have had to face the wrath of insensitive and improper questioning.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
in order to provide for provisions which make it mandatory for some relative to accompany
the person whose statement is being recorded and to ensure that there is a presence of a
woman while the statement is being recorded. Such steps will ensure that the victim does not
have to face undue pressure and feels comfortable in providing the evidence.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
November 28, 2018.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PRODCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
* * * * * *
160. (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order in
writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits of his
own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be
acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so
required:
Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or above the age of
sixty-five years or a woman or a mentally or physically disabled person shall be required to
attend at any place other than the place in which such male person or woman resides.
(2) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, provide for the payment
by the police officer of the reasonable expenses of every person, attending under
sub-section (1) at any place other than his residence.
* * * * * *
Police
officer’s
power to
require
attendance of
witnesses.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2266LS(S-3)—17-12-2018.