As.

Fo-e INTRODUCED iN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 209 of 1991

THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India,

‘Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as fellows:— 4 4

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amend-
ment) Act, 1991.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. (1) In article 332 of the Constitution, after clause (3A), the follow.
ing clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until
10 the re-adjustment, under article 170, takes effect on the basis of the
first census after the year 2000, of the number of seats in the Legis-
lative Assembly of the State of Tripura, the seats which shall be
reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly shall
be, such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a
15 proportion not less than the number, as on the date of coming into
force of the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1991, of
members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative
Assembly in existence on the said date bears to the total number

of seats in that Assembly.”.

20 (2) The amendment made to article 332 of the Constitution by sub-
section (1) shall not affect any representation in the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Tripura until the dissolution of the Legislative
Assembly existing at the commencement of this Act.

Short
title

and com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
article
332.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For restoring peace and harmony in the areas of the State of
Tripura where disturbed conditions prevailed, a Memorandum of Settle-
ment was signed by the Government of India with Tripura National
Volunteers on 12-8-1988. The said Memorandum provides for a greater
share of tribals in the governance of the State. The said Memorandum
envisages amendment of the Constitution to provide that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Constitution, the number of seats in the Legis-
lative Assembly of the State of Tripura reserved for Scheduled Tribes
shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a
proportion not less than the number, as on the date of coming into force
of the Constitutional amendment, of members belonging to the Scheduled
Tribes in the existing Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the
existing Assembly. Tt also provides that the amendments shall not
affect, any representation in the existing Assembly of the State of Tripura
until its dissolution,

2. in order to implement the said Memorandum, action is to be
taken te determine the seats which are to be reserved for Scheduled
Tribes in the State of Tripura. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State is govern-
ed by the provisions of article 332 of the Constitution. Having regard
to the special circumstances obtaining in the State of Tripura, it is pro-
posed to further amend article 332 of the Constitution for making a
temporary provision for the determination of the number of seats
reserved for Scheduled Tribes until the re-adjustment of seats on the
basis of the first census after the year 2000 under article 170 of the
Constitution for the State of Tripura.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects,

New Deum; 8. 8. CHAVAN.
The 1th December, 1991.