 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No.  209 of 2024 
THE CULTURAL MAPPING BILL, 2024 
By 
SHRI MANOJ TIWARI, M.P. 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the mapping  of cultural 
heritage of the country including protection of endangered art, traditions 
and crafts and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cultural Mapping Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title, extent 
and 
commencement. 

-2- 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) ‘Board’ means the Cultural Mapping Board constituted under 
section 3; 
(b) `cultural heritage’ includes traditional arts, folk arts, folk 
music, folk festivals, crafts and such other traditional heritage of the 
country which are endangered; 
(c) “folk artist” means any person who earns his livelihood by 
performing arts including music, dance, drama, play, singing to 
entertain public or displaying of his paintings or artistic skills to 
public; 
(d) `mapping’  means the system of digital mapping of cultural 
heritage with the use of Geographic Information System (GIS)  
technology; and  
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
 
 
Definitions. 
3. (1) The Central Government, shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be known as the Cultural 
Mapping Board 
(2)  The Board shall consist of,- 
(a) Union Minister of Culture, ex-officio Chairperson; 
(b) Secretary, Union Minister of Culture, Member- Secretary; 
(c) ten members to be appointed by the Central Government 
from amongst the persons who have knowledge and experience in 
the field of archaeology, history, architecture, conservation, 
science and technology, environment science, town and country 
planning or public administration. 
(3) Every member of the Board shall hold office for a period of 
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. 
(4) The terms and conditions of the office of, including the 
method of filling casual vacancies in the Board and the procedure for 
removal or disqualification of a member of the Board, shall be, such 
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify. 
(5) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, 
make regulations for regulating its own procdure. 
(6) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of such 
number of officers and employees as may be prescribed. 
 
 
Constitution of the 
Cultural Mapping 
Board. 

-3- 
 
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other 
terms and conditions of service of, members, officers and 
employees shall b such as may be determined by the Board in 
consultation with the Central Government.  
 
4. The Board shall:- 
(i) undertake identification and mapping of cultural heritage of the 
country and issue such directions as it may consider necessary and 
expedient for he effective protection and preservation of the cultural 
heritage in this behalf; 
(ii) advise the Central Government for inclusion of the subject of 
cultural heritage and diversity in the academic curriculum; 
(iii) frame schemes for providing financial assistance to the 
traditional folk artists and craftsmen. 
(iv) cause or undertake an inquiry and initiate legal action in 
consultation with Central Government, in case of offences relating to 
mapping of cultural heritage; and 
(v) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the 
Central Government for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 
 
Functions of the 
Board. 
5. Whoever- 
(i) damages or causes any damage to cultural heritage; 
(ii) indulges in any propaganda with the intention of causing any 
hindrance in mapping of cultural heritage; 
(iii) commits or omits to commit any act in relation to cultural 
heritage, which is an offence under any other law for the time being 
in force. 
     shall be guilty of committing an offence under this Act. 
 
Offences. 
6.(1) Any person who commits any offence under section 5 shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, 
or with fine, which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
(2) A penalty awarded upon conviction for an offence under this 
section shall be in addition to any penalty, which upon conviction is 
provided for such offence under any law for the time being in force. 
 
 
Punishment. 

-4- 
 
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Board for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 
 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
8.(1) The Board shall prepare an annual report, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Central 
Government.  
(3) The annual report shall be laid by the Central Government, as 
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 
Provided that the Board may also submit interim report or reports to 
the Central Government, which shall cause the report to be laid, as soon 
as, may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
Annual report. 
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 
 
Act to have 
overriding effect. 
 
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, any other law for the time being in force. 
Provisions of the 
Act to be in 
addition to other 
laws. 
11. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the State 
Governments, may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 
Power to make 
rules. 
  

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
Culture plays an important role in the development of any nation. It represents a set of 
shared attitudes, values, goals and practices. Culture manifest themselves in almost all economic, 
social and other activities. A country as diverse as India is symbolized by the plurality of its 
culture. 
India has one of the world’s largest collections of songs, music, dance, theatre, folk traditions, 
performing arts, rites and rituals, paintings and writings.  
There are lakhs of traditional folk artists and craftsmen across the country who are 
managing to survive on the basis of their creativity and production. However, the need is to 
protect such cultural heritage. The best way to do the same is by way of mapping of cultural 
heritage of the country with the use of Geographic Information System (GIS) and other 
appropriate technology.  
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for the constitution of a Board for the mapping of 
cultural heritage of the country including protection of endangered art, traditions and crafts. 
 
Hence this Bill. 
 
      NEW DELHI;                           MANOJ TIWARI 
November 13,  2024. 
  

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
        Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Cultural Mapping Board for the 
conservation of the cultural heritage in the country. It also provides for  a secretariat for 
the purpose of assisting the Board. Clause 8 provides for the Central Government to 
provide adequate fund to the Board. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring 
expenditure of rupees one hundred crores per annum.  
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred and fifty crores is also likely to be 
involved.  
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
     MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 Clause 11 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
--------- 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the mapping  of cultural heritage of the country 
including protection of endangered art, traditions and crafts and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
----------  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Manoj Tiwari, M.P.) 
 