1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI DAYAKAR PASUNOORI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 341 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following clauses shall be
added, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 209 of  2016
Amendment of
article 341.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
“(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law provide
for sub-categorization or de-sub-categorization of the castes, races or tribes or part of or
group within any castes, races or tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1)
or by law made by Parliament under clause (2), in respect of a State or Union territory,
upon receiving a resolution recommending such sub-categorization or, as the case may
be, de-sub-categorization passed by the legislature of that State or, as the case may be,
Union territory.
(4) Where the Scheduled Castes of a State or Union Territory are sub-categorized by
Parliament by law under clause (3), it shall be lawful to treat such sub-categories as
distinct identities for the purposes of reservation in services in connection with the affairs
of that State or, as the case may be, Union territory, under clause (4) of article 16, and in
admission to educational institutions run or substantially aided by the Government of that
State or, as the case may be, Union territory, under clause (5) of article 15.”.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 341 of the Constitution empowers the President to add or remove castes from
the lists of Scheduled Castes. However, it is well acknowledged that the Scheduled Castes
are not a homogeneous group. Some castes are more backward than others. This leads to
disproportionate accruing of benefits of reservations to some communities.
Undivided State of Andhra Pradesh acutely faced this problem in 1996 and it was
brought to the notice of the then Government of Andhra Pradesh. The persons belonging
to certain Scheduled Castes such as the ‘Maadigas’ and ‘Rellis’ complained that they were
unable to compete with the persons belonging to certain other Scheduled Castes that were
comparatively better off. This led ‘Maadigas’ and ‘Rellis’ losing out on the benefits of
reservations. They demanded that the Scheduled Castes be categorized into four groups so
that the benefits would be distributed evenly across all castes.
The Government of undivided State of Andhra Pradesh responded favourably with a
Government Order in 1996 which was struck down by the Andhra Pradesh High Court.
Therefore, the legislature of the then State of Andhra Pradesh enacted a law in year 2000
known as the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes (Rationalisation of Reservation), Act,
2000, which was again struck down by the Supreme Court in the year 2004. The Court's
judgment was that the State Government did not have the competence to legislate on this
matter. The Andhra Pradesh Assembly then passed a resolution urging the Union
Government to subcategorize the Scheduled Castes of the State. The Central Government
responded by setting up of the Justice Usha Mehra Commission in 2007 to examine the
matter.
The Commission spent an year extensively travelling across Andhra Pradesh and
studying the issue. It concluded that the grievance of the ‘Maadigas’ and ‘Rellis’ was true
and that benefits were indeed unfairly distributed. The Commission, in its report submitted
on 1 May, 2008, had recommended subcategorization of the Scheduled Castes. It clarified
that this would not be a national level subcategorization and that as per the Constitution,
State could request for State-level subcategorization that pertained only to service and
educational institutions in the respective State. Thus, this demand should be seen on a
case to case basis in each State.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide that the
Parliament may by law provide for subcategorization or de-categorization of any Caste, race
or tribe or part of group within any caste, race or tribe upon receipt of a resolution from
legislature of a State or Union Territory, as the case may be.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DAYAKAR PASUNOORI
May 5, 2016

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Parliament to subcategorize or de-subcategorize the
existing castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes as the
Scheduled Castes for the purpose of State of Andhra Pradesh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India on account of benefits to
be provided to the persons belonging to subcategorized castes, races or tribes under the
ongoing Central Schemes meant for development of the Scheduled Castes.
At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be incurred on this
account. However, it is expected that a recurring expenditure of about five hundred crore
will be involved annually.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
341. (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it
is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or
Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes
specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of or group
within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said
clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.
* * * *
Scheduled
Castes.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Dayakar Pasunoori, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1045LS(S3)—28-07-2016.