1
THE  UNWED TRIBAL WOMEN (PROTECTION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection from sexual exploitation and welfare of unwed tribal women.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unwed T ribal Women (Protection and Welfare)
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 209 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "sexual relationship" includes sexual intimacy and sexual intercourse; and
(ii) "tribal" means a Scheduled Tribes as defined under clause (25) of the
article 366 of the Constitution of India.
3. No person shall enter into a sexual relationship whether consensual or otherwise,
with a tribal woman without lawfully marrying that woman.
4. Any person who violates the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three  years and shall also be liable to
pay to the tribal woman and child, if any, born out of such sexual relationship, a subsistence
allowance at such rate, as may be determined by a Court of Law of appropriate jurisdiction:
Provided that where more than one person enter into sexual relationship with a same
tribal woman in contravention of the provisions of section 3, each such person shall be
subject to punishment and payment of subsistence allowance as aforesaid.
5. It shall be the responsibility of the officer-in-charge of a police station, where an
offence under section 3 takes place, to ensure the recording of the complaint of the tribal
woman.
6. Where the officer-in-charge of a police station does not register the complaint of a
tribal woman, he shall be held guilty of an offence of criminal negligence and shall also be
subject to such departmental action, as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Prohibition
on sexual
relationship
with a tribal
woman
without
marriage.
Punishment.
Responsibility
of the
officer-in-
charge of the
police station
to register a
complaint.
Penalty for
not
registering a
complaint.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Orders list the names of certain tribes as Scheduled
Tribes. The Constitution of India also makes special provisions in favour of persons belonging
to these tribes to ensure their political representation in the legislative bodies and social and
economic welfare. However, the women folk of these tribes, particularly tribal unwed mother's
need special protection.
The scheduled tribes population is approximately 84.3 million, constituting
8.3 per cent. of the total population of the country. Out of this, males are 42.6 million and
females are 41.7 million, accounting for 8.01 per cent. and 8.40 per cent., respectively, of the
total population as per 2001 year Census. The disturbing de-tribalisation trends in tribal
societies such as gender equality, lower fertility and mortality patterns seem to be gradually
eroding, as they get more integrated into non-tribal society and their traditionally sustainable
livelihoods are being encroached upon. The persent socio-economic trends expose tribal
women and girls to high risk of sexual exploitation by non-tribal persons. Social interaction
and exchange controlled by dominant non-tribal social groups at workplace, residence and
schools make tribal girls and women the most vulnerable object of undue sexual advancement
and exploitation.
There are thousands of unwed mothers among the tribes in India. It is evident that
attaining unwed motherhood as an identity dehumanizes and discredits individual victims.
Thus, it is critical to examine the life of tribal unwed mothers from an increasingly detribalising
structural context that imposes a wide range of structural disabilities upon the victims. It is
thus essential to make a law for the protection and empowerment of tribal women in general
and tribal unwed mothers in particulars.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY  RAMACHANDRAN
July 1, 2015.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection from sexual exploitation and welfare of unwed tribal women.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1431LS(S3)—23.07.2015.