                                                            Bill No. 209 of 2022
THE PREVENTION OF MOB L YNCHING
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent mob lynching and provide adequate punishment for persons committing
mob lynching with a view to instill a sense of fear among the persons who
involve themselves in such a kind of actions and for rehabilitation of
victims of lynching and their families and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Constitution of India guarantees to all persons the right to
life and personal liberty and the equal protection of law;
AND WHEREAS in recent times, there have been a spate of incidents
resulting in loss of livelihood, injuries and death of persons at the hands of
lynch mobs;5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS it is deemed necessary and expedient to enact a legislation
for the protection of these rights guaranteed by the Constitution in the light
of Supreme Court direction dated 17-07-2018 in W.P.(C) No. of 754 of 2016
(Tahseen S. Poonawalia Vs. Union of India and Others).
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Mob Lynching Act,
2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:–
(a) “appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(b) “lynching” means any act or series of acts of violence or aiding,
abetting or attempting an act of violence, whether spontaneous or planned,
by a mob on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth,
language, dietary practices, sexual orientation, political affiliation,
ethnicity or any other related grounds;
(c) “mob” means a group of two or more individuals, assembled with
an intention of causing violence or lynching;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “victim” means any person, who has suffered physical, mental,
psychological or monetary harm as a result of any offence committed
under this Act, and includes his or her relatives, legal guardian and legal
heirs of a deceased victim; and
(f) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or the Indian Penal Code shall
have the meanings assigned to them respectively in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or as the case may be, in the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
CHAPTER II
DUTIES OF NODAL OFFICERS AND POLICE OFFICERS
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate, a senior police
officer, not below the rank of Superintendent of Police, as nodal officer in
each district to prevent lynching in such district.
(2) The nodal officer shall be assisted by one of the Deputy
Superintendent of Police in the district for taking measures to prevent incidents
of mob violence and lynching.
(3) The nodal officer shall constitute a special task force so as to
procure intelligence reports about the persons who are likely to commit such
crimes or who are involved in spreading hate speeches, provocative statements
and fake news.
5
10
15
Nodal Officer.
20
25
30
35
40
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

3
4. The nodal officer designated under sub-section (1) shall,–
(a) hold regular meetings (at least once in a month) with the local
intelligence units in the district along with all Officers in-charge of Police
Station of the district to identify the existence of the tendencies of
vigilantism or mob lynching in the district;
(b) take such steps to prohibit instances of dissemination of offensive
material through different social media platforms or any other means for
inciting lynching; and
(c) monitor the investigation of offences of mob lynching personally
and ensure that the investigation is carried out effectively and the charge-
sheet in such cases is filed within the statutory period from the date of
registration of the First Information Report or arrest of the accused, as
the case may be.
CHAPTER III
PREVENTION OF ACTS LEADING TO LYNCHING
5. (1) It shall be duty of every police officer, in-charge of a police station
to take all reasonable steps to prevent any incident of lynching, including its
incitement, commission and possible spread in the area under his jurisdiction
and to that end–
(i) make all possible efforts to identify patterns of violence in the
area under their jurisdiction, that has led to occurrence of targeted violence;
(ii) obtain information regarding the likelihood of an act of lynching;
and
(iii) act in furtherance of the duty to prevent any act of lynching in
accordance with the powers vested in them.
(2) Every police officer exercising powers under this Act in discharge
of their duties shall act without any delay in a fair manner.
CHAPTER IV
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT FOR LYNCHING
6. Whoever commits an act of lynching–
(i) where the act leads to the victim suffering hurt, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend up
to seven years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;
(ii) where the act leads to the victim suffering grievous hurt, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend up to ten years, and with fine which may extend to three lakh
rupees;
(iii) where the act leads to the death of the victim, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for life and with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees.
7. Whoever takes part in a conspiracy or conspires to lynch another person,
or abets or aides or attempts an act of lynching shall be punished in the same
manner as if they had taken part in the actual incident of lynching.
8. Any person who,–
(a) knows or have reasonable cause to believe that any other person
is guilty of an offence under this act, gives that other person any assistance
Duty to prevent
lynching.
Punishment for
offence of
lynching.
Punishment for
conspiracy or
abetment or
aides or attempt
to lynch.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Duties of the
Nodal Officer.
Punishment for
obstructing
legal process.

4
Punishment
for
dissemination
of offensive
material.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
with intent thereby to prevent, hinder or otherwise interfere with his arrest
or administration of Justice for the said offence, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be
liable to such fine as may be prescribed; and
(b) threatens a witness with any injury to his person or property or to
the person or property of any one in whom the witness is interested, with
intent to cause harm to that person, or to compel that person to refrain or
withdraw from being a witness in any investigation or trial under this act
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years and shall also be liable to such fine as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
OTHER OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, whoever publishes, communicates or disseminates by any method,
print or electronic, any offensive material, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term of not less than one year which may extend
upto three years, and with fine which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, whoever causes damage to any property movable or immovable
in the act of lynching, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term of not less than one year which may extend upto three
years, and with fine which may extend to twice the amount of damage or loss
caused to the property, as may be determined by the Court.
11. Any person willfully and maliciously giving false information and so
causing an arrest or a search to be made under this Act shall on conviction be
liable for imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with
fine which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees or both.
12. When any police officer, directly incharge of maintaining law and
order in an area, omits to exercise lawful authority vested in him under law,
without reasonable cause, and thereby fails to prevent lynching, shall be guilty
of dereliction of duty.
Explanation— For the purposes of this section, dereliction of duty by a
police officer shall also include the following:
(i) failure to provide protection to a victim of lynching;
(ii) failure to act upon apprehended lynching;
(iii) refusing to record any information under sub-section (1) of section
154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating to the Commission
of an offence under this Act.
CHAPTER VI
INVESTIGA TION, PROSECUTION AND TRIAL
13. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply
to this Act, save and except as amended or supplemented to the extent provided
under this Chapter.
14. Unless otherwise specified, all offences specified under this Act, shall
be cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.
Punishment
for causing
damage to any
property
movable and
immovable.
Punishment
for false
information or
failure to give
information.
Dereliction of
duty by Police
Officer.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.Application of
Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973.
Offences to be
cognizable,
non-bailable
and non-
compoundable.
40
45

5
15. No police officer below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police shall
investigate any offence committed under this Act.
16. The provisions of sections 196 and 197 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure,1973 shall not apply to offences committed under this Act and the
Court may take cognizance of such offence when satisfied that the said offence
has been committed.
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure
1973, or in any other law for the time being in force, the offences specified
under this Act shall be tried by Designated Judges appointed under this Act.
18.(1) The Appropriate Government by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint as many Designated Judges in consultation with the Chief
Justice of the High Court of the State as it may be necessary to try offences
punishable under this Act.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Designated
Judge under this Act unless he or she is or has been a Sessions Judge under
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
19.(1) The victim shall have the right to receive a copy of any statement
of the witness recorded during investigation or inquiry, and a copy of all
statements and documents filed under section 173 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 including the charge-sheet or closure report submitted by
police.
(2) A victim shall be entitled to receive free legal aid if he or she so
chooses and to engage any advocate who he or she chooses from among
those enrolled in the legal aid panel under the Legal Services Authorities Act,
1987 and the State Legal Aid Services Authority shall pay all costs, expenses
and fees of the advocate appointed by the victim or informant in accordance
with relevant rules.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law being in
force, the Designated Judge trying a case may permit the prosecution to be
conducted by any advocate recommended by the victim:
Provided that no person, other than the Advocate-General or
Government Advocate or a Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor,
shall be entitled to conduct the prosecution without the prior approval of the
Designated Judge.
(4) Where the prosecution is conducted by an advocate recommended
by the victim, the expenses arising out of such service, shall be borne by the
State Government.
(5) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the State Government for
making arrangements for the protection of victims and witnesses against any
kind of intimidation, coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence.
(6) The State Government shall inform the concerned Designated
Judge about the protection provided to any victim, informant or witness and
the Designated Judge shall periodically review the protection being offered
under this section and pass appropriate orders.
(7) It shall be the duty of the Investigating Officer to record the
complaint of victim, informant or witnesses against any kind of intimidation
coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence, whether given
Investigation
by Senior
Police
Officers.
Sanction not
required for
offences under
the Act.
Case triable
by Designated
Judges.
Power to
appoint
Designated
Judges.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
39 of 1987.
Rights of
victim.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
orally or in writing and copy of the same shall be sent to the Designated
Judge within twenty-four hours of recording it.
20.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act, 1973, every case, registered in connection with an offence
under this Act and where the Investigating Officer does not file a charge-
sheet within a period of three months from the date of registration of the First
Information Report, shall be reviewed by a committee headed by an officer
of the level of an Inspector-General of Police to be constituted by the State
Government and such committee may pass orders for a further investigation
by another officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police
wherever it comes to the conclusion that, having regard to the nature of
investigation already carried out, such investigation would be necessary.
(2) The Committee constituted under sub-section (1) may also review
cases of such offences where the trial ends in quittal and issue orders for
filing appeal, wherever required.
(3) The Committee shall submit a report of its findings and action
taken in each case or cases to the Director General of Police.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
21. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government, may by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of the period of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
22. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation
of, any other law for the time being in force except to the extent the provisions
of other laws are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
23.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be
after it is made before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
2 of 1974.
Constitution
of Review
Committee.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to be in
addition to
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been an increase in the number of cases related to mob
lynching in India. This act of people taking the law into their hands
because of the shallow knowledge of the Justice system poses a serious
threat to the rule of law and principle of natural justice. Such acts have also
posed serious threats to minority groups in the country and appropriate
steps must be taken in order to check deter such crimes.
In a country like India, a person taking law into their own hands is
unacceptable. Citizens of the country have been granted fundamental rights
and such lynching cases are abusing right to life, right to a fair trial, etc. India
is a secular state and it is important to ensure that interest of the minorities
are being protected and they are not suppressed by the majority.
In Tehsen S. Poonawalla Vs. Union of India and others, the then Hon’ble
Chief Justice of India along with three Judge bench had condemned the recent
incidents of mob lynching and mob attack taking place in different parts of
Country.
Mob lynching and mob vigilantism must be prevented by the government
by taking strict action and people ought to report such incidents.
Months have been passed since the Supreme Court expressed anguish by
what it described as ‘horrific acts of mobocracy’ and  issued a slew of direction
to the Union and State Government to protect India’s ‘pluralist social fabric’
from mob violence.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                              E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER
10 August, 2022.
7

8
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to prevent mob lynching and provide adequate punishment for persons committing
mob lynching with a view to instill a sense of fear among the persons who
involve themselves in such a kind of actions and for rehabilitation of
victims of lynching and their families and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, M.P .)