BUI No. zoe of 1985 
THE llNDUSTRlAL DEVELOPMENT BANK OF IJNDIA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1985 
A 
BlLL 
further to amend the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty ... ixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Industrial Development Bank of India Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1985. title. 
l~ ot 1964. 5 2. In section 2 of the Industrial Development Bank ot India Act, 1964 Amend-
IU 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,- ment of 
(a) in clause (c) ,-
(i) for sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall be 
s'lbstituted. namely:-
"(iii) mining including development of mines;"; 
(ii) in sub-clause (v), for the words "by air", the words "by 
nir or by ropeway or by lift" shall be substituted; 
(iii) for sub-clause (vi), the following sub-clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
" (1,i.) the generation, storage or distribution of electri-
city or any other form of energy;"; 
(it) in sub-clause (vij.tj.). for the word "machinery", the 
words "machinery or equipment" shall be substituted; 
section 
2. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 3. 
Amend-
mentof 
sec-
tion4. 
2 
(v) .foI: sub-clau.se (i;r), the following sub-clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(i.;r) the setting up of, or development of, an industrial 
area or an industrial estate;"; 
(vi) for sub-clause (xii) and the Exp1ana~ below that 5 
sub-clause, the following sub-clauses and Erplanation shall be 
substituted, namely:-
'(xii) providing engineering, technical, financial, man-
agement, marketing or other services or facilities for indus-
try: 10 
(xiii) service industry such as altering, ornamenting, po-
lishing. finishing, oiling, washing, cleaning or otherwise 
treating or adapting any article or substance with it view to 
its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal; 
(xiv) providing medical, health or other allied services; 15 
(xv) providing services relating to information techno-
logy. telecommunication or electronics; 
(rvr..) leasing, sub-leasing or giving on hire or hire-pur-
chase of industrial plants, equipments, machinery or other 
assets including vehicles, ships and aircraft; :zo 
(xvii) such other activity as the Central Government 
may. having regard to the objects of this Act, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; or 
(xviii) the research and development of any concept, 
technology. design, process or product whether in relation 25 
to any of the matters aforesaid, including any activities 
specified under sub-clause (xvii), Or any other matter. 
Ezpla1l4tion.-The expression "processing of goods" includes 
any art or process for producing, preparing or making an article 
by subjecting any material to a manual, mechanical, chemical. 30 
electrical' or any . other like operation.'; 
(b) for clause (da). the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:;;.... . , 
'(cia) "nationalised bank" means a corresponding new bank 
specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Ac- 35 
quisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 or a corres- 5 of 197Ci. 
pondin~ new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980;'. 40 at 1980. 
3 .. In section 3. of the principal Act. in sub.section (4), the word 
"other" shall be omitted. 40 
4 •. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "ODe hundred crores of rupees". the words 
"one thousand crort's of mpees" shalt be substituted; 
(b) In the proviso, for the words "ftve hundred crores of rupees", 
the wents "two thousand erores of rupees" shall be substituted. 4~ 

62 of 1984. 
5 
10 
3 
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following Amend-
sub-sp.ction shall be inserted, namely: - ~t of. 
II (4A) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), every direc-
tor nominated under sub-clause (iii) or sub-clause (v) of clause (e) 
of sub-section (1) shall hold office for such term not exceeding three 
years, as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.". 
6. In section 6A of the principal Act, for clause (iii), the followin~ 
clause shall be substituted, namely:-
sec-
tion6. 
Amend-
ment of 
sec-
"(iii) the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India, established lion 6A. 
under section 3 of the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India Act, 
1984;". 
7. In section fI of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)-
(a) after clause (c), the following clause 
namely:--
shall be inserted, 
Amend-
ment of 
sec-
tion 9. 
15 II (ea) granting lines of credit or loans and advances to the 
20 
35 
45 
Industrial Finallce Corporation. any State Financial Corpora-
tion or any other financial institution which may be notified by 
the Central Government in this behalf, for the purpose of any 
business of such Corporation or institution;"; 
(b) after clause (db), the following clause shall be 
namely:-
inserted. 
.. (de) granting loa~ and advances to. any person for pur-
poses of investment in any indw;trial concern;"; 
(e) after clause (g). the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
.. (ga) granting, opening, issuing, confirming or endorsing 
letters of credit and negotiating or collecting bills and other do· 
cuments drawn thereunder; 
(gb) providing consultancy and merchant banking service~ 
in or outside India; 
(ge) acting as the trustee for the holders of debentures or 
other securities; 
(gd) acquiring, with the approval of the Central Govern-
ment, the undertaking, including the bUSiness, assets and liabili-
ties of any institution the principal object of which is the promo-
tion or development of industry in India, or the grant of finan-
cial assistance for such promotion or development;"; 
(d) in clause (ii), after the word "technical" the words Ie, legal, 
marketiIU{" shall be inserted; 
(e) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-. 
"(k) promoting, forming or conducting or associating in the 
promotion, formation or conduct of companies. subsidiariflll. so-
cieties, trusts or such other associations of persons as it may 
deem At;". 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
11B. 
Power 
to ac-
quire 
rights. 
Amend· 
ment of 
BeC-
tion 18. 
A81ead-
mentof 
sec-
tion 21. 
Substi-
tution of 
sec-
tion 34. 
Act 10 of 
IIM9 
nottoap-
ply to 
ne"e-
lop-
ment 
Bank. 
4 
3. After section llA of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"UB. The Development Bank shall have the right to aCQuire, by 
trallSier or assienment, the rights and interests of any public finan-
cial institution as defined fn section 4A of the Companies Act, 1958 5 1 of 1858. 
(including, any other rights incidental thereto) in relation to any 
loan or advances aranted, or any amount recoverable by such insti-
tution, either in whole or in part, by the execution or issue of any 
ipstrument or by the transfer of any instrument or in any other 
manner.". 
t. In section Ie of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the words, 
figures and letters "the 30th day of June each year", the words "or such 
other date, as the Central Government may. by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint" shall be inserted. 
10 
tt. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-seetio. (2), after the 15 
wards, filUl," and letter "the 30th day of June each year", the words "or 
such other date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Of8cial Gazette, appoint" shall be inserted. 
11. For section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:- lOIO 
"34. Nothing contained. in the Banking Reaulatton Act, 1949 
eScept section 34;A. ad section 36A.D thereof, shall apply to the 
n..elopment Bank.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Industrial Development Bank of India (the Development Bank) 
established under the Industrial Development Ba.nk of India Act, 1964 
is the principal financial institution for providing credit and other faci-
lities for the development of industry, for coordinating the working of 
institutions engaged in financing, promoting or developing industries 
and for assisting the development of such institutions. The Development 
Bank has been providing direct financial assistance to large and medium 
large industrial concerns and also providing help to small and medium 
industrial concerns through banks and State-level financial institutions. 
In the light of experience gained over the years, it is felt necessary to 
make some new activities also eligible for financial assistance and to en-
Jarge the scope of business of the Development Bank to cover certain 
activities which the Development Bank could not take up in the absence 
of enabling provisions. It is also felt necessary to enlarge tho! capital 
base so as to enable the Development Bank to cater to the growing volume 
of business. It is also proposed to provide more operational ~exibility 
to the Development Bank to enable it to discharge more effectively its 
functions as the principal financial institution for the development of 
industries. 
2. The main proposals are as follows: 
(a) The present definition of 'industrial concern' as contained in 
the Act does not include many important activities. It is, therefore, 
proposed to widen the deftnition of 'industrial concern' sO as to enable 
the Development Bank to provide financial assUtanee to certain BeCton 
like storage of energy, development of mines, medical, health or 
allied services, leasing and sub-leasing activities, information .techno-
logy, telecommunications and electronics. It is also proposed to em-
power the Central Government to bring within the purview of the de-
finition 'industrial concern' engaged in activities which may be 
found to be supportworthy. 
(b) In view of the expanding volume of its business and. the 
expected growth in the Development Bank's activities, it is proposed. 
to raise the authorised capital of the Bank from Rs. 500 crores to Rs. 
1,000 crores which limit may bE increased by the Central Government 
up to Rs. 2,000 crores by notification in the Official Gazette. 
(c) It is proposed to enlarge the scope of business which the 
Development Bank can undertake by empowesing it to grant lines of 
credit or loans and advances, otherwise than by way of subscription 
to aharesldebentures, to Industrial Finance Corporation of India, State 
Financial Corporations or any other financial institutions notifted by 
the Central Government, to grant loana and advances to any person 
for purposes of investment in any industrial project to open and ad-
vise letters of credi~ and to negotiate or collect bills and other docu-
5 

6 
m.ents drawn thereunder, to provide consultancy and merchant bank· 
ing services ill or outside India, to act as trustee for the holders of 
debentures and other securities and to provide for acquisition of 
business and undertaking of any other financial institution. In view 
of these amendments. the D(!velopment Bank will be able to undertake 
these activities lind discharge its role as the principal financial insti-
tution. 
(d) It is proposed to amend the Act to enable the Development 
Bank to open offices even at the place where it has its head office. 
(e) A new provision is sought to be inserted to enable the Deve-
,LOpment Bank to purchase the participation certificates under the Par-
ticipation Certificate Scheme operated by !DBI, IFCI and ICIer pro-
viding for a single Window clearance of the proposals for setting up 
an industrial unit, and speedy availability of funds for the project. 
<f) Presently, the directors nominated by the Central Govern-
ment fr(\m amnngst the employees of the Development Bank and the 
financial institutions and persons having special skills and ex-
perience. hold office during the pleasure of the Central Govern-
ment. It is proposed to provide that such members shall hold office 
for such 'term not exceeding three years as the Central Government 
may specify. 
(g) The accounting year of the Development Bank at present 
is from 1st July to 30th June. It Is proposed to amend the Act to 
provide flexibility to the Development Bank to change the account-
ing year, 'If need be. 
3. It is also proposed to make certain other minor and consequential 
amendments in the Act. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
Nzw Da.m: VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
Dated the 13th December, 1985. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The authorised. and paid-up capital of IDBI is Rs. 500 crores and 
Rs. 445 crores respectively, at present. Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to 
increase the authdrised capital of the Industrial Development Bank of 
India (lOBI) from five hundred crores of rupees to one thousand crores 
of rupees, with an enabling provision to increase it to rupees two 
thousand crores. by notification. The proposed amendment would enable 
the Central Government to fix the authorised capital of the IDBI by noti-
fication from time to time taking into account the actual requirements, 
within the !?!'escribed limit or two thousand crores of ruJ>ees. The Cen-
tral Government alone is empowered to subscribe to the share capital 
of the lOBI as per the IDBI Act. The Central Government will, there-
fore, be required to subscribe to the share capital of the IDBI to the 
extent of the enhanced amount of paid-up capital as may be fixed from 
time to time. This would be a non-recurring expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The outgo of funds would be to some ex-
tent offset by the profit transferred annually by the IDBI to Govern-
ment of India. In 1984-85, the lOBI transferred an amount of rupees 
thirty-two crores to the Government of India. 
2. The Bill would not involve any other recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure. 
7 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FBOK THE lNDtJ'S'l'IUAL DIlVIlLOPMI:NT Bunt OF INDu 
N;T, 1964 
(18 OF 1964) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
* • • • '. 
(c) "industrial concern" means any concern engaged or to be 
engaged in,-
• • • • • 
(iii) mining; 
• • • • • 
(v) the transport of passengers or goods by road or by 
water or by air; 
(m) the generation or distribution of electricity or any form 
of power; 
(vii) the maintenance.. repair, testing or servJ.cmg of 
machinery of any description or vehicles or vessels or motor 
boats or trailers or tractors: 
• • • • • 
(ix) the development of any contiguous area of land as an 
industrial estate; 
• • • • • 
(xii) the research and development of any process or pro-
duct in relation to any of the matters aforesaid. 
Explanation.-The expression "processing of goods" includes any 
art or process for producing, preparing Or making an article by subject-
ing any material to a manual, mechanical, chemical, electrical or any 
other like operation. 
• • • • • 
(cia) "na~ionaliSed bank" means a corresponding new bank specified 
in the First Schedule to the .Banking Companies (Acquisition and Trans-
fer of Undertakings) Act, 1970; 
• • • • • 
8 
5 of 1970. 

10f 
1956. 
9 
3. (1) • • • .. • 
(4) The Development Bank may establish ofllces, branches or agencies 
at any o1her place in or outsiae India. 
4. The authorised capital of the Development Bank shall be one 
hundred crores of rupees: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Oftidal Gazette, increase the said capital up to five hundred crores of 
rupees. 
• • • • • 
6A. Each of the institutions specified in this section, and no other 
institution, shall be regarded, for the purposes of this Chapter, as a 
financial institution, namely:-
• • • • • 
(iii) the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited, 
formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956; 
• • • • • 
9. (1) The Development Bank shall function as the principal financial 
institution for co-ordinating the working of institutions engaged in 
financing, promoting or developing industry and for assisting the deve-
lopment of such institutions in such manner as it may deem appropriate 
and may carryon and trarisact any of the following kinds of business, 
namely:-
• • • • • 
• (i) providing technical and administrative assistance to any 
industrial concern or any person for promotion, management or ex-
pansion of any industry; 
• • • • • 
(k) forming or conducting of subsidiaries fOr carrying out its 
functions; 
• • • • • 
]8. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the fund to be 
closed an\"! balanced as on the 30th day of June each year. 
• • • • • 
Esta-· 
blish-
ment 
and in-
corpor-
ation of 
Indus-
trial 
Deve-
lop-
ment 
Bank 
otlndia. 
Autho-
rised :. 
capi-
tal. 
Finan-
eial 
Institu-
tion. 
Busi-
ness of 
Deve-
lop-
ment 
Bank. 
Accoun-
tsand 
audit 
of Dcvc-
lop-
ment 
Assis-
tance 
Fund. 

Prepa-
ration 
of ac-
counts 
and ba-
lance-
sheet. 
Act 10 
of 1949 
not to ap-
ply to 
Deve-
lop. 
ment 
Bank. 
10 
21. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Develop-
ment Bank to be closed and balanced as on the 30th day of June each 
rear. 
• • • • • 
34. Nothing contained in the Banking Companies Act, 1949, except 
section 34A thereof, shall apply to the Development Bank. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 
(Shri Vishwanath Pratap Srngh, 
Mi.nister of Finance.) 