1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighthYear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words "sixty-five years", the
words "seventy years" shall be substituted.
Short title.
Bill No.  209 of  2017
Amendment of
article 124.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Clause (2) of article 124 of the Constitution of India allows every Judge of the Supreme
Court to hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years. The age of retirement of
Supreme Court Judges, which was fixed at sixty-two years in the beginning, was enhanced to
sixty-five years by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Since then, no
revision has taken place in this regard.
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, in its 39th Report dated the 29th April, 2010, has recommended
to raise the retirement age of the Judges of the High Courts from sixty-two to sixty-five.
Hence, in view of this it is expedient and necessary to enhance the age of Supreme Court
Judges from sixty-five years to seventy years. Further, most of the reasons adduced by the
Fifth Central Pay Commission in support of its recommendation for increasing the age of
retirement of the Central Government employees, such as global practices, increase in life
expectancy, improved health standards, need for utilization of experience and wisdom of
senior employees, etc., would also apply to the Judges. Besides this, after their retirement the
Judges are being appointed by Government in various Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals, etc.
which is antithesis and not in consonance as well as sprit of preamble to Constitution of
India. The increase in age of retirement will altogether put a check on the re-employment of
the Judges of the Supreme Court after retirement.
Independence of judiciary is an essential attribute of rule of law, which is one of the
basic features of the Constitution. Judiciary must be free from all pressures including the
pressures from executive as well as psychological pressure on the Judges related to their
future after retirement. The Judges are required to ensure the independence and impartiality
of judiciary by keeping themselves free from any allurement of employment under the
Government after their retirement.
The Constitution specifically prohibits the Chairman of Union Public Service
Commission and its Members, the Chairman of State Public Service Commission and its
Members for further employment either under the Government of India or under the Govern-
ment of any State. The Constitution on the other hand nowhere restricts or prohibits retired
Chief Justice and Judges of the High Courts to hold further employment either under the
Government of India or under any of the State Governments.
Article 148 (4) provides that the Comptroller and Auditor General shall not be eligible
for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any State
after he has ceased to hold his office.
The Chief Justice and Judges of the various High Courts, the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, the Chairman of Union Public Service Commission, the Chairman of the
State Public Service Commission and the Members of these Commissions are constitutional
functionaries and they should be kept free from all kinds of allurement of employment under
the Government after cessation of their office. It is presumed that reappointment of Judges
would have effect of undermining the independence and fairness of judiciary.
The Constitution prohibits the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the Chairman,
Public Service Commission and its members from getting employment after cessation of their
office, however, no such bar is there with regard to the Chief Justice and the Judges of the
Supreme Court.
In view of the present state of vacancies of Judges in the Supreme Court, it is extremely
difficult to clear the heavy pendency of cases in the Supreme Court. Increasing the age of
retirement by five more years would restrict occurrence of new vacancies on account of
2

3
superannuation for the next five years during which time the existing backlog in vacancies
could be cleared. This would have a clear impact on reduction of pendency of cases in the
Supreme Court.
It is, therefore, proposed to increase the age of retirement of the Judges of Supreme
Court from sixty-five years to seventy years.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI LEKHI
November 23, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
124.  ( 1) * * * * *
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and
of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years:
* * * * *
Establishment
and
Constitution
of Supreme
Court.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4151LS(S3)—08.12.2017.