As IN'l'llODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
Bill No. 20 of 1_ 
THE INCOME-TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Income-tax (Amendment) Act, Short 
1989. title and 
com-
S (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day of mence-
January, 1989. ment. 
43 of 1961 2. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act. 1961 (hereinafter referred to Amend-
as the principal Act), after cla'Use (15), the following clause shall be ~~~~notl0. 
inserted, namely:-
10 '(l5A) any payment made, by an Indian company engaged in 
the business of operation of aircraft, to acquire an aircraft on lease 
from the government of a foreign State or a foreign enterprise under 
an agreement approved by the Central Government in this behalf. 
Explanation_For the purpose of this clause, "foreign enterprise" 
15 means a person who is a non-resident;'. 
3. In section 80G of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in clause (i), after the word, brackets, 
figures and letter "sub-clause (iiia)", the words, brackets, figures and 
letters "or in sub-clause (iiiaa)" shall be inserted; 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
BOG. 

Repeal 
aacI 
savings. 
2 
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), after sub-clause (iiia), the 
following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(iiiaa) the Prime Minister's Armenia Earthquake Relief 
Fund; or". 
4. (1) The Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1989 is hereby re- 5 Ord. 1 of 
pealed. 1989. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On 8th December, 1988, the Soviet Republic of Armenia was hit by a 
massive earthquake which killed 'more thin 50,000 people and caused 
large scale damage to properties. To augment. the resources for providing 
relief to the victuns of the earthquake, a Special Fund called "Prime 
Minister's Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund'" was opened to rQCeive contri-
butions in cash or by cheque from individuals and organisations. In order 
to encourage contributions to this Fund it was proposed to provide 100 per 
cent. dedUction from the total income in respect of contributions to this 
Fund by amending section 80G of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
2. Further, in order to facilitate the payment of lease rent, without 
deduction of tax at source, by Air India and Indian Airlines for acqUiring 
an aircraft on l¥Be from the govemment of a foreign State or a foreign 
enterprise under an agreement approved by the Central Government, it 
was proposed to amend the provisions of section 10 of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961, so as to qxclude such payment from the purview of the total 
income. 
" 
3. Whereas Parliament was not in session and the amendments to the 
provisions of the Income-tax Act as mentioned above were to be carried 
out immediately, the Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1989 (Ord. 1 
of 1989) was promulgated by the President on the 24th January, 1~9. 
4. The Bill seeks to replaCe the said Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; S. B. CHAVAN. 
The 7th MaTCh, 1989. 
3 

Incomes 
not in-
cluded iJI 
total 
income. 
Deduc-
tion in 
respect 
of dona-
tions to 
certain 
funds. 
charitable-
institu. 
tions, etc. 
• 
ANNEXUU 
ErDlAC'rIl PROM'l'H1: IlIfCOKE-TAx AcT. 1981 
(43 OJ' 1961) 
• • • 
CH.APT];& UI 
• 
INCOMJ%s WHICH DO NOT JI'ORM PART OF TOTAL INCOME 
18, .In, computing 1he total income of a previous year of any perseu. 
any income falling ~thin any of the following clauses shall not be 
iDcluded-- ' 
'. • " " 
lOG. (1) In computing the total income of an assessee, there shall be 
deducted, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this 
seetion,-
(i) "in ·a case where th.eaggregate of the sums specified in sub-
sttCijem (2) in<:lud" any sum or sums of the nature specified in sub.. 
clause (iiia) or in sUb-clause ('Vii) of clause (a) thereof, an amount 
equal to the whole of U1e sum Qr, as the case may be. S\lD1f; of such 
nature plUs fifty per cent. of the balance of such aggregate; and 
• • • • • 
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following. 
namely:-
(a) any sums paid by the assessee in the previous year as as 
donation to-
• • • • 
.. 

LOK SA.BBA 
A ~ 
BILL 
fUrther to amend the Income.-tax Act, 1961 
(Shrl S. B. Ch4V411y Minfste10 of Fi1kmce) 