II of 191a. 
Bib No. ao of 19$$ 
THE (RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL,1955 
(As INTRODUCED.m LOR: SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
. _ ..-..-~ --' 
fu.rther to amend' the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
BE it enacted by Parli~ment in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
. 1. This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amend- Short title. 
ment) Act, 1955. 
2. In section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (herein- 'Amendment 
after referred to as the principal Act), after clause (b), ihe following ~c:ecwn ~f 
clause shall be inserted, namely: - 1934. 
"(bb) "co-operative credit society" means a society regis-
tered or deemed to be registered under the Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1912 or any other law relating to co-operative 10 
societies for the time being in force in any . part of the terri-
tories to which this Act extends, the primary object of which 
is to provide financial accommodation to its members and 
includes a cooperative land mortgage .bank." 
3. In section 6 of the principal Act, the words "and a branch in I, :r.:~~:e~: 
London" shall be omitted. Act II of 
1934· 
t. In section 8 of the principal. Act, in clause (a) of sub-section 
(1), for the word "two" the word "three" shall be substituted. 
Amendment 
ofaection8, 
ActlI of 
1934· 
5. In sub-section (3) of section 13 of the principal Act, for the Amen~ment 
words "f,n his absence" the words "if for any reason, he is unable to 20 '][c~eiil~; 13. 
attend" shall be substituted: 19304. 

AmeDdmeDt 
eflCCdoD 11 
Act II of I,,.. 
IDterdoa of 
Dew aeetioQa 
46Aaqd46B 
iDAot II of 
1'340 
i 
•. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (4),-
(i) after the words "State co-operative banks" the words 
and figures "State Financial Corporations established under 
, the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951" shall be LXIII at I".. 
10 
inserted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (c), after the words "the Bank" the 
words "or as are fully guaranteed as to the repayment of ~he 
principal and payment c:tf interest by a State Government" 
shall be inserted; 
(:iii) in sub-clause (a), for the words "a cash credit or 
overdraft granted" the words "a loan or advance made" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for clause (4A), the following clause shall 'be substituted, 
I, namely:-
20 
"(4A) the making of loans and advances out of the 
National Agricultural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund 
and the National Agricultural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund 
established under section 46A and section 46B respectively 
for the purposes specified in the said sections." 
. 7. After section 46 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"46A. (1) The Bank shall establish and maintain a Fund to 
be known as the National Agricultural Credit (Long Term 
Operations) Fund to which shall be credited-
(a) an initial sum of ten crores of rupees by the Bank; 
and 
(b) . such further sums of money as the Bank may contri-
bute every year: 
ProvidE.d that the annual contribution during each of the 
five years commencing with the year ending on the 30th day of 
June, 1956 shall not be less than five crores of rupees: 
Provided further that the Central Government may, if the 
circumstances so require, authorise the Bank to increase or reduce 
3' the atr0unt of its annual contribution in any year. 

3 
(2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the 
Bank only to the following objects, namely:-
(a) the making of loans and advances to State Govern-
ments for subscribing directly or indirectly to the share 
capital of a cooperative credit society and repayable on the 
expiry of fixed periods not exceeding twenty years from the 
date of making such loan or advance; 
(b) the making to State cooperative banks of loans and 
advances for agricultural purposes, repayable on the expiry 
10 of fixed ·periods not being less than fifteen months and not 
exceeding five years from the date of making such loan or 
advance, against such securities as may be specified in this 
behalf by the Bank: 
Provided that such loans and advances are fully 
15 guaranteed as to the repayment of the principal and payment 
of interest by the State Government; 
(c) the making to Central Land Mortgage Banks of 
loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods 
not exceeding twenty years from the date of making such 
loan or advance: 
Provided that such loans and advances are fully 
guaranteed as to the repayment of the principal and payment 
of interest by the State Government: 
(d) the purchase of debentures of Central Land Mort-
2.5 gage Banks: 
30 
Provided that such debentures are fully gua;-anteed as 
to the repayment of the principal and payment of interest 
by the State Government. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, a Central 
Land Mortgage Bank includes an institution engaged in the grant 
of loans on the mortgage of agricultural land and declared as 
sucb by the State Government in this behalf. 
46B. (1) The Bank shall establish and maintain a Fund to National 
be known as the National Agricultural Credit (Stabilisation) ~o:tura1 
Fund to which shall be credited such sums of money as the Bank (StabiU .... 
tioo) Pund. may contribute every year: 
Provided that tile annual contribution during each of the 
five years commencing with the year ending on the 30th day of 
June, 1956 shall not be less than one crore of rupees: 
Provided further that the Central Government may, if the 
circumstances so require, authorise the Bank to increase or reduce 
the amount of j.t~ Jnollal contribution in any year. 

4 
(2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the 
Bank only to the making to State cooperative banks of loans and 
advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being 
less than fifteen months and not exceeding five years from the 
date of making such loan or advance and on such terms and S 
conditions as may be specified in this behalf by the Bank: 
Provided that no such loans or advances shall be made-
(a) except for the purpose of enabling the State coope-
rative banks to pay any dues in respect of bills of exchange 
and promissory notes purchased or rediscounted by the 10 
Bank under clause (2) of section 17 Or loans and advances 
made to them by the Bank under clause (4) of section 17, and 
unless, in the opinion of the Bank, the State Cooperative 
banks are unable to pay such dues in time owing to drought, 
famine or other natural calamities; and I, 
(b) unless such loans and advances are fully guaranteed 
as to the repayment of the principal and payment of interest 
by the State Government." 
Amr ~~ent 8. In section 47 of the principal Act, for the words "and such o .~.lOn 47, _ 
Act II of other contingencies as" the words "and for all other matters for lOT 
1934· which provision is to be made by or under this Act or which" shall 
be substituted. 
:r~~ent 9. In sub-section (1) of section 52 of the principal Act, the words 
52, Act II of "ff appointed by it or at the expense of the Central Government, if 
1934- appointed by that Government" shall be omitted. a1 
!==~ 10. After section 54 of the principal Act, the following section 
s4A in Act shall be inserted, namely.-II of 1934. 
De1qatlon "54A. (1) The Governor may, by general or special order, 
of powers. delegate to a Deputy Governor, subject to such conditions and. 
limitatiOJas, if any, as may be specified in the order,3C 
Amendment 
of the Flnt 
Scbeduleto 
Act II of 
1934· 
such of the powers and functions exercisable by 
, him by or under this Act or under any other law for 
the time being in force as he may deem necessary for the effi-
cient administration of the functions of the Bank. 
(2) The fact that a Deputy Governor exercises my pewer or U 
does any act or thing in pursuance of thi Act shall be conclusive 
proof of his authority to do so." 
11. In the First Schedule to' the principal Act in paragraph, 3 for 
t~e w¥ '''Kashmir'' the words "Jammu and Kashmir" aball be.-
Substitu~d. ' 
\ 
\ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Reserve Bank of India had appointed in August 1951 a 
Committee of Direction for conducting an all-India rural credit 
survey. The Committee's General Report was published in Decem-
ber 1954. The Report makes comprehensive recommendations in 
relation to numerous aspects of the problem of. rural credit. The 
recommendations envisage 'J complete reorganisation of the Coope-
rative structure on certain Imes. The principle of State partnership 
at all levels of the cooperative structure is postulated as a pre-
requisite for the adequate success of the cooperative organisation. 
It IS contemplated, as a part of the integrated solution of the rural 
credit problem, that the Reserve Bank should shoulder certain 
specific responsibilities calculated to enable it to play its due role 
in the reorganisation of the cooperative structure and in enlarging 
and facilitating the supply of rural credit through it. The Reserve 
Bank of India has agreed to shoulder these responsibilities and this 
Bill seeks to empower it to carry them out. 
2. The Bill provid~s for the setting up of a National Agricultural 
Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund by the Reserve Bank. The 
amount in the said Fund will be applied exclusively for the making 
01. loans and advances to State Governments for subscribing to the 
share capital of cooperative credit societies, for the making of. medium 
term loans to State cooperative banks for agricultural purposes and 
for the making of long term loans and advances to Central Land 
Mortgage Banks. It is also provided that a second Fund called 
National Agricultural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund should be set up 
by the Reserve Bank the amount therefrom being applied exclusive-
ly for the making of medium term loans and advances to State 
cooperative banks to enable them to convert short term credit into 
medium term credit whenever necessary owing to drought, famine or 
other like calamities. Along with these and consequential amend-
ments, other amendments of a routine nature which were due to be 
made in the Act are t>romoted in this Bill. One such amendment is 
to remove the present obligatory provision in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act to maintain a branch in London having regard to the 
changed status of the country. 
NEW DELHI; 
Tlwl 14th April, 1955. ,,, ... 
i'~1f C. D. DESHMUKH. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 (II OF 1934) 
• • • • • 
6. Oftiees, branches and areneles.-The Bank shall, as soon as 
may be, establish offices in Bombay, Calcutta. Delhi and Madras and 
a branch in .Lond,!n, and may establi.sh branches. or agencies in any 
other place In IndIa· • • • or, Wlth .the prevlous .sanction of the Central Government, elsewhere. 
• • • • • 
8. Composition of the Central Board and tenn of otllce of Dlree. 
tors.-The Central Board shall consist ot the following Directors, namely:-
(a) a Governor and two Deputy Governors to be appointed 
by the Central Government; , 
• • • • • 
13. Meetings of the Central Boanl-(l) 
• • • • • 
(3) The Governor, or in his absence the Deputy Governor autho-
rised by the Governor under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 
8 to vote for him, shall preside at meetings of the Central Board, 
and, in the event of an equality of votes, shan have a second or 
casting vote. 
• • • • • 
1'7. Business which the Bank may transaet.-
• • • • • 
(4) the making to local authorities, scheduled banks provincial 
co-operative banks, and the principal currency authority of Ceylon 
of loans and advances, repayable on demand or on the expiry of 
fixed periods not exceeding ninety days, against the security of-
• • • • • 
(c) such bills of exchange and promissory notes as are 
eligible for purchase or rediscount by the Bank; 
(d) promissory notes of any scheduled bank or provincial 
co-operative bank, supported by documents of title to goods such 
documents having been transferred, assigned, or pledged wAlly 
such bank as security for a cash credit or overdraft grante! for 
bona fide commercial or trade transactions, or for the purpose 
of. financing seasonal agricultural operations or the marketing 
of crops; 
'(4A) the making to State Co-operative Bank of loans and advan-
ces for agricultural purposes, repayable on the expiry of fixed periods 
6 

, 
not being less than fifteen months and not exceeding five years 
against such securities as may be specified in this bebalf by the 
Central Board: 
Provided that-
(a) such loans and advances are fully guaranteed as to the 
principal and interest by the State Government; and 
(b) the amount of loans and advances granted to any State 
Co-operative Bank shall not exceed the owned funds of such a 
bank: 
Provided further that the amount of loans and advances 
granted by the Bank under this clause shall not at any time 
exceed five crores of rupees in the aggregate. 
4'. Allocation of surplus profits.-After making provision for bad 
and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets, contributions to staff and 
superannuation funds and such other contingencies as are usually 
provided for by bankers, the balance of. the profits shall be paid to 
the Central Government .. 
• • • • • 
52. Powers and duties of auditors.-(l) Every auditor shal~ be 
supplied with a copy of the annual balance-sheet, and it shall be 
his duty to examine the same, together with the accounts and vou-
chers relating thereto; and every auditor shall have a list delivered. 
to him of all books kept by the Bank, and shall at all reasonable 
times have access to the books, accounts and other documents of the 
Bank, and may, at the expense of the Bank if appointed by it or at 
the expense of the Central Government if appointed by that Govern-
ment, employ accountants or other persons to assist him in investi-
gating such ~ccounts, and may, in relation to such accounts, examine 
any Director or officer of the Bank. 
• • • • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
• • • • • 
3. Th'e Northern Area shall consist of the States of Uttar Pradesh, 
Punjab, Delhi, Ajme:~ Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Patiala and the 
East Punjab States union, Bilaspur and Rajasthan. 
• * .. .. • 

'\ 
\ \ i 
, 
LOK SABttA 
A 
BnL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934-
--
" (Shri C. D. Deshmukh, 
Minister of Finance), 
Gh-ND-LAD-I08LS-I$-4-.5$-I.7$O 