BlII No. %0 of 11'0 _ 
~ 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON 18TH APRIL 1960) 

43 of 1950. 
Bill No. 20 of 196o --_ .. -
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMEND .. 
MENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
Short title. 
1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People 
(Amendment) Act, 1960. 
. . Amendment 
S 2. SectIon 12 of the RepresentatIon of the People Act, 1950 of section 12 
10 
15 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) shall be re-numbered 
as sub-section (1) of that section and after that sub-section as so 
re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) An order under sub-section (1) may contain provisions 
for the allocation of any member representing any council cons-
tituency immediately before the making of the order to any 
constituency delimited anew or altered by the order and for such 
other incidental and consequential matters as the President may 
deem necessary.". 
3. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause Amendment 
( d) shall be omitted. ofsectlon 28. 
4. For section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitution 
be substituted namely'- of. new , . sectIOn for 
section 31. "31. If any person makes in connection with-
Making 
20 (a) the preparation, revision or correction of an elec- fa1~e decla-rattons. toral roll, or 

Amendment 
of Fourth 
Schedule. 
(b) the inclusion or exclusion of arty entry in or from 
an electoral roll, 
a statement or declaration in writing which is false and which 
he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to 
be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 5 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.". 
5. In the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act,-
(a) under the heading "Andhra Pradesh", for the entry "2. 
District Boards", the entry "2. Zilla Parishads" shall be subs-
tituted; 
(b) under the heading "Uttar Pradesh", for the entry "2. 
District Boards", the following entry shall be deemed to have 
been substituted with effect from the 1st day of February, 1960, 
namely:-
10 
"2. Zilla Parishads including Antarim Zilla Parishads". IS 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The main reason for bringing forward this Bill is the urgent need 
to amend the lists of local authorities in relation to the States of 
Andhra Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh as given in the Fourth Schedule 
to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, for the purposes of 
the impending biennial elections to the Legislative Councils of these 
two States. District boards have been abolished in both these States 
and in their places Zilla Parishads have been set up in Andhra 
Pradesh under the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Samithis and Zilla 
Parishads Act, 1959 and Anoorim Zilla Parishads have been set up in 
Uttar Pradesh under the Uttar Pradesh Antarim Zilla Parishad Act, 
1958. Antarim Zilla Parishads in Uttar Pradesh will be replaced by 
regular Zilla Parish ads in due course. In view of the impending 
hiennial elections to the Andhra Pradesh and the Uttar Pradesh 
Legislative Councils from local authorities constituencies it is urgently 
necessary to amend the lists of local authorities for these two States 
by substituting for district boards these new bodies as in clause 5 of 
the Bill. The amendment in relation to Uttar Pradesh is proposed to 
be given retrospective effect from the 1st February, 1960 as the mem-
bers of the Antarim Zilla Parishads have already been included in the 
electoral rolls for local authorities constituencies, as they had to be, 
based on the view that the Antarim Zilla Parishads are district 
boards to all intents and purposes. 
This opportunity has been taken to propose certain minor amend-
ments in sections 12, 28 and 31 of the Act as suggested by the Election 
Commission. In the absence of any specific provision, an order 
under section 12 altering or amending a delimitation order made 
under section 11 may not contain any provisions relating to inciden-
tal or consequential matters such as allocation of any sitting member 
to any constituency altered or newly created by the amending order. 
It is proposed to insert a new provision in section 12 for such inci-
dental and consequential matters as in clause 2 of the Bill. 
Though under the Act, electoral registration officers are charged 
with the duty of preparation and revision of electoral rolls, claims 
and objections in respect of entries in thc draft TOUS are disposed of 
by a separate category of officers, namely, revising authorities 
3 

,4 
appointed in pursuance of rules made under section 28. This dual 
system besides being unduly cumbrous and dilatory results in mak-
ing the electoral registration officers only nominally responsible for 
the accuracy of the electoral rolls. It is accordingly proposed to do 
away with this dual system and place the responsibility for dispos-
ing of claims and objections in respect of entries in the draft rolls on 
the electoral registration officers themselves and for that purpose to 
omit clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Act, as in 
clause 3 of the Bill. 
Because of its limited scope, section 31 does not fully serve the 
purpose for which it was enacted. Under clause (a) of this section 
a person commits an offence only if he makes a false statement or 
declaration in writing in or in connection with a claim or applica-
tion to include his own name in the electoral roll but not when he 
does so in respect of some other person. Furthermore, the section 
appears to be applicable only to statements made in claims and objec-
tions made before revising authorities or in applications made under 
section 23 of the Act for inclusion of names but not to statements 
made before any other persons, as for example, enumerators at the 
stage of the initial preparation or annual revision of the rolls. Ex-
perience has shown that false statements are made at this stage also 
in quite a number of cases. It is accordingly proposed to widen the 
scope of section 31 as in clause 4 of the Bill. 
R. M. HAJARNAVIS. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 13th April, 1960. 

5 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950 
(43 OF 1950) 
• • • • • • • • • 
12. The President ,may, from time to time, after consulting the Power to alt-
Election Commission, by order, alter or amend any order made by er or amerul orders. 
him under· • • section 11. 
• • • • • • • • • 
28. (1) The Central Government may, after consulting the Elec- Power' to 
tion Commission, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules m:ke rule •. 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
• 
(d) the constitution and appointment of revising authorities 
to dispose of claims and objections; 
• • • • 
31. If any person makes in or in connection with- Making (If 
• 
false declarll-
(a) a claim or' an application for the inclusion in an electoral tions. 
roll of his name, or 
(b) an objection to the inclusion therein, or an application for 
the exclusion or deletion therefrom, of the name of any 
other person, a statement or declaration in writing which 
is false and which he either knows or believes to be false 
or does not believe to be true he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine or with both . 
• • • • • 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 27 (2) J 
• • • 
Local authorities for purposes of elections to Legislative Councils 
ANDHRA PRADESH 
• • • • • 2. District Boards . 
• • • • • • • • • 

6 
UTTAR PRADESH 
• • • • • 2. District Boards. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
(Shr': R.M. Hajarnam, 
Deputy Minister of Law.) 