Gof1950. 
To BE INTRODUCED IN ;LoIC SABD,. 
Bill No. ZO of 1985. 
THE UNION TERRITORIES (DIRECT ELECTION TO 
THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) BILL, 1965 
~ 
BILL 
to provide for direct: election in certain Union territories for fiZZing 
the seats allotted to them in the House 01 the People and fcYlf 
matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Union Territories (Direct Election Short title. 
to the House of the People) Act, 1965. 
Z. In this Act- Deftn1-
. "h th . tions. (a) "parliamentary constituency as e same mearung as 
in the Representation of the People Act, 1950; 
(b) "sitting member" means a person who immediately 
before the commencement of this Act is a member of the House 
of the people; 

Direct 
election 
to flll the 
seats in 
the House 
of the 
People 
aLlotted 
to certain 
Union ter-
ritories. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 43 
of 1950. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 43 
of 19r,1. 
Provision 
'u to 
sitting 
member. 
2 
(c) "Union territory" means any of the Union territories of 
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Laccadive Minicoy and 
Amindivi Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli. ' 
, 3. At the next general election to the Bouse of the People and 
thereafter, the seats allotted under section 3 of the Representation 
01 the People Act, 1950 to the Union territories in the House of the 
People shall be seats to be IDled by persons chosen by direct election 
and for that purpose each Union territory shall form ODe parlia-
mentary constituency. 
4. In the Representation of the People Act, 1950,-
(a.) in sub-section (1) of section 4, the words u, to the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to the Laccadive, Minicoy and 
Amindivi Islands, to nadra and Nagar Haveli," shall be omitted; 
(b) in su.b-section (1) of section 13B, for the words ueach 
parliamentary constituency in the Union territory of Delhi,", the 
, words "a parliamentary constituency in each of the Union terri .. 
tories of Delhi, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Laccadive, 
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli," 
shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (1) and in sub-section (Z) of section 13D, 
for the words "the Union tetritory of Delhi"~ the words "each of 
the Union territOries of Delhi, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands and nadra an~ 
Nagar Haveli" shall be substituted. 
5. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in section 4, the 
words Uto the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to the Laccadive, 
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands, to Dadra and Nagar Haveli," shan 
be omitted. 
6. The sitting memoer representing each Union territory shall 
continue to represent that Union territory until the dissolution of 
the present House of the People and if before such dissolution the 
seat allotted to a Union territory in the House of the People becomes 
vacant it shall be filled by a person nominated by the President and 
that person shall represent the Union territory In the p~ent Ho~ 
of tl\e Peo~le until its dissolution, 
43 of 19~0. 

I ~)/ 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND ·REASONS 
The Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the 
Laccadive, Mil'licoy and Amindivi Islands and Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli have been allotted one seat each in the House of the People. 
Under the existing law, these seats are to be filled by persons nomi-
nated by the President. The BiR seeks to provide that at the next 
generel election and thereafter as and when necessary these teats 
shall be filled by direct election. 
NEW DELm' , G.L.NANDA.. 
The 11th AfMch, 1965. 

. . . 
ExTRACTS nOM: THE Rl:PUSD'l'ATION OP TIIID PmPLi 
Act,I950 
(43 OP 1950) 
• • • • • 
4. (1) The seats allotted under section 3 to the State of Jammu Filling 
and Kashmir, to the Andaman and Nioobar Islands, to the Laccadive, ?f seats 
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands, to Dadra and Nagar HaveU, and to : the 
the Part B tribal areas shall be seats to be filled by persons nolDi- ot':~ 
Dated by the President. People. 
• • • • • 
13B. (1) The electoral roll for each parliamentary .constituency Electoral 
~ in the Union territory of Delhi, each Assembly constituency and registra-
each Council constituency shall be prepared and revised by an elec- tion 
toral registration officer who shall be such officer of Government or officers. 
of a local authority as the Election Commission may, in consultation 
with the Government of the Stat~ in which the constituency is 
situated, designate or nominate in this behalf. 
~, .••. ':I,., "t""" .• -.. . 
.. , ., '. ... . . . . 
.( " .... .. . . 
·tm:"·'b)-;-'The·:e~~fu~ roll for every parliamentary constituency Blectoral 
other than a parliamentary constituency in the Union territory of roll.for 
Delhi shall consist of the electoral rolls of so much of the assembly par~-
.. rised ·th· th t li t st" men ary consbtuenCles 83 are comp WI m a par amen ary con 1- constitu-
tuen.cy; and it shall not be necessary to prepare or revise separately encies. 
the electoral roll for any such parliamentary constituency. 
(2) The provisiOns of Part III shall apply in relation to every 
parliamentary constituency in the Union territory of Delhi as they 
apply in relation to an assembly constituency. 
• • • • • 
ExTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
ACT, 1951 
(43 OF 1951) 
• • • • • 
4. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Qualiftca-
House of the People other than a seat allotted to the State of Jammu tions for 
'fLDd Kashmir to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to the Laccadive, m~ber. , r t ship ot Minicoy and Amindivi Islands, to Dadra and Nagar Have 1, or 0 the House 
the Part B Tribal Are~, unless- of the •. •. • •• People. 
• ••• 'r 
" .' •• 1 s 

'" 
LOt{' SABHA 
It, 
BILL 
to provide for direct election in certain Union territories for 
filling the seats allotted to them in the House of the People 
ami-for' matteu-ccmDecteCa·therewitti.. . 
(Shri GtdJlarilal N tIIIda, 
Minister. of Home Affairs.) 