AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

a7 UW ४४४

Bill No. 20 of 1998
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE (ADMINISTRATION) BILL, 1998
By
‘Suri G.M. BANaTWALLA, M.P.
A
BILL

wovide for the appointment of a Commission to oversee the administration of the
secretarial staff of the House of the People ard for matters connected therewith.

‘itenacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—
1. This Act may be called the House of the People (Administration) Act, 1998.
2 In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “Commission” means the House of the People Commission constituted
section 3 of this Act;

(0) “House” means the House of the People;

(c) “Leader of the Fiouse” means the Prime Minister or amember of the Council
“of Ministers, who, being a member of the House, may be nominated by the
ime Minister for the purposes of this Act;

____ (d) “Leader of the Opposition” means a member of the House who is recognised
by the Speaker as such or his nominee, who shall be a member of the House, and if

there is no such leader, then the leader of the party in the Opposition having the
est number of members in the House;

(0) “Sceretarial Staff" means the staff of the House of the People:
(0 “Secretariat” means the Secretariat of the House of the People; and

Short title
Definitions.


2

(g) “Speaker” means Speaker of the House of the People.

‘Constitution and 3. (1) There shall be constituted a Commission to be known as the House of the
Coes People Commission to perform the functions conferred on it by this Act.

(2) The Commission shall be appointed by the House on a motion moved by the
Leader of the House and adopted by the Honse,

(3) The Commission shall consist of the following:—
(a) the Speaker;
(b) the Deputy Speaker of the House:
(०) the Leader of the House;
(व) the Leader of the Opposition; and

(९) three members of the House to be elected by the system of Proportional
representation by means of a single transferable vote.

‘Time upto which 4. The Speaker and the. Leader of the House shall continue (0 be the members of the

peesker 2nd Commission until immediately before the assumption of the office by their respecuve
Leader of the

House continue SUCCESSOrS.
as Members of

‘Commussion.

Cessation of 5. A member of the Commission other than the Speaker and the Leader of the House

membership of “shall cease to be 2 member of the Commission if he ceases to be 2 member of the House
the Catamission,

-tniemen of the" (1) The Speaker shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the Commission
Sommizsion.
(2) While the office of the Speaker is vacant, the Deputy Speaker of the House
shail function as the Chairman of the Commission end, if for an i
unable to act as hainmar of ine Commussion, the Deputy ५१८६-३६
Chairman of the ssion

॥ be a Secretary-Genersl of the House whe
inmendation of the Commission.

Appointment of 7. (1) There 5 he appointed by the

Secretary-Ge0- President of Indis
oral,

(2) The Secretary-Generai shail be appointed from ar

those who have

distinguished themscives and made their mark in the service of the House in vacious
capacities in the Secretariat for not less than twenty years.
(3) The Secretary-General shall be the head of the Secretariat.
Vacation and res: 8. The office of the Secretary-General shali become vacant—
sgnation of, and fi
removal from, (a) On his attaining the age of superannuation, as may be fixed by the
ee Commission,
relary-General

(6) on his resignation in writing addressed to the President of india;

(2) on his removal from office by the President of India in the sane manner as
is provided for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court under clause (4) of
article 124 of the Constitution.

Functions of the 9, Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the functions of the Commission shall
Commission. include the following: —

(a) to frame rales regulating the recruitment, appointment, promotion and
other service conditions of the Secretary-General and officers and staff of the
Secretariat;

(6) 10 adopt such service rules of the Government of India as it may deem fit;
(०) to appoint officers and staff on deputation io posts in the Secretariat from


3

_ other services such as Judicial services or from office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General or from State Legislatures;

(d) to determine the strength of the secretarial staff at various levels and their
__ pay scales and other allowances;

(e) to ensure that the classification, grading, salaries, allowances and other
conditions of service, including pension and other benefits, of the personnel in the
_ Secretariat are kept generally in conformity with those of the personnel in other
comparable services in the Government of India and also consistent with the service
_ requirements of the House;

i! (f) to consider and decide appeals against the orders of the Speaker or Secretary-
General, as the case may be, submitted by the officers and staff of the Secretariat;

(g) to prepare an estimate for each financial year of the expenses of the services
of the House and of any other expenses incurred fr the service of the House and lay
them before the House;

(fh) to appoint a member of the secretarial staff as “Finance Officer” who will
be responsible for accounting for the sums paid out of money provided by Parliament
for the service of the House; and

y

(i) to exercise all powers necessary to implement the provisions of clause (1) of
article 98 of the Constitution of India towards the constitution of a separate,
independent and autonomous Secretariat of the House

10. (/) The Commission may delegate to the Speaker or Secretary-General any of its Delegation of

ons under this Act. functions of the
‘Commission,

(2) Anything done by or in relation to a person, to whom functions are delegated
this section, in the discharge of functions of the Commission, shall have the same
as if done by or in relation to the Commission.

(3) Any delegation of functions made by the Commission under this section or
y amendment or revocation of such delegation shall be mentioned in the annual report
Commission made under section 12

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Commission shall
ain the ultimate responsibility for considering any representation made, in relation to
s affecting the interests, in connection with the eraployment of the secretarial staff,
taff associations who are recognised by the Commission in respect of such staff, and
or the conduct of consultations and negotiations, about such matters with those staff
tions.

वा, The validity of any proceedings of the Commission shall not be affected by any Validity of the
among the members of the Commission, or by any defect in the appointment or Proceedings of

mination of any members of the Commission. err a

12. The Commission shall as soon as possible, after the end of every financial year, Annual Report
print and present to the House a report on the exercise of its functions in that year. bias Commis-
i
13. (1) The Commission may make rules to regulate its procedure and conduct of its Power to make
rules,

(2) The Commission may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to
-gulate recruitment and conditions of service of the secretarial staff.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
6, before the House, while it is in session, for a total peridd of thirty days which may be
omprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of

session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, the
agrees in making any modification in the rule, or the House agrees that the rule



Transitional
provisions,

Saving,

4

should not be made, the rule shail thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be.

(4) Any notice of amendment to such rules given by a member shall stand referred
to the Commission who shali consider it and make such changes in the rules as the
Commission may consider fit.

(5) The final ule made by the Commission after taking into consideration the
amendments suggested by the members shall be laid before the House and. thereafter, on
the House agreeing to the final rule on a motion made by a member of the Commission, ‘he
rule or amendment to a rule, as the case may be, shall be promulgated by the Commissi
by notification in the official Gazette.

14. All persons employed in the secretarial staff immediately before the coming into
force of this Act, shall be treated, for all purposes, as if their appointment had been made
by the Commission, unless the Commission decides otherwise.

15. All rules, regulations and orders made and in force immediately before the coming
into force of this Act, shall be deerned to have been made by the Commission and shall
continue to be valid and cperative unless modified or revoked by the Commission, so,
however, anything contained thersin being inconsistent with any provisions of this Act,
shall be of no effect and be void to ihe extent of such inconsistency.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The concept of an independent Secretariat of Parliament is an essential adjunct of
jamentary democracy. The significance of this conceptualisation of a Secretariat
pendent of the Executive was fully realised in the 1920s when the then Central

lative Assembly passed unanimously a resolution moved by Pandit Motilal Nehru

‘The independent position of the Secretariats of the Houses of Parliament was
ised by the makers of our Constitution when they considered it necessary to
॥९ a separate and exclusive article (article 98) in the Constitution. This article
ges enactment by Parliament of a law to regulate the rect ent and conditions of
९ of persons appointed to the secretarial staff of the House. The enactment of such a
ation is long overdue.

The unique position of the Lok Sabha Secretariat demands, as it does, a special sense
of dedication and impartiality from the secretarial staff in the discharge of their duties and
fires a broad-based institutional arrangement representing the House to be statutorily
available to assist the Speaker in watching and safeguarding the interests of the
‘ial staff in the service of the House and its members. This institutional arrangement
sought to be made by providing a House of the People Commission.

Hence this bill.

‘New DELHY G.M. BANATWALLA.
Me 23, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a House of the People
Commission. Its members are the members of the House of the People who would be
discharging their duties in relation to the Commission as its members. The expenditure
towards the payment of their TA/DA, if any, would be a part of the normal expenditure of
the House. The increase in the expenditure, if any, as a result of constituting the Commission

would be a marginal one that would not be possible to be quantified in specific terms at
this stage.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to confer on the Commission the power to make rules for
out the purposes of this Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may be
Je are matters of procedure and administrative details. The delegation of legislative
ver is, therefore, of a normal character. ‘


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the appointment of a Commission to oversee the administration of the
secretarial staff of the House of the People and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri G. M. Banatwalla, M.P.)