CORRIGENDA 
THE HIGH DEN<''IMINATION BANK NOTES (DEMONETISATION) 
BILL, 1978 
L-To bel As introduced in lDk Sabha 7 
1. Page 3, line 30,-
t:2.!: "47th " ~ "17th tI 
2. Page 7, line 12,-
after ,ldenomination f1 insert '''bank'' 
3. Page 9, line 30,-
!Q.r. "Rs. 5000 11 ~ "Rs.1000 
Rs. 5000" 
4. Page 13, line 18,-
f.21: "matte:r fl read "matte,..s" 
5. In the docket page,-
NEW DELHI, 
February ~. 1~za 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
f' 
\ 
BIll No. 10 of 11'18 
THE HIGH DENOMINATION BANK NOTES (DEMONETISATION·) 
BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to PTOVide in the publ:c interest fOT the dem.onetila.tion of C'Tta.in high 
den.om.ination ba.nk notes and for matteTs connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS the availability of high denomination bank notes facilitate. 
the illicit transfer of money for financing transactions which are harmful 
to the national economy or which are fOT illegal purpo~ arid it is there- . 
fore necessary in the public interest to dernonetise hlgh denommation' 
bank notes; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Y·ear of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Denomination Bank Notes Short 
(Demonetisatfon) Act, 1978. title, 
eS1ent 
encI (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
commence-' 
(3) It mall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of ment. . 
January, 19'78. 

De8ni-
tiQbl. 
2 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "bank" means-
(i) a banking coropal1~' as defined III c1auie (c) of section 5 
of the Banking Regulation Act. 1949; 10 of 1949, 
(ii) the State Bank of India constituted under the Statf! ~ 
Bank of India Act, 1955; 23 of 195~, 
(iii) a subSidiary bank as df'fined in the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act. 1!159; 38 of 1969 
(iv) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 
of the Banking Companit's (Acquisition and Transfer of Under- 10 
takings) Act, 1970; 5 of 1970. 
(v) a regional rural bank established under sub-section (I) 
of section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act. 1976; 21 of 1976 
defined in section 2 of the (vi) a co-operative bank a<; 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, 15 2 of 1934. 
and includes every branch th~reof; 
(b) "bank notes" means the bank not~s issued by the Reserve 
Bank of India under section 22 of the Reserve Bank of India Ad, 
1934; 
'"... . " '0 I .\: ' .. ,- w,j. 
'(e) "di&t;nctive number" in relation to a high denomination bank 20 
note'· fuees'ffii: number includinl! thealphabetfeBl arwl numerical 
prefixes appeart.ng nn the fil(,/,> nf'the note; 
(d) "high denomination bank I1nt,e" means a bank note of the 
denominational value of one thousand rupees, five thousand rupees 
or ten thousand rupees, issued by the Reserve Bank; 25 
(e) "public sector bank" mean" ::l bank rf!ferrpd to in sub-clau88 
(ii), (iii) or (iv) of clause (a); . 
(1) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constituted 
2ofl934. 
under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 2 cd 1934 
(g) "ich~duled, bank" means a public sector bank or any other 30 
baDk, ~ a bank, 'included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934;' :&:of 1984. 
(h) "State Bank!..' means the State Bank of India constituted 
under the State Bank of India' Act. 1955. ' . 23 of 1958. 
Hilh de- 3. Oft the e~piry of the 16th day of January, 1978, all high denomina- 3~ 
nomination tio,u bank notes shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 26 Qf 
bank notes the' Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934, cease to be legal tender in payment 2 ot 1914. 
~ ~ or on account at any place, 
~encl"" 

4. Save as provided by or under this Act. no person shall, after PrQbibi.:. 
the 16th day of J'anuary, 1978, transfer to the possession of another person tion of 
or receive into his possession from another person any high denomination transd fer . an re-
bank note. ceiPt Of 
hi,h 
denow-
natlou 
bank notes, 
5 5. (1) Ev:ry 'bank a'nd Government treasury shall prepare and send to Declata-
'd d' this ti t shb' tion of the Reserve Bank in the manner provl e 10 sec ona re urn wmg hi h 
separately LInder each denominational value the total value of high de- de~Omi­
nomination Lank notes of that value held by it at the close of business on nation 
the 16th day of January, 1978 and the distinctive numbers of high de- benk notes 
)0 nomination bank notes of that value: bYdbanksao 811 v-
Provided that a bank or a Government treasw'y in which the currency ernment 
chest of the Issue Department of the Reserve Bank has, teen esta bUshed tl' ,'B-
shall also submit a separate return showing separately under each de- su.ries. 
nominational value the total value of high denomination bank notes held 
15 in such currency chest at the c~ose of business on the 16th day of January. 
1978 and the distinctive numbers of high denomination bank notes of that 
value, 
(2) E;very' such return shall be prepared and presented as provided in 
sub-section (8) in triplicate and shall be sigl'led by the Manager of the 
20 bank or othel' person in charge of thE: bank oi· 'the Governm~nt treasury 
(3) Every I'clu1'1l under sub-section (1) shall be presented fol' f.orward-
ing to the Re~elve Bank to the Manager of the sub-office, oftk.'e or branch 
of the Reserve Bank at the places specified under sub-section (2) of section 
7, or to the District Magistrate, or to the Sub-divisional Magistrate or, if 
25 such Manager or Magistrate is not available, to the senior-most Revenu~ 
or Police Officer available not later than 3.00 P.M. on the 17th day of 
January. 1978: 
Provided that if it is not feasible to present the return to any such 
person as aforesaid, it may be presented by handing two copies thereof 
30 not later than 3.00 P.M. on the 47th day of January, 1978 to a telearaph 
office, one copy for despatch by express telegram to the Reserve Bank at 
Bombay at the expense of the bank or the Government treasury, as the 
case may be, and the other copy for return to the person presenting it in 
the manner provided in sub-section (4). and by despatching the third 
35 cOpy I equired by sub-section (2) by registered post on the same day to 
the Reserve Bank at Bombay. 
(4) The offlcer to whom the return is presented shall give back to 
the person presenting it; one copy thereof under his signature' and seaJ 
of office in acknowledgement of receipt on which shall also be recorded 
I 
040 the Ume and date of receipt, and such officer shall without delay forward 
one copy of, the return to the Reserve Bank at Bombay. 
(5) The Manager or other person in charge of every bank or Govern~ 
ment treasury shall, immediately after the preparation of the returns 
required to be sUbinitted under this section, cause the high denomination 
04S bank notes mentioned therein to be kept in a separate receptacle and 
seal the same with his seal and of the 'officers having custody of luch 
receptacle. 

E¥cballie 
ritbflh 
denomi-
natiOn 
barllt'notee 
held 'by 
bariks and 
Govern-
ment 
treasurietl. 
Exchange 
ofhllh 
denomina-
tion bank 
notes held 
by other 
persons, 
6. (1) A bank other tMn a public sector bank may obtain from the 
Rese~e Bank Sf a public sectof bank an equivalent amount in exchallie 
for the high denomination bank notes declared by it in the return 
referred to in section 5 by credit to an account maintained with the 
Reserve Bank or a public sector bank or in bank notes. 
(2) A public sector bank may obtain from the Reserve Bank an 
equivalent amount in exchange for the high denomination bank notes 
declared by it in the return referred to in section 5 or the high denOmi-
nation bank notes ~ed by it in exchange under sub-section (1) by 
credit to an account with the Reserve Bank or in bank notes. . 
(3) A Government treasury may obtain from the Reserve Bank an 
equivalent amount in exchange for the high denomination bank Dotes 
declared by it in the return referred to in section 5 in bank notes or 
by cl'edit to Government account. 
s 
10 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1), (2) and IS 
(3), where the return referred to in section 5 is presented in the manner 
provided in the proviso to sub-section (3) of that section, the exchange 
referred to in this section may be effected only by the Reserve Bank 
at Bombay. 
(5) Every application for the exchange of. high denomination bank 20 
notes under this section shall be accompanied by the copy of the return 
received under sub-section (4) of section 5 which contains the distinctive 
numbers of such bank notes. 
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contaioned in the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, any high denomination bank note owned 25 2 of 1114. 
bya person other than a bank or Government treasury may be exchanged 
atter the 16th day of January. 1978, only on tender of the note-
(a) where the high denomination bank note is owned by an indi-
vidual, by the individual himself; or where the individual is abient 
from India, by the individual concerned or some person duly autho-)o 
r.iaed. by hlm in this behalf; or where the individual is mentally In-
capacltat$i from attending to his affairs, by his guardian or by any 
ot~~person competent to act on his behaUj 
(b) where the high denomination bank note is owned by a Hindu 
undivided family, by the karta, and, where the karta is absent from 3S 
India or is mentally incapacitated from attending to his affalr9, by 
any other adult member of his family; 
(c) where the high dtnomination bank note is owned by a com-
pany, by the managing director thereof, or. where for any unavoid-
able reason such managing director iii not able to tender the note, or 40 
where there is no managing director, by any director thereof; 
(d) where the high denomination bank note forms part of the 
assets of a firm, by the managing partner thereof, or, where for any 
imavofdablereason such partner is not able to tender the note, or 
where there is no managing partner as su~h, by any partner thereof 4~ 
rto~ being a minorj 
(~) where the high denomination bank note is owned by any 
other 88Sociation of persona, by any member of ~e ulOciati.on or the 
prlnctpal omc.r thereof; and . 

(j) where ij}e high denomination bank note is owned by any 
other person, by that person or by some person competent to aet on 
his behalf; 
and within the time and in the manner provided in this section. 
S (2) Every persoll desiring to tender for exchange a high denomina,tion 
bank note under this section shall prepare in the form set out in the 
SchedUle three copies of a declaration signed by him giving in full the 
particulars required by that form and sllall, not later than the l~th ~y of 
January. 1978, deliver such copies in person together with the hiih deno-
10 nu.nlltion bank notes he desires to exchange-- . 
(a.) to either of the offices of the Reserve Bank at Bombay or to 
the sub-office, office or branch, as the case may be, of that bank at 
Ahmt:dabad, Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Calcutta, Gauhati, Hyderabad, 
Jaipur, Kanpur, Madras, Nagpur, New Delhi and PatPa; 01' 
IS (b) to the main office or branch of the State Bank at the head-
'Luarters of a district; or 
(c) to any other office of a public sector bank notified inthil 
behalf by the Reserve Bank: 
Provided that if such person resides in a place not within convenient 
~ reach of any such office or branch, or if, by reason of age.· infirmity 01' 
illness he is unable to attend thereat, he may forward the high denomi-
nation bank notes he desires to exchange together with three copies of 
the declaration in respect thereof by insw'ed post to the Reserve Bank 
at Bombay not later than the 19th day of January, 1978. 
2.5 (3) Every declaration under this section shall. for the purpoBe of 
identifying the person making it. be attested by the maDaser or other 
person in charge of the bank, if any, with which he maintains an account, 
or by a salaried Magistrate or a Justice of the Peace or a police officer 
not below the rank of an Inspector oJ Police. 
30 (4) Unle~ it appears that the declaration has not been cempleie in 
all material particulars, the Reserve Bank. the State Bank or an,. bank 
notified unQer clause (c) of sub-section (2), as the case may lie, ·to wt¥ch 
an application for exchange of high denomination bank note. i8 made 
under this section, shall pay the exchange value of the said notes for 
35 C'redit to a 'properly introduced account of the owner or the declarant, 
as the case may be, with any scheduled bank: 
:Provided that if the owner or de¢larant. as the case may be. does not 
have a bank account, the exchange value of the said notes shall be paid 
only on propClr identification and until payment is 80 made, the amount 
40 shall retnain in the cUltody of the Reserve Bank or the bank, u the 
case may be. to which the high denomination bank notes were tender-
ed. 
(5) Where it appean that the declaration has not been compteted in 
all materitll SNlttictllal'S, tbe Reserve Bank, the State Bank or the notUled 
45 bank, as the case may be, to which sUch application as aforesaid is Im..te 
Ihall, unless the declarant Is able '·to supply the omhsion wttbout delay, 
refuse to ateept and pay for the bank notes to 'W'hkh the deem.don .... 
"tell, and where It does 10 "eluse) shall reNra GDe (!Opt oftbe deel8Ntton 

6 
_ to the cleelarant after enteriag therein the date on whkh it" presented 
and shall refer the matter to the Central Government to whleh it ,hall 
forward a copy of the declaration with a brief statement of the reasons 
for refusing to pay for the bank notes. 
Exchange 
of note. 
after the 
timellmlt 
apt!clfted 
in section 
7. 
(6) TIle Central Govel'JllDent may require any declarant l'eferred to S 
in sub-section (5) to amplify his declaration to such extent and In respect 
of such particulars as it thinks :fit and may, unless the declarut is able 
tofuUy cOmply with such requirement, refuse, for reasons to be recorded 
in writiDa, to sanctieD the exchange of the high denomination bank DOtes 
to which the declaration relates. 10 
(7) The Central Government or any person or authority authorised 
by it in this behalf may, by order in writing and for reasona to be re-
corded therein, extend in any caSe or class of cases the period during 
which high denomination bank notes may be tend.ered for exchange 
under this section. 15 
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, any person 
who fai18 to apply for exchange of any high denomination bank notes 
within the time provided ill thal sectioll may tender the notes together 
with the declaration required under that section to the Reserv;· Bank at 
any 0If the places specified in clause (cr) of sUb-section (2) of that sec- 20 
tion, not later than the 24th day of January, 1978 together with a state--
ment. explaining the reasons for his failure to apply within the said time 
limit: 
Provided that if lSUC,h pt:J'son resides in a place not within convenient 
reaeh of the sub-office, office or branch of the Reserve Bank at any of the 25 
said places or if, by reason of age, infirmity or illness, he is unable to 
attend thereat, he may forward the high denomination bank notes he 
desires to exchange together with three copies of the declaration required 
under section 7 by insured post to the Reserve Bank at Bombay not latel' 
than the 24th day of. January, 1978, along with a statement explaining 30 
the reasons for his failure to apply within the time specified in section 7. 
(2) The Reserve Bank may, if satisfied after making such inquiries as 
it may consider necessary that the reasons for the faidure to submit the 
notes for exchange within the time provided in section 7 are genuine, 
pay the .v;alue of the notell in the manner specified in sub-section (4) of 35 
that aection, 
(3) Any person aggrieved by the .. efusal of the Bes.-ve BaQk to Jta7 
the value of ~e notes under sub-section (2) may prefer an appeal to 
tbe Central Gov.emment within fourteen days of the iCOmmunication of 
~re~~~. ~ 
Cloa1J14t of t, (1) AU banks and Government treasurieS shall be closed on the 
bawand 17th day of January, 1978 for the transaction of all business exeept the 
Govern- preparation and presentation or, as the case may be, receipt of the re--
ment tNiI-. turns referred to in section 5. . surles. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1)', the 17th day ot 4S 
J~wY, 1978 shall, for the purposes of the Negotiable InstrumeJ1lta Act, 26.f 1111. 
. .' ~88~, be deemed to be a public holiday notified under that Act. 
Penalties. lQ. ·(1)·lf "ny bank fails to prepare and present within the time and 
" in i~he manner provided by section 5 any return referred to in tbatl8C-
i1~tion, or pres~ti. any return undl!l' that $ection which is fal.ae ·in·.uty so 

• 7 
material particular, the manager or other person in charge of the bank 
shall, unless he proves that the failure took place, or the false return, 
was preMDted, without hi, knowledge or that he exercised all due dili~ 
gen.oe to preftl1t the same, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
S whiM may extend to three years, or with fine. or with both. 
(2) Whoever knowingly makes in any declaration under section 7 any 
statem>Emt which is false or only partially true or whic.h he does notb~,: 
Heve to be true or contravenes any provtsion of . this Act.' or tl\e , .. ~ 
rules made' thereunder 8ha11 be' punishable with imprisonment f(/f a 
10 term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both .. 
(3) An officer of a scheduled bank who Il"f~eS payment out of the 
amount being the exchange value of a high dt:,lomination note credited 
under sub-section (4) of section 7 to an account maintained with such 
bank shall, unless such account is an account whiCh has been opened 
IS after proper introduction, be punishable with imprisonment for a .erm 
which may extend to three years. or with flne. or with both. ' 
11. (1) No prosecution for an offence punishable under this Act 
shaH be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Gov-
ernment. 
~o (2) Notwithstanding anything in section 29 of the Code of Criminal 
2 of 1974. Procedure, 1973, the court o~ a Magistrate of the first class or the court of 
a Metropolitan Magistrate trying an offence punishable under this Act 
may impose a fine exceeding five thousand rupees. 
12. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
2-5 Government or any officer of the Government or against the Reserve Bank 
or any public sector bank or any officer of such bank for anything done 
or intended to be done in good faith under this Act. 
Spec:~l 
provitiona 
relatm, to 
offences. 
Protection 
of action 
taken ~n 
JOOd faith. 
Ii 13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Removal of 
Act, the Central Government may, by notification in the Offtcial ditlouillet. 
30 Gazette, make any order. not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act. which appears to it to he necessary for the purpose of re-
moving the difficulty: 
Provided that every such order shall, as soon as mAY be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of. Parliament. 
3S 14. (1) The Central Government. may make rules tor giving effect to Powerto 
the provisions of this Act. make 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of. the following 
matters, namely:-
40 (a) the custody and disposal of high denomination bank nota 
tendered for exchange under this Act and of the declarations in rel-
pect thereof; 
- (b) the time within which applications referred to in sub-section 
(5) of section 6 may be made; and 
(c) the time within which and the manner in which the State 
Bank and public sector banks notifled under clause (c) of sub-section 
,(2) of section 7 may claim reimbursement fl'om the Reserve Bank' of 
payments made by them in respect of high denominatfon bank !'late!! 
accepted by them under that section. 
00 •. 
(' 

8 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under. thil ACt 
shall be laid, as lOon as may be aHt.'r it hl wade, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session {or a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one ses,ion or in two or more successive sessiollS, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 5 
or the successive sessions I'foresaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made. the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shan be without prejudice to the validity of anytbi.ng 10 
previously done under that rule. 
15. (1) The High Denomina,tion Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Ordi-
nance, 1978 is hereby repealed. 
(2) NotWithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have be,n done Of' 15 
taken under the corresponding provisions of· this Act. 
1 of 1978. 

.~ 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 7(2)] 
r FOBM OF DECLARATION 
(To be file.d in triplicate) 
5 1. Name of. ~e owner of the bank notes (tn bl6Ck letters) 
!. Addreas! Office 
, ., Residence 
3. Status. t.e., whether indivIdual, Hindu undivided f ..... l1- .A_ 
10 .. ( ) ftn..-th ... ·uv. company. ua-Ul, etc. ... a .. ue er aS8f!lSed to Jncome-tax; 
(I» If so. name of the ~me-Tax Circle/Ward/~trj~t where last assessed' 
(c) PUntanent Account ~umber. . • 
5.U~aged in business. profesSion or vQCation~ name in which such business :~ carned on. " .. 
15 6. Principal place of bu~ness, profession or "'ottltion and location and sttle of each braneb( • . 
7. In the case· of a firm, name and address of each partner. 
8. In .the cas~ of a partner in a firm, name and address of each firm or finns in whIch hI! IS a partner. . 
20 9. In the case of a salaried person. amount of salary per annum. 
10. In the case of a Government emplcyee, Government Department and POSt Qeld. 
J.l: In the case of a retired Government employee, last post held, Government De-
partment under which such post was held and date of retirement. 
12. In the case of a retired employee of a non-Government employer, particulars 
25 of last post held. 
13. In the case of any other person, particulars of profession or vocation or, as 
the case may be, former pl'ofE:Ssion or vocation. 
14. Particulars of high denomination bank notes tendered 
Denomination Number of Notes Distinctive Numbers- Total value 
30 Rs. 5000 
Ra. 10000 
35 -D1stinctive numbers of bank notes tendered 
elphabetical and numerical prefixes of the notes. 
110t adequate. -
Rupees 
(in words)' Ra. 
should be furnished -indicating-
Attach a statement if space is 
15. Relsons for keeping the amount in cash in notes of such hiih denominations. 
16. When and from what source did the bank notes come into possession? 
40 \1. If any of the notes tendeted represent borrowings, the name(s) and addressees) 
of the persons from whom borrowed and the dates on which borrowed. 
18. MJlnner in which payment of value of the bank notes is desiredj i.e .• in cash 
or payment to bank, etc. 
111. If payment Is to be made into a bank account, full details of the bank account 
45 20. Has any other declaration been made in respect of other bank notes of the 
owner? If so, state full particulars. 
21. If the declarant is not the owner of the bank notes. capacitv in which declara-
tion is SIgned. 
I lion/daughter/wife of hereby solemnlv declare 
50 • (name in block letters) (name of father/husband) 
that the particulars furnished above are full, true and correct to the best of r:rt~ 
knowledge and bellef. I further declare that the bank notes tendered herewl 
'belong to me -- .------------------.- .... ---.,.-.--. --.- ----. 
to and are not held benami. 
5S name of owner of bank notes. not flIed any other declaration under this 
I also solemnly affirm that I h'7il:d-another/otherdeclaratiOrl(S)8s-per- part(~ 
Act. 
60 culars attached. 
I furt.her declare that I am making thi~ declaration in!DY capaci~y ~s ________ .and that I am competent to make this declaration and verlfy It. 
designation, 
Place: 
etc. 
65 Date :-~----
I hereby testify that I know 
, (name in block letters) 
that the above declaration was signed in mv presence. 
Place: 
n %*8' 
...................... 
(Signature of declarant) 
------------- -
the declarant and certify 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The availability of high denomiriation bank notes facilitates the illicit 
transfer of money for financing transactions which are harmful to the 
national economy or which are for illegal purposes. It was, therefore, 
considered necessary in the public interest to demonetise all bank notes 
of the denominational value of one thousand rupees, flvethousand rupees 
and ten thousand rupees issued by the Reserve Bank ofi India. Hence, 
the President promulgated on the 16th day of January, 1978, the High 
Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Ordinance, 1978, to provide 
:for the demonetisation of the aforementioned high denomination bank 
notes and for matters connected therewith or incidentaflherelo. 
The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
Dated the 18th February, 1978. RM.PATEI;. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 5/2/78-BO.I, dated tne 22nd February, lln8 from 
Shri H. M. Patel. Minister of Finance to the Secretary, Lok Babha.] 
The Pa:esident, having been informed c<if the subject matter of the High 
D.enomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Bill, f978, has recommended 
under article 117 (1) and (3) of the Constitution of India, the introduction 
in and consideration by Lok Sabha of the said Bill in the current session. 
10 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill deals with the exchange of high denomination 
bank notes tendered before the 19th day of January, 1978, by persons 
other than banks and Government treasuries to the Reserve Bank or the 
State Bank or to a notified public sector bank. According to sub-clause 
(5) o~ this clause, where such bank refuses to exchange any high denomi-
nation bank notes on the ground that the declaration in respect of such 
notes has not been completed in all material particulars, it lias to refer 
the case to the Central Government by forwarding a copy of-the declara~ 
tion with a brief statement of the reasons for refusing to pay for the bank 
notes. Sub-clause (6) o£ the clause provides for the action which tlie 
Central Government may take in relation to such cases. 
2. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for exchange by the Reserve Bank of 
high denomination bank notes held by persons other than banks and 
Government treasuries after the time limit specified in clause 7. Accoro-
ing to sub-clause (3) of this clause, any persoJi aggrieved by the refusal 
of the Reserve Bank to pay the value of the notes may prefer an appeal 
to the Central Government. 
3. The additiona{ work-load arising out of. the functions of the Central 
Government under sub-clauses (5) and (6) of clause 7 and sub-clause (3) 
of clause 8 is proposed to be discharged through thle existing officers ana 
machinery. The same has been done under the correspondirtg provisions 
of, the Ordinance. The provisions of sub-clauses (5) and (6) of clause 7 
and sub-clause (3) of clause 8 will, therefore. involve only incidental 
expenditure on stationery, correspondence and other connected matters. 
This expenditure will be negligible and will be met out of the normal 
budgetary allotment of the Department. The quantum of, such expendi-
ture and the period over which such expenditure may have to be incurred 
will depend upon the number of cases which may be referred unoer sub-
clause (5) of clause 7 and the number of appeals under sub-clause (3) of 
claUSe 8 and it is not possible to make any assessment in respect of the 
same at this stage. 
4. The .provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure of 
a recurring or non-recurring nature. 
II 

MEMORANDUM'REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
"·,Clause 14 of· the Bill seeks to confer power on the CeRtral Government 
to· make rules for giving effeet to the provisions' of the Bt:t1:' Such rules 
may provide for matters, such M, the cuitodyand disposal of bigh denomi-
nation bank notes tendered for exchange under this Act and of the decla-
rations in respect thereof. the time within which applications referred to 
in sub.seotiol!l (5) of s~tion 6 maybe ma~e, the time witliin which and the 
mannet in which the State Bank and public sector banks notified under 
clause (c) o~ sub-seetion (2) of section '7 may claim reImbursement from 
the Reserve Bank of payments made by them'in respect of high denomina-
tion bank notes accepted- by them under that s~ction. . 
The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail. The delegation of legislative power 
is; therefore, of normal character. 

~MORANDUM EXPLAINING THE MODIFICATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE BILL TO REPLACE THE HIGH DENOMINATION BANK 
NOTES (DEMONETISATION) ORDINANCE, 1978 
Section 8(1) ot the High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) 
Ordinance, 1978 relates to the exchange, after the time limit specified in 
section 7 thereof, of high denomination bank notes held by persons other 
than banks and Government treasuries. This provision provides only for 
the tender of the notes in person. For removing the hardship caused by 
the provision in the case of persons unable to attend in person by reason 
of age, infirmity, illness or distance, a removal of difficulties order-tm 
High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) (Removal of Difti-
culties) Order-was issued under section 13 ot the Ordinance on the 23rd 
January, 1978. The proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill in-' 
corporates the substance of this Order. 
Section 14 of the Ordinance confers power upon the Central Govern-
ment to make rules for giving effect to the provisions or-the Ordinance. 
The corresponding provision in the Biii· seeks to spell out expressly some 
of the matter in respect of which rules may be made. [Vide sub-clause 
(2) of clause 14 of the Bill]. 
"Jo 

WK BABItA 
A 
BILL 
to provide in the public inttrest tor the demonetisation of certain Digb 
denomination bank notes and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
...........--
(Shri B.' M. Patei, 
Min.ute1' oJ FinAnce) 