SUI No. zo of 1"1 
THE DELHI (URBAN AREAS) TENANTS' 
RELIEF BILL, 1961 
• 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOIC SABRA 
ON 28m MARCH, 19(1) 
...... " ,,..." . 

I 
i 
I 
t [ 
~. 
PtlDjab Act 3 
of 19II. 
2 of 1924. 
, 61 of 1957. 
I 
I 
! l 
f 
881 KG. _ ", "I 
THE DELHI (URBAN AREAS) TENANTS' RELIEF 
BILL, Ig61 
(As INTRODt7CZD :rx LOIE SAmu) 
.a. 
BILL 
to provide relief to the tenants of land in the urban CINU at the 
Union te.nitory of Delhi. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth- Yea- of the Republic 
of India as follows: - . 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi (Urban Area) Taws' Shan dtle. 
Relief Act, 1961. ~uc!?d 
S (2) It extends to the areas in the Union territory of Delhi whieh, meDC. 
immediately before the 1st day of November, 1166, were ineluded in a 
municipality or in a notified area under the provisiOllS of the Punjab 
Municipal Act, 1911, or in a cantonmeIlt under ihe prcMa:bms of the 
Cantonments Act, 1924, but shall not apply to the areal owned by 
10 the Central Government or the Delhi Development Authority CODl-
tituted under the Delhi Development Act, 1951 or ay local authority. 
20 
(3) It shall eome into force on such date as the Chief Commis-
sioner may, by notification in the Oftlclal Gazette. appoint. 
z. In this Act, Wlleu. the context otJaerwise requires,~ Ddaid-.. 
(a) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chief Commislioner of 
Delhi; 
• 
(b) 
. . "family" means-
(i) in relation to a person belonging to a joint Hindu 
femUy, f!!Very member of s:ueh family; and' 
(ii) in relation to any other person, the person, the wife 
or husband, as the case may be, and the dependent ehfidren 
and grand-children, of such person; 
• 

(e) "land-holder" means a person under whom a tenant holds 
land and to whom the tenant is, or but for a special contl'6ct would 
be, liable to pay rent for the land; 
(d) "person under disability" means-
(i) a widow; , 
(ii) a minor whose father has died; ._._ __ _ _. 
(iii) a woman who is unmarried or who, if married, Is 
diVorced or judicially separated from her husband or whose 
husband is a person falling under item (iv) or (v); 
(iv) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union; 10 
(v) a person incapable of cultivating land by reason of 
some physical or mental disability; 
(vi) a person prosecuting studies in a recognised institu· 
tion and not exceeding 25 years of age; or 
(vii) a person who is under detention or undergoing im. I' 
prisomnent; 
(e) "tenant" and "tenancy" include a sub-tenant and a sub-
tenancy respectively;· 
(f) the words "land" and "tenant" and all other words and 
expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the 20 
Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 or the Agra Tenancy Act, 1901 shell g pi A Illii 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them,- of 190I.ct 
(i) in relation to areas to which the Punjab Tenancy Act, 
1887 applies, in that Act; or 
(ti) in relation to areas tt' which the Agra Tenancy Act, 25 
1901 epplies, in that ~ct. 
~acI. ef 3. (1) After the commencement of this Act, no person shall be 
tictmeDt.r liable to be ejected from any land held by him as tenant except on 
...... one or more of the following grounds, namely:-
(a) that a decree for arrear of rent due in respect of the land 30 
remains unsatisfied after the expiry of the period allowed there-
fOf; . 
(b) where rent is payable in kind, toot he has without suffi-
cient cause fiiled to cultivate the land in the manner or to the 
extent customary in the locality in which the land is situated; 3S 
(e) that he has sub-let or otherwise transferred the wbole or 
any part of the tenancy in contravention of any lew for the time 
being in force or of any contract; 
(d) that he has used the land in a manner which renders it 
unfit for the purpose for which it was let. 40 

3 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub;.S"~t1on; (1), but' 
I;ubject to the provisions of any law for the time being in force or 
of any contract between the parties, a tenant may be ejected from' 
the land held by him by a land-holder,-
5 (a) in any case where the land-holder is a religious or 
charitable institution, on the ground that the institution requires 
the land bona fide for use for a non-agricultural purpose in 
furtherance of its objects; and 
(b) in any case where the land-holder was a person under 
10 disability at the commencement of the tenancy, on the 8l'ound 
that he requires the land bona fide for cultivation by himself or 
for building a dwelling house, a cattle shed or business premises 
for use by himself or 6Ily member of his family and the proceed-
ing for ejectment is instituted within two years from the date 
1'5 when he ceases or has ceased to be e person under disability. 
Provided that no proceeding $.~l lie under this sub-section in 
respect of any share of land unless the share has first been partitioned 
.by metes and bounds. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the disability of • 
20 penon shall cease,-
30 
35 
• 
(a) in the case of a widow, if she re-marries, on the date of 
her re-marriage or if any person succeeds to the widow on her 
death, on the date of her death; 
(b) in the case of a minor, on the date of his ettainine majo-
rity; 
(c) in the case of a woman who is unmarried or who i. 
divorced or judicially separated from her husband, on the date of 
• her marriage or re-marriage, as the case may be, or in the case of 
a woman whose husband is a person falling under clause (d) or 
(e), on the date on which the disability of the husband ceases; 
(d) in the case of a person who is Q member of the Armed 
Forces of the Union, on the date of his discharge from service or 
of his posting to the reserve; 
(e) in the case of a person suffering from a physical or 
mental disability, on the date on which the disability ceases to 
exist; 
(f) in the case of a person Who is prosecutina studies in a 
recognised institution, on the date when he ceases to prosecute 
studies in that or any other recognised institution; 
(g) in the case of a person under detention or undergoin. 
imprisonment, on the date when he is released from detention 
or imprisonment. 

4 
Abatement •• Save as provided in section 3, no tenant of land shall, whether 
f!.s~ceed- in .execution of a decree GI' order of a court or otherwise, be ejected 
from the lQ.d, .and if there is any proceeding for ejectment af such 
tenant pending immediately before the commencement of this Act \ 
and the proceeding could not have been instituted had this Act 5 
been in force at the time of the institution of such proceeding, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any law, such proceeding 
shall, on such commencement, abate. 
Roeltotation 5. (l) Where, after the commencement of this Act, a person 
:-!:~:::. under disability or a religious or charitable iPlStitution has taken 10 
tain cues. po8Sf!Saion of land by ejecting the tenant therefrom under sub-
Rent. 
ACt to ov~r­
ride con- ' 
trac:tl, otc. 
section (2) of section 3 on the ground that the land is required for 
a pYrpO&e specified in that sub-section and such person or institution 
fails to use the land for that purpose within one yeai" from the date 
on which such person or institution took possessian thereof, the IS 
tenant shall be entitled to be restored to possession of the land from 
which he was ejected, on the same terms on which he held it at the 
time of ejectment. ' 
(~) Where, on or after the 1st July. 1958 and before the commence-
ment of this Act, any tenant of land has been ejected from the land 20 
and the ejectment could not have taken place if this Act had been in 
force on the date of such ejectment, the officer specified in this behalf 
by the Chief Commissioner may, either on his own motion or on 
application made by the tenant, restore him to possession of the land 
from which he has been ejected, on the same terms on which he held 2S 
it at the time of ejectment. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as entitling a tenant 
to be restored to poaseu.ion of any land if it is under cultivatinn by 
t!le oWDel' who is a person under disability or has, on or before the 
28th day of March, 1961, ceased to be used for agricultural purposes. 30 
6. The rent payable by a tenant in respect of land held by him as 
such shall not exceed one-fifth of the produce of the land or the money 
equivalent thereof, or where a lower rent is agreed upon between him 
and the land-holder, the .greed rent. 
7. The provisions of this Act shall. save as otherwise expressly pro- 35 
videCli, hav~ effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in'any other law, custom or usage or agreement or decree or order of 
court. 
Power to 8. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official 
--naleB. Gazette. make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Ad. . 40 

(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 800n as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while It is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in tw.o successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
S the session in which it is so laid or the seesion immediately following, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule Shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be' of no' e1tect, as the 
case may be, so however that any such modttlcation or annulment shall 
10 be without prejudice to the vaUdity of anything previOWli'Y 'done 
under that rule. ' ,. . 
•. (1) The provisions of the Punjab Tenancy Ac~ 1887 and the Repeal. 
!6 of !887. 
U.P. Act II 
,of !9O!. Agm Tenancy Act, 1901 and the Punj-ab Tenets (Security ~f Tenure) 
A= Act, 1950, as applicable to the areas to-whieh this Act ,extendl, Which 
15 are incoaBistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby I'e~. 
Punjab 
,XXII 
'1950. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or an,. ation 
taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under imy of tb~' pro-
visions so repealed, to ,the extent to which it is not inconsiStent with 
the provisions of this Act. shall be deemed to have'beendone-or taken 
in ex.erci8e of the powers conferred by this Act as if this Act was in 
20 force on the date on which such thing was done or such action was 
taken. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND :REASONS 
The Utnancy laws now in force in the urban areas of Delhi, i.e., 
the anu which, before the 1st November, 1956, were included within 
tlw. ij,auts of a Municipality or a Notified Area or Cantonment, do not 
prG¥Ide adequate protection to the tenants of agricultural lands 
.,.n.t eviction by the land-lords, nor do they contain provisions for 
..,wating agricultural rents on a fair and equitable basis. On account 
of .the rapid growth of the city, more end more agricultural lands in 
the urban areas of Delhi are likely to be diverted to non-agricultural 
UIe8. However, so long as the lands are not so diverted, it is neces-
sary to confer security of tenure on agricultural tenants and to 
regulate the rents payable by them. The Bill seeks to achieve this 
object and alSo makes provision for restoration of tenancies to 
agricultural tenants evicted. otherwise than on specified grounds, 
kom their holdin,s on or after the 1st July, 1958. 
LAL BAHADUR. 
Nsw Dm.m:; 
The 11th MaTch, 1961. 
• 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the ~i1l empowers the Chief Commissioner to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. Such rules will be 
necessary for prescribing the form of application for restoration of 
ejected tenants under clause 5 and for regulating other matters of 
procedure. The delegation of legislative power is. therefore, ot a 
normal character . 
• 
• 
7 

LOK SABHA 
'.,~ ... - .. " 
.'.: ":',.' ~ .. ".. , 
!\ ~ ." .~. ~~. '". 
!"'..;-
A. 
BILL 
to provide relief to the tenants of land. in the urban areis of 
tho Union territory of Delhi. 
(Shri /AI Ba1uMIur SluJstri, 
Minis,,,. of HDIIN Affair,.) 