THE  AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (REMUNERA TIVE PRICES)
BILL, 2007
By
PROF. MAHADEORAO SHIWANKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative prices fixed on the basis of cost of production
 of  the agricultural produce to the farmers, compulsory purchase of the produce
through Governmental agencies and compulsory market intervention by such
Governmental agencies in cases of bumper crops and for the establishment
 of an autonomous Board for the purposes and for matters connected
 therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This  Act   may  be  called  the  Agricultural  Produce  (Remunerative  Prices)
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “agricultural produce” include paddy, wheat, pulses, bajra, jowar, millet,
madwa, maize, soyabean, sugarcane, cotton, oilseeds, jute, spices or horticultural
produce, which is used for human consumption or for medicinal purposes;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  20  of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
5
10
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “Board” means the National Agricultural Produce Remunerative Prices
Fixation Board established under section 3; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months
of the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Board
to be known as the National Agricultural Produce Remunerative Prices Fixation Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name,  sue and be sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a  Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson with such qualifications as may
be prescribed, in the field of agriculture or with agriculture background, to be appointed
by the Central Government;
(b) nine members to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation
with State Governments, by rotation  in alphabetical order, to represent the Government
of the States;
(c) one member each to represent the Union Ministries of Agriculture and
Chemicals and Fertilizers to be appointed by the Central Government;
(d) one member to represent the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;
(e) such number of representatives of farmers growing such crops as may be
prescribed; and
(f) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and one
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the presiding officers of the respective Houses.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, members of the Board
and the manner of filling vacancies and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of
their functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The headquarter of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
(6) The Board shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and staff and with
such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall discharge the following functions, namely:—
(a)  fix and declare remunerative prices on the basis of cost of production of
agricultural produce before every sowing season:
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different zones of the country;
(b) while fixing the remunerative prices of the agricultural produce, the Board
shall take into account the following factors, namely:—
(i) cost incurred by the farmers in sowing, growing and harvesting of a
particular agricultural produce;
(ii) cost incurred on seeds, fertilizers, insecticides and pesticides;
(iii) cost incurred on labour;
(iv) expenditure incurred on payment of premium for crop insurance, taxes
on land, irrigation cost or any other cess, if applicable;
(v) maintenance cost of the fields;
(vi) cost incurred on transportation of agricultural produce to the market;
Establishment
of the
National
Agricultural
Produce
Remunerative
Prices
Fixation
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(vii) climatic conditions and occurrence of natural calamity; and
(viii) other expenditure such as expenditure incurred on electricity or
pumpset or any such other item.
(c) It shall be the duty of the Board to ensure that the farmers get remunerative
prices based on the cost of production of their produce.
(2) The Board shall, in order to avoid duplication of its work, perform its functions in
close liaison with Central and State agencies, institutions and authorities, which are
responsible for procurement, supply, distribution, trade and such other activities in relation
to the agricultural produce.
(3) The Board shall give wide publicity to the remunerative prices fixed by it and
update worldwide market prices of the agricultural produce through electronic and  print
media.
5.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,—
(a) the Central and State Government agencies shall purchase agricultural
produce from the farmers at the prices fixed by the Board in case the farmers fail to
sell their produce in the open market;
(b) the appropriate Government shall invoke market intervention compulsorily
whenever there is bumper crop of any agricultural produce for which the Board has
not fixed remunerative prices and purchase the agricultural produce offered for sale
through the Governmental agencies in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(c) the appropriate Government shall keep a watch on the activities of traders
and middlemen during the immediate post harvest period to ensure that the prices of
agricultural produce do not fall as a result of speculation and take such measures as it
may deem necessary to protect the interests of the farmers.
6. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the farmers and their produce.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the purposes of this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Application
of the
provisions of
the Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India lives in villages because nearly seventy per cent of our population lives in
villages. Majority of them are farmers or agriculture labourers who grow crops for the entire
nation and have made the country self sufficient in foodgrains. But unfortunately even after
more than five decades of country's independence, the lot of farmers has not improved. They
have to depend upon the vagaries of monsoon and do not get remunerative price for the
crops they grow. It has been observed that in the immediate post harvest period, prices of
agricultural produce nosedive due to the manipulation of the unholy nexus of unscrupulous
traders, middlemen and others in the trade. The farmers are, therefore, forced to sell their
produce at throwaway prices which later on is sold at a premium to the consumers. One small
Committee in the Union Agriculture Ministry fixes the Minimum Support Price of a few
agricultural produces but it has been observed that generally the Minimum Support Price is
not remunerative and remains below the expectations of the farmers. More so, this Minimum
Support Price has no legal backing. Hence it is felt that if an autonomous Board is established
to fix the remunerative prices with certain guidelines, this problem of the farmers can be
solved to a great extent because assured prices of the commodities or agricultural produce
will remove the uncertainty caused by the glut in the market. The farmers will get the
remunerative prices for their produce and eventually it will benefit them and they will become
prosperous.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHADEORAO SHIWANKAR
November 16, 2006.
————
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117(3)  OF
THE  CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. 7-27/2006-FES-ES, dated 5 January, 2007 from Shri Sharad Pawar,
Minister of Agriculture to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Agricultural Produce
(Remunerative Prices) Bill, 2007 by Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar, Member of Parliament,
recommends the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution in
Lok Sabha.
4
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \ 218LS.PM65

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Agricultural Produce
Remunerative Prices Fixation Board. Clause 4 provides that the Board shall give wide publicity
to the remunerative prices fixed for agricultural produce. Clause 5 provides that the Central
and State Government agencies shall purchase agricultural produce at remunerative prices
fixed by the Board if the farmers fail to sell their produce in the open market. Clause 8
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the purposes of this
Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crores may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum. A sum of rupees one hundred crores may also involve as non-
recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives  Power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative prices fixed on the basis of cost of production of
the agricultural produce to the farmers, compulsory purchase of the produce through
Governmental agencies and compulsory market intervention by such Governmental
agencies in cases of bumper crops and for the establishment of an autonomous
Board for the purposes and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
—————
(Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—266LS(S-5)—20.02.2007.