     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 20 of 2021
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second  year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
      1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2.  In the Constitution, for the sub-heading “Cultural and Educational Rights”
and article 29, the following sub-heading and article shall be substituted, namely:–
“Cultural, Linguistic and Educational Rights
29.(1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part
thereof having a distinct culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.
(2) The State shall take steps to conserve linguistic heritage of the country.
(3) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part
thereof having distinct language shall have the right to conserve the same.
(4) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them.”.
5
Protection of
linguistic
heritage and
interests of
minorities.
2
Substitution
of new article
and sub-
heading
thereto for
article 29.
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a diverse country. This diversity is manifested in different forms, be it
dance, dress, food, rituals, etc. Linguistic diversity is perhaps the most important
among them.
India is home to more than one hundred major languages. Considering that each
language has a number of dialects, the significance of the Hindi proverb “Kos Kos
par badle Pani, Char Kos par badle vani” becomes evident. Underlying the
importance of India’s linguistic diversity, Hon’ble Prime Minister while speaking in
Houston, Texas recently stated “Languages are symbol of India’s liberal and democratic
society. Hundreds of languages have co-exited and developed in India for ages and
still continue to be mother tongue of crores of people….. Unity in diversity is our
heritage and this diversity is the base of our vibrant democracy. This is our strength
and inspiration”.
The Eighth Schedule to the Constitution recognizes only twenty-two languages,
namely Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri, Gujarati, Hindi, Kashmiri, Kannada,
Konkani, Maithili, Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Odia, Punjabi, Sanskrit,
Santhali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. Among these languages, six languages
have been conferred the status of classical languages. These are Tamil, Telugu, Sanskrit,
Kannada, Malayalam and Odia. These languages have a recorded history over
1000-2000 years and body of ancient literature. Take the example of Odia, it has a
history of over 2000 years and during all this period, Odia was a language which was
least affected by external influences of Arabic and Persian. Odia is the only Indo-
Aryan Language other than Sanskrit. It is spoken and read in West Bengal, Jharkhand
and parts of Andhra Pradesh adjoining Odisha.
The richness of Tamil and Sanskrit literature is well known to us. The
Prime Minister himself quoted famous Tamil poet Kaniyan Pungundranar and admired
Tamil as amongst the most ancient languages of the world during his address in the
United Nations General Assembly recently. Sanskrit has had the greatest literary
exponents, including Kalidasa, Ashvaghosh, Bhavabhuti, etc. who have produced
immortal classics admired world over.
Similarly, there is an abundant linguistic heritage associated with each Indian
language. Since language is central to each culture, it is important that we conserve
our linguistic heritage. Though linguistic minorities have been given fundamental
right to conserve their linguistic heritage, it is even more important that State takes
proactive initiatives in this direction so we do not have to repent at some later stage
for losing this rich heritage.
With the above objects in view, the Bill seeks to amend article 29 of the
Constitution to enjoins upon the State to take steps to conserve our linguistic heritage.
           Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;          BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
October 30, 2019
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
Cultural and Educational Rights
* * * * *
29. (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part
thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to
conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving  aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, language or any of them.
* * * * *
Protection of
Interests of
minorities.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend  the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri  Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)