Bill No. 20-C of 2015
THE RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY IN
LAND ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2)  It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of December, 2014.
2. In the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabili-
tation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words
"private company" wherever they occur, the words "private entity" shall be substituted.
3. In the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2) of section 2, after the second proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Substitution
of certain
expression
throughout
Act.
30 of 2013.
Amendment
of section 2.
5
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 10.03.2015

2
"Provided also that the acquisition of land, for the projects listed in
section 10A and the purposes specified therein, shall be exempted from the
provisions of the first proviso to this sub-section.".
4. In the principal Act, in section 3,—
(i) in clause (j), in sub-clause (i), for the words and figures "the Companies Act,
1956", the words and figures "the Companies Act, 2013" shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (y), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(yy) "private entity" means any entity other than a Government entity or
undertaking and includes a proprietorship, partnership, company, corporation,
non-profit organisation or other entity under any law for the time being in force.'.
5. In the principal Act, after Chapter III, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
 namely:—
"CHAPTER IIIA
P
ROVISIONS OF CHAPTER II AND CHAPTER III NOT TO
APPLY TO CERTAIN PROJECTS
10A (1). The appropriate Government may, in the public interest, by notification,
exempt any of the following projects from the application of the provisions of
Chapter II and Chapter III of this Act, namely:—
(a) such projects vital to national security or defence of India and every
part thereof, including preparation for defence or defence production;
(b) rural infrastructure including electrification;
(c) affordable housing and housing for the poor people;
(d) industrial corridors set up by the appropriate Government and its
undertakings (in which case the land shall be acquired up to one kilometre on
both sides of designated railway line or roads for such industrial corridor); and
(e) infrastructure projects including projects under public-private partner-
ship where the ownership of land continues to vest with the Government.":
Provided that the appropriate Government shall, before the issue of
notification, ensure the extent of land for the proposed acquisition keeping in
view the bare minimum land required for such project.
(2) The appropriate Government shall undertake a survey of its wasteland
including arid land and maintain a record containing details of such land, in such
manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
6. In the principal Act, in section 24, in sub-section (2), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that in computing the period referred to in this sub-section,
any period or periods during  which the proceedings for acquisition of the land were
held up on account of any stay or injunction issued by any court or the period
specified in the award of a tribunal for taking possession or such period where
possession has been taken but the compensation lying deposited in a court or in any
designated account maintained for this purpose shall be excluded.".
7.  In the principal Act, in section 31, in sub-section (2), in clause (h), after the words
‘affected families’,  the words ‘including compulsory employment to at least one member of
such affected family of a farm labourer' shall be inserted.
8. In the principal Act, in section 46, in sub-section ( 6), in the Explanation, in
clause (b), the words "any person other than" shall be omitted.
Amendment
of section 3.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIIA.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to exempt
certain
projects.
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment
of section 31.
1 of 1956.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Amendment
of section 46.

3
9. In the principal Act, after section 67, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘67A. The Authority shall, after receiving reference under section 64 and after
giving notice of such reference to all parties concerned, hold the hearing in the district
where the land acquisition takes place for settlement of the objections raised in the
reference.’
10. In the principal Act, for section 87, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"87. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any person who is
or was employed in the Central Government or the State Government,  as the case may
be, at the time of commission of such alleged offence, the court shall take cognizance
of suh offence provided the procedure laid down in section 197 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 is followed.".
11. In the principal Act, in section 101, for the words, "a period of five years", the
words "a period specified for setting up of any project or for five years, whichever is later,"
shall be substituted.
12. In the principal Act, in section 105,—
(i)  for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) The provisions of this Act relating to the determination of
compensation in accordance with the First Schedule, rehabilitation and
resettlement in accordance with the Second Schedule and infrastructure amenities
in accordance with the Third Schedule shall apply to the enactments relating to
land acquisition specified in the Fourth Schedule with effect from 1st January, 2015.".
(ii) sub-section (4) shall be omitted.
13. In the principal Act, in section 113, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words "the provisions of this Part", the words "the provision of this
Act" shall be substituted;
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "a period of two years", the words "a period of
five years" shall be substituted.
14. (1) The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
 Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Ordinance, 2014, is hereby repealed.
(2)  Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the principal Act, as amended by this Act.
Amendment
of section
105.
Amendment
of section
113.
Ord. 9 of
2014.
Repeal and
saving.
5
10
15
Substitution
of new
section for
section 87.
Amendment
of section
101.
Offences by
Government
officials.
Insertion of
new section
67A.
Hearing to be
held by
Authority in
district or
districts to
decide
grievances.
20
25
30

GMGIPMRND—5229LS(S3)—10-03-2015.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)