1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  UNLAWFUL  ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION)  AMENDMENT
BILL, 2018
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  20  of  2018
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section 23 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"23A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up
a Special Court in every State capital to try the offences of terrorist acts.
(2) The Special Court shall consist of—
(a) two judges of the Supreme Court;
(b) one judge from the High Court to be appointed on rotation basis;
(c) one retired judge of the Supreme Court; and
(d) one retired judge of the High Court,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Judges mentioned under clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (2) shall be such as may be
prescribed.
23B. The Special Court shall dispose of every case of terrorist act within a period of
forty-five days from the date of framing of charges.
23C. No appeal shall lie in any Court against the order of the Special Court.".
Insertion of
new sections
23A to 23C.
Setting up of
Special Courts
to try the
offences of
terrorist acts.
Special Court
to try cases
within forty-
five days.
Restriction of
appeal against
the order of
the Special
Court.
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to Global Terrorism Report 2017, India is among top ten terrorism affected
countries of the world. In the year 2016, 929 terrorist attacks occured in  India which claimed
the lives of 340 people. The day of 28th November, 2008 is an unforgettable day. On this day
terrorist attack happened on India's financial capital, Mumbai, after this attack India's GDP
growth rate shrunk to 7 per cent. yearly while India's GDP growth rate was moving ahead at
the rate of 9.3 per cent till the year 2008. Report released by Moody's Investors Services said
that terrorist attacks in India have impacted its economy negatively in the long run. According
to Moody's its study tells that economic activities have been slowed considerably due to
terrorist attacks and it impacted the economy in long term.
Terrorism impacts the economy in many ways, apart from direct loss due to attacks, it
is not easy to make conducive environment for the investors with the presence of terrorism.
On the other hand, widespread expenditure occurs on establishment and maintenance of
anti-terrorism system, weapon, other defence materials, arrangement of human resources
and training etc. Terrorism has also direct and deep ill-effects on tourism.
Government cost to take debt has risen due to terrorist attacks. Cost of debt had risen
from 0.41 to 0.65 in countries worst affected by terrorism. International Monetary Fund's
researchers R. Bairry Johnston and Oana M. Nedelescu said in their paper, titled "The Impact
of Terrorism on Financial Markets" issued in 2005, discusses some of the direct and indirect
economic consequences of terrorism and inter alia states that—
“...........The direct economic costs of terrorism, including the destruction of life and
property, responses to the emergency, restoration of the systems and the infrastructure
affected, and the provision of temporary living assistance, are most pronounced in the
immediate aftermath of the attacks and thus matter more in the short run...........
The indirect costs of terrorism can be significant and have the potential to affect the
economy in the medium term by undermining consumer and investor confidence.......
Finally, over the longer term, there is a question of whether the attacks can have a
negative impact on productivity by raising the costs of transactions through increased
security measures, higher insurance premiums, and the increased costs of financial
and other counter-terrorism regulations.....”
According to Global Terrorism Report 2017, India ranks on 8th place in the terrorism
affected countries of the world. Country's status can be ascertained from this that India's
condition is worse than Libya.
Thus, if India is to become economic and strategic power then it has to complete the
judicial process within forty-five days against arrested terrorists to make India terror-free.
The need is to set up Special Courts in capital of every State to try the cases of terrorist acts
and complete judicial process within forty-five days. Terrorists should not have right to
appeal. The Central Government should also ensure the compliance to the decision of Special
Courts within ten days and it should be made mandatory to inform the Special Courts about
the enforcement of punishment within prescribed time. High security to terrorists and to
keep them alive on State's spending increases the economic burden of the Government.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 with
a view to set up Special Court in every State capitals to try the offences of terrorist acts
punishable under the Act. It also provides for disposal of every case of terrorist act under the

4
Act within a period of forty-five days of occurrence of such terrorist act and make an order
in this behalf. It further provides for implementation of the decision of the Special Court by
the Central Government within ten days of making such order.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT  KHAIRE
December 8, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up Special Court in every State capitals to try
the offences of terrorist acts. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees  five hundred crore  would be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3689LS(S3)—23.01.2018.