Short title and 
commencement.
AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 20 of 2023
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋං Mൺඋ඀ൺඇං Bඁൺඋൺඍ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment) Act, 
2023.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.

2. In the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, after Part X, the following new Part
and sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART XA
SPECIAL CATEGORY STATUS TO THE SUCCESSOR STATE OF 
ANDHRA PRADESH
94A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the successor State of Andhra Pradesh shall be deemed to have been 
conferred the status of special category State for a period of ten years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) The successor State of Andhra Pradesh shall by virtue of being conferred a
special category State under sub-section( 1), be provided the following incentives and 
benefits:—
(i) ninety per cent. of the State expenditure on all centrally-sponsored schemes
and external aid to be borne by the Central Government and the remaining ten 
per cent. to be given to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh as interest free loan;
(ii) preferential treatment in the distribution of funds by the Central
Government;
(iii) benefits of debt-swapping and debt-relief schemes;
(iv) concession in the customs duty, corporate tax, income tax, Central Goods
and Services Tax (CGST) and Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST)  to 
attract industries and investment in the State; and 
(v) provision that the unutilised money of the State in any financial year shall
not lapse and be carried forward to the next financial year.’’.
Insertion of 
new Part XA.
Special 
Category Status 
to the State of 
Andhra Pradesh.
6 of 2014.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The bifurcation of the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh resulted in an uneven 
distribution of metropolitan cities and resource rich regions. Hyderabad being forfeited 
from the residuary State of Andhra Pradesh put the State in a disadvantaged position in 
terms of distribution of assets and liabilities of common institutions which are mostly 
located in the city. There are 107 institutions listed under Schedule X of the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2014, of which 97 are located in Telangana proving the impediment in 
progress of the Andhra Pradesh. 
Secondly, repeated assurances have been given on the part of the Central Government 
that a special development package for the residuary state of Andhra Pradesh would be 
provided with adequate incentives, particularly for Rayalaseema and north coastal regions. 
The region has been identified for grant of special development package, similar to 
Bundelkhand region and KBK districts of Odisha. Statistics have indicated the plight of 
these regions and an incessant delay in conducting the decadal Census is proving to be tough 
with Andhra Pradesh. The state is losing out on a number of benefits, as population remains 
an important criteria for grants by the Centre.
While the buffer time of ten years for completion of bifurcation is just two years away 
from now, there are several benefits pending to be granted for the state. Despite being a 
welcome move, a development package often results in delay in release funds, lack of 
finances to clear the pending bills and delays in payments for the ongoing works. The 
presence of such constraints, resulting from an unjust and inequitable bifurcation of the 
erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh, Special Category Status being granted to the state proves 
to be a viable solution.
Hence this Bill. 
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං; 
March 4, 2022. 
MARGANI BHARAT       
Pඋൾඌංൽൾඇඍ’ඌ Rൾർඈආආൾඇൽൺඍංඈඇ ඎඇൽൾඋ Aඋඍංർඅൾඌ 117(1), 117(3) ൺඇൽ 274(1) ඈൿ ඍඁൾ 
Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ.
[Copy of Letter No. 16017/01/2022-S.R dated 11 January, 2023 from Shri Nityanand 
Rai, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2022 * (Insertion of new Part  XA) by Shri Margani 
Bharat, M.P., recommended the  introduction under articles 117(1) and 274(1) and the 
consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution of the Bill in Lok Sabha. 
[*The Bill being printed in 2023, the year in the title of Bill has been changed from 2022 to 2023.]

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 94A seeks to provide Special Category Status 
to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh by providing certain concessions, subsidies and 
other assistance to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, 
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for conferring special status 
to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh.  As the sums of money which will be given to the 
successor State of Andhra Pradesh as concessions and subsidy by appropriation, by law, 
made by Parliament, cannot be stated now it is not possible to give the estimate of recurring 
expenditure which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India.

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
_________
(Shri Margani Bharat, M.P.)