AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

20 APR 2000

Bill_No. 20 of 2000

THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2000
By
‘Suri 5080 Moutre, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 2, after clause (w), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

“(wa) ‘Tribunal’ means a Criminal Offences Claims Tribunal constituted
under Chapter IIIA;

(wb) ‘victim’ means a person who, individually or collectively has suffered
physical or mental injury or loss or damage to property or substantial impairment to
his fundamental rights, through acts of commission or omission by any person in
violation of any law in force or a victim of any offence under the Indian Penal Code
and includes the immediate family or dependants in the case of death of a victim;”

Short title.

section 2.


Insertion of
new Chapter
MA.

Setting up of
criminal
offences claims
Tribunals.

Application for
‘compensation.

Award.

2

3. In the principal Act, after Chapter वा, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—

“CHAPTER IIIA
CRIMINAL OFFENCES CLAIMS TRIBUNALS

35A. (J) Every State Government and Union territory administration shall, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, constitute one or more Tribunals to be known as Criminal
Offences Claims Tribunal for such areas in the respective State or the Union territory as may
be specified in the notification, for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims of a victim for
compensation in respect of offences involving death of, or bodily or mental injuries to per-
sons or damages to his property or mental, social or political activities.

(2A Tribunal shall consist of such number of members as the State Government or
the Union territory administration may deem fit to appoint and where it consists of two or
more members, one of them shall be appointed as the Chairman thereof.

(3) 4 person shall not be qualified for appointment as the member of a Tribunal unless
he—

(a) is, or has been, a judge of a High Court, or
(0) is, or has been, a District Judge, or
(c) is qualified for appointment as a Judge of the High Court.

(4) Where two or more Tribunals are constituted for any area, the State Government
or the Union territory administration may, by a general or special order, regulate the distri-
bution of business among such Tribunals.

35B. (1) An application for compensation arising out of an offence specified in sub-
section (1) of section 35A may be made—

(a) by the person who has sustained the injury; or

(b) where death has resulted by the offence, by all or any of the legal representa-
tives of the deceased; or

(०) by an agent duly authorised by the person injured or by all or any of the
representatives of the deceased, as the case may be:

Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined
in any such application for compensation, the application shall be made on behaif of or
for the benefit of all the legal representatives of the deceased and the legal representa-
tives, who have not so joined, shall be impleaded as respondents to the application.

(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Tribunal having juris-
diction over the area in which the offence has taken place and shall be in such form and shall
contain such particulars as may be prescribed.

(3) No application for compensation under this section shall be entertained unless it is
made within six months of the occurrence of the offence:

Provided that the Tribunal may entertain the application after the expiry of the said
period of six months if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented from making the
application in time.

356. On receipt of an application made under section 35B for compensation, the Tribu-
nal shall, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, made an interim award based
on its subjective satisfaction of the urgency in the matter and after recording the reasons in
writing and holding an inquiry into the claim shall make a final award determining the amount
of compensation, which appears to it to be just, and specifying the person or persons by whom
and to whom it shall be paid, and in making the award the Tribunal shall specify the amount
and also the method of payment to and distribution among the claimants.

20

25

30

35

45


3

35D. The compensation, as awarded under section 35C, shall be payable by an indi-
‘vidual or individuals, if he or they have been found guilty of an offence under sub-section
(1) of section 35A by the Tribunal to the victim.

35E. Where the compensation has not been paid to the victim by the person responsi-
ble to pay such compensation under section 35D, the Government concerned shall take
such steps as it deems fit to collect the money as an arrear of land revenue from the person
and pay the same to the victim.

35F. Where the persons responsible to pay compensation under section 35D, is not in
a position to do so, the State Government or the Union territory Government, as the case
y be, shall pay the compensation, awarded under section 35C, to the victim, out of a
nd to be constituted for the purpose.

350. (1) In holding any inquiry under section 350, the Tribunal may, subject to any
es that may be made in this behalf, follow such summary procedure as it deems fit.

(2) The Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court for the purpose of taking
idence on oath and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling the
luction of documents and material objects and for such other purposes as may be
escribed.

(3) Subject to the rules that may be made in this behalf, the Tribunal may, for the

of adjudicating upon any claim for compensation, request one or more persons
ssing special knowledge of any matter relevant to the injury, to assist it in holding the

35H. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any person aggrieved by an award
of Tribunal, may, within ninety days from the date of award, prefer an appeal to the High

Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said
d of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
m preferring the appeal in time.

(2) No appeal shall lie against an award of a Tribunal if the amount in dispute in the
| is less than five thousand rupees.

351. Where any Tribunal has been constituted for any area, no criminal court shall
jurisdiction to entertain any question relating to any claim for compensation which
be adjudicated upon by the Tribunal for that area, and no injunction in respect of the
sim for compensation shall be granted by the criminal court.

351. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter.

(2)In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the appointment, salary, allowances, conditions of service, etc. of the
members of the Tribunal;

(0) the form of application for claims for compensation and the particulars it
‘may contain; and the fees, if any, to be paid in respect of such applications;

(0) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding an inquiry under
this Chapter;
(d) the powers vested in a civil court which may be exercised by a Tribunal;

(७) the form and manner in which and the fees, if any, on payment of which an
appeal may be preferred against an award of a Tribunal; and

(0) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.".

Payment of
award by
accused.

compensation
to be collected
as arrear of
land revenue.

Government to
pay compensa-
tion in case of
failure by ac-
cused,

Procedure for
inquiry.

Appeal

Criminal
courts not to
have jurisdic
tion,

Rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Crimes are being committed and offenders are tried throughout the civilised world.
Some of the accused persons are acquitted not entirely on the basis of the facts of the case
but due to the benefit of doubt given to them.

While the rights of the accused are well protected under law, the victims of offences
are left helpless and unprotected. The civil law open to them is costly, indirect, cumbersome
and long drawn. The importance and necessity of providing a cheap and immediate relief to
the helpless victims of crime was recognised world wide and the United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and treatment of Offenders, has recommended that the rights of
the victims should be protected and that the Government concerned should ensure payment
of compensation to the victims.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; SUBODH MOHITE
February 3, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every State Government and Union territory
administration shall constitute one or more Criminal Offences Claims Tribunals for the
Purpose of disposing of claims for compensation made by victims of offences like death,
physical or mental injury, etc. The tribunal consist of such number of members as may be
deemed fit by the Government concerned. It further provides that where the person
responsible to pay compensation awarded by a Tribunal is not in a position to pay the
victim, the Government concerned shall pay such compensation out of a Fund to be
constituted for the purpose. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India in constitution of Tribunals, payment of salaries and
allowances of the members and in constitution of the Fund, in respect of Union territories.
As far as State Governments are concerned, the ‘expenditure will be met from the Consolidated

Funds of respective States, It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about
tupees five crore.

It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore
from the Consolidated Fund of India.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Central Government to make rules for carrying

Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the
matters of detail only, the

out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3519LS—18-2-2000.