THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR AGRICULTURAL COSTS AND
PRICES BILL, 2014
BY
SHRIMATI JAYSHREEBEN K. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Commission for ensuring minimum support prices to
farmers for their agricultural produce and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Agricultural Costs and
Prices Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 20 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "agricultural produce" includes paddy, wheat, sugarcane, millet, barley, ragi,
madwa, cotton, maize, soyabean, rapeseed, mustard, peanut, coconut, sunflower,
groundnut, safflower,  sesamum, niger seed, gram, tur, urad, moong, masoor (lentil),
peas, jute, cashew nut, pepper, turmeric, tobacco, potato, tomato, onion, mango, apple,
orange, kinnoo, mousambi  and other such foodgrain or commodity as may be
prescribed;
(ii) "Commission" means the National Commission for Agricultural Costs and
Prices constituted under section 3;
(iii) "cost of cultivation " includes operating cost plus imputed value of labour
including family, market based rental value of land, interest on both working and fixed
capital, transportation cost, marketing cost and insurance premium; and
(iv) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months
of the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Commission to be known as the National Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be  sued.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of—
(i) (a) a Chairperson; and
(b) a Vice-Chairperson,
to be appointed, from amongst persons of eminence having special knowledge
in the field of agricultural economics, by the Central Government;
(ii) three members of Parliament, of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and one
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
(iii) one member from each State having practical experience in the field of
agriculture with  compulsory agricultural and rural background to be nominated
with designation "State Advisor" by the Central Government in consultation with the
respective State Governments;
(iv) one member each representing the Union Ministries of Agriculture,
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution and Food Processing Industries;
(v) one member representing the Indian Council of Agricultural Research; and
(vi) two members representing farmers to be appointed by the Central
Government  in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and members of the Commission, shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the officers and staff of the Commission, shall be such as may be prescribed.
Constitution
of the
National
Commission
for Agricul-
tural Costs
and Prices.
Definitions.
Composition
of the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. (1) The Commission shall perform the following functions:—
(a) fix and declare the minimum support price of agricultural produce on the
basis of cost of cultivation and announce the same well in advance of the sowing
season:
Provided that minimum support price of an agricultural produce may vary for
different States depending upon the cost of production in each State;
(b) ensure that the farmers get the minimum support prices fixed by the
Commission for their agricultural produce;
(c) recommend to the Central Government measures for raising the standard of
farming in the country, especially raising farm productivity and farm profitability;
(d) ensure that the prices of the agricultural produce do not fall below the minimum
support price fixed by the Commission due to undesirable activities of traders and
middlemen after the post-harvest period; and
(e) give wide publicity to the minimum support prices of the agricultural produce
fixed by it.
(2) The Commission shall, while discharging its functions, consult State Governments
and such other agencies as it thinks fit, which are responsible for procurement, supply,
distribution, trade and other activities in relation to agricultural produce so as to ensure
payment of minimum support prices to the farmers.
6. (1) The Commission shall set up its zonal office in the capital of each State to be
headed by the State Advisor who shall be assisted by such number of persons, as may be
prescribed.
(2) The zonal offices shall study the farming environment prevailing in the respective
States, and present a report to the Commission before the beginning of each sowing season
giving such details, including agricultural productivity, as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall ensure implementation of the minimum  support
prices fixed by the Commission.
8. Where a farmer fails to sell his agricultural produce in the open market at the
minimum support price fixed by the Commission, the Central Government and the State
Government shall purchase the agricultural produce from the farmer at the price fixed by
the Commission.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Commission for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two
years from the date of the commencement of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Commission
to have
offices in
State capitals.
Central
Government
to implement
the minimum
support
prices.
Compulsory
purchasing of
agricultural
produce by
the Central
and the State
Governments.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power of the
Central
Government
to remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Functions of
the Commis-
sion.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
Power to
make rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The share of agriculture in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the country is constantly
falling every year since independence. As per the advanced estimates of National Income for
the year 2012-13, agriculture and its allied sectors contributed 13.7 per cent. to the Gross
Domestic Product. In 1950, the share of agriculture in GDP was 51 per cent. and by the year
2011-12, it came down to a mere 14.1 per cent. and that too without any substantial decrease
in the number of the people dependent on it. Still more than sixty per cent. of our population
is directly dependent on agriculture. It is shocking that the policy makers, the leaders, the
bureaucracy, etc. are apathetic to the fact that more than three lakh farmers have committed
suicide across the country during the last thirteen years.
There are several reasons behind the sorry state of agriculture in the country, but one
of the major reasons is non-availability of remunerative prices of agricultural produce. In the
circumstances, middlemen, hoarders, money lenders, etc. are exploiting the farmers. The
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) under the Ministry of Agriculture fixes
the Minimum Support Price (MSP) of a few agricultural commodities. However, this
Commission has no statutory backing and it often happens that the MSP determined by the
CACP is not remunerative for farmers. Perhaps it would not be incorrect to say that the CACP
has failed in its duty to provide remunerative prices to farmers. There is no proper mechanism
to calculate the cost of production of agricultural produce and, therefore, the MSP announced
by the CACP is far below the cost incurred by the farmers to raise their crops. Therefore, it is
felt that if a fully autonomous statutory commission is established to fix the minimum support
prices of the agricultural produce with certain guidelines, it will go a long way in mitigating
the miseries of the farmers of the country.
N
EW DELHI; JAYSHREEBEN  K.  PATEL
June 9, 2014.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Commission for Agricultural
Costs and Prices. Clause 4 provides for composition and salary and allowances of the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Commission. Clause 5 provides,
inter alia, for giving wide publicity to minimum support price of the agricultural produce by
the Commission. Clause 6 provides for establishment of zonal offices in the capital of each
State. Clause 8 provides for compulsory purchasing of agricultural produce by the Central
and the State Governments. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds to the
Commission for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees two hundred crore would be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—679LS(S3)—27-06-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Commission for ensuring minimum support
prices to farmers for their agricultural produce and for matters connected
therewith or  incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Jayshreeben K. Patel, M.P.)