1
THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PERMANENT BENCH AT BARGARH) BILL, 2019
By
DR. PRABHAS KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court of Orissa at
Bargarh
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the High Court of Orissa (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Bargarh) Act, 2019.
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 20 of 2019

2
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of Orissa at Bargarh
and such Judges of the High Court of Orissa, being not less than three in number, as the
Chief Justice of that High Court may from time to time nominate, shall sit at Bargarh  in order
to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in that High Court in respect
of cases arising in the districts of Bargarh, Jharsuguda, Balangir, Boudh, Deogarh, Kalahandi,
Kandhamal, Nuapada, Sambalpur, Subarnapur and Sundargarh.
Establishment
of a
permanent
Bench of High
Court of
Orissa at
Bargarh.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The High Court of Orissa is located at Cuttack in Odisha. The judiciary is an important
pillar on which the Indian democracy rests. When a person faces any type of injustice,
judiciary is often his last resort. But even in Judiciary, in view of the large number of pending
cases, there is not much scope for speedy justice. If Justice is delayed then it amounts for
denial of justice. Keeping in view the geographical location of the State of Odisha, people
living in Western Odisha region face a lot of obstacles and inconveniences to travel a long
distance to reach the High Court at Cuttack to get justice. This is not only time consuming
but also expensive for citizens belonging to weaker sections of society.
There has been a long pending demand from the people of Western Odisha that a
Bench of High Court should be established in Western Odisha region which will provide
much needed relief to the litigants who are not in a position to bear the burden of expenditure
on account of travelling and lodging to attend hearing of their cases at the High Court in
Cuttack.
Therefore, establishment of a permanent Bench of High Court of Orissa at Bargarh in
the Western part of Odisha would greatly help in quick disposal of pending cases and
delivery of justice to the poor residing in Western Odisha.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRABHAS KUMAR SINGH
December 5, 2018.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court of Orissa at
Bargarh
————
(Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3265LS(S3)—31-01-2019.