As InTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

10 AUS 200!

Bill No. 187 of 2000

THE STREET CHILDREN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS) BILL, 2000
By
Surman Renuka CHowoHury, M.P.
A

BILL
[to provide for protection of the rights of the street children. |

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (/) This Act may be called the Street Children (Protection of Rights) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.

3 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “abandoned child” means a child whose parents or guardian have abandoned
the child in any circumstance;

(b) “appropriate Government” means the State Government in respect of
children belonging to a State by virtue of birth or domicile and their rights and the
10 Central Government in all other cases;

(c) “chit” means any child below the age of eighteen years;

Short title,
extent and

Definitions.


Formulation of
a National
Policy for
street children,

Setting up of
National
Commission.

Functions of
the National
‘Commission.

(d) “destitute child” means a child having no known parents or guardian
responsible for up-bringing, education, training and development of the child:

(०) “Convention” means the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child, adopted by the U.N. General Assembly in 1989;

(0) “National Policy" means the National Policy for the street children as
provided under section 3 of this Act;

(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(h) “Regulatory Authority” means a regulatory authority appointed under
section 6; and

(i) “Street Children" means and includes the deprived children with
unknown parentage, abandoned and neglected children including destitute
children of sex workers and abandoned children,

3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, lay down a
National Policy for the street children, in consultation with the National Com
constituted under section 4, to secure to all street children all the rights of the chi
contemplated in the Convention.

4. (1) The Central Goyernment shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set
up a Commission called the National Commission for Street Children,

(2) The National Commission shall consists of the following namely:—

(a) the Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment who shall be the
Chairman of the National Commission;

(b) the Secretary to the Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
who shall be the ex-officio Secretary of the National Commission;

(c) the Union Ministers of Health and Family Welfare, Labour, Finance and
the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Chairman of the Central
Social Welfare Board shall be the ex- officio members of the National Commission;

(d) three Members of Parliament, two from the Lok Sabha and one from the
Rajya Sabha who shall be elected by the respective House of Parliament as members
of the National Commission for a period of one year; and

(e) five members of the National Commission to be appointed by the Central
Government in the manner as may be prescribed.

5. The National Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions:—

(a) to evolve a National Policy as provided under section 3 of this Act for
securing to the Street Children the rights of the child as contemplated under the
Convention and to prevent violation of such rights, by recourse to the provisions of
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986, and any other means as may be prescribed;

(b) to lay down schemes and programmes for achieving the objectives set out
in clause (a);

(c) to evolve and float health insurance, education, training and development
assurance schemes for such children;

(d) to promote schemes and programmes for emancipation of children from
the clutches of organised beggars’ gangs and those found engaged in bonded labour
and working in hazardous industries, mines engaged in hazardous jobs including
sex-workers and to rehabilitate them through education, training and providing for
their due maintenance, care and security against exploitation and health hazardous,
through proper institutions like child-care homes, including those set up under
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 and Non-Governmental philanthropic organisations.

10.


3

(e) to create and generate funds for financing the schemes made under
this Act, at the national level;

(0 to promote schemes to ensure that children apprehended for loitering and
minor offences and other apprehended for juvenile delinquency are not lodged in
jails nor detained in lock-ups, for want of sureties, as under-trails and otherwise and
for this purpose to make a review from time to time, of the provisions of the Indian
Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 and relevant rules and operation
thereof, to ensure expeditious trial of juvenile under-trails and to recommend
amendments and modifications thereto;

(g) to lay down norms, rules and regulations for recognition and registration
of the voluntary organisation and trusts engaged in welfare and care of the street

children,
6. (J) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, Appointment
appoint a Regulatory Authority for each territorial division created for the purpose. % Ree
0
(2) It shall be the duty of the Regulatory Authority:
(a) to register all births within its territorial jurisdiction:
(b) to maintain a Register of the Street children residing in its territorial
jurisdiction, with appropriate classification;
(c) to evolve plans and programmes for approval of the National Commission
for the purpose envisaged in sub-section (d), (९) and (1) of section 5;
(d) to evolve guide-lines for approval of appropriate Government for running
of institutions and organisations for carrying out various objectives for care and
rehabilitation of street children; and
(९) to carry out such other functions as may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall ensure that:— Rights of street
children,

(J) every street child shall have the right to proper means of living, due
care, protection and security of life against physical and mental violence, as
may be prescribed.

(2) every street child shall haye the right to basic education and training
and means for free and fair development of personality including play and
entertainment, as may be prescribed.

(3) every street child shall have the right to injoyment of highest attainable
standard of health, nutrition, medi-care, treatment for illness and rehabilitation
of health, as may be prescribed.

8. The appropriate Government shall constitute a ‘Street Child Development — street Children
Fund’ for implementation of the schemes promoted under this Act. Development
Fund.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules Powerto Make
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The need for protecting the child from abuse and exploitation has been felt for a
long time. The first Declaration of the Rights of the Child was drafted in 1923 and was
adopted by the League of Nations in 1924, declaring, that mankind ownes to the child the
best it has to give.

‘The year 1979, was observed as the International Year of the child when the United
Nations undertook to draft a treaty binding on all the nations. The UN General Assembly
in 1989, unanimously adopted the convention on the Rights of the Child. The soul of the
convention is set out in four over-arching articles.

1. No discrimination against children.

2. In all matters concerning children, the best interests of the child shall be primary.

3. The right of the child to life, survival and development.

4. The right of the child to express views freely in all matters affecting him or her.

All this concern of humanity for the child is obviously attributable to acceptance of
the fact that the child is most vulnerable to abuse and exploitation, especially in the poorer
nations, were child labour especially bonded child labour is rampant.

Children’s rights became the matter of concern in all the major UN conferences in
1990's. India acceded to the UN Convention on the rights of the child on December 11,1992,
and decade 1991-2000 has been observed as the Decade of the Girl Child with the National
Decade Plan of action for the Girl Child in recognition of the rights of the girl child to
protect from exploitation, assault and physical abuse. The National Policy for children
laid down in 1974 itself envisaged that “Children shall be protected against neglect, cruelty
and exploitation.”

Despite all these policies and programmes and laws like the Juvenile Justice Act,
1986, and the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, the child remains the
most exploited and abused section of society. Over 20 million children are enslaved in
bonded employment, 380 million children are kept away from school, malnutrition of
children continue unabated taking a heavy toll of the infants and as per recent UNICEF
study over one million children are forced into prostitution every year, majority of them in
Asia, Countless children are seen engaged in begging on road crossings and other public
places, most of them under organised gangs.

»  Itis therefore, necessary to lay down by law the basic rights of all children, including
the street children, the children of abandoned and neglected children and the bonded
children and those engaged in begging and children of sex workers who face the problem

. of identity of society and to provide an administrative mechanism for protection and
promotion of these rights.

To provide necessary infrastructure to secure to the street children their rights, as
per UN convention and to protect them against exploitation and abuse, it is proposed to
create a Regulatory Authority in each territorial division as provided for in clause 6 of the
Bill, who would be responsible for registering all births and maintain a register for the
street children, to provide for ways and means for securing their due rights under the
Convention.

‘The Bill thus aims at providing for infrastructure, policy and the law to secure and
protect the rights of the street children, as per UN Convention, adopted by the Government.

Hence this Bill

New DeLut; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
November 8, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a National Commission for the
street children by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for creation of funds for
financing the schemes made under this Act. Clause 7 provides for certain basic rights of
children like education, training, health-care, rehabilitation, etc. Clause 8 provides for
constitution of a Street Children Development Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees four crore per annum,

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for protection of the rights of the street children.

(Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4868LS—28-11-2000.