1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI JA
YANT SINHA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. For article 85 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:–
“85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to
meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but three months shall not intervene
Bill No.  20   of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5 Substitution of  new
article for article 85.
Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation and
dissolution.

2
2
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in
the next session:
Provided that the number of sittings in each session of each House of
Parliament shall not be less than thirty days.
(2) The President may from time to time–
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (b) of clause ( 2), if the
House of the People fails to sit for the minimum number of sittings as prescribed in clause
(1) for two consecutive years, it shall be dissolved by the President.”.
3. For article 174 of the Constitution, the following article shall be  substituted,
namely:–
“174. (1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of
Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but three
months shall not intervene between the last sitting in one session and the date
appointed for its first sitting in the next session:
Provided that the number of sittings in each session of each House of the
Legislature of the State shall not be less than fifteen days.
(2) The Governor may from time to time–
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (b) of clause ( 2), if the
Legislative Assembly fails to sit for the minimum number of sittings as prescribed
in clause (1) for two consecutive years, it shall be dissolved by the Governor .”.
4. After article 361A  of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:–
“361AA. All Bills, discussions, debates, duration of work, committee reports,
parliamentary proceedings and any other document laid on the table of the either
House of Parliament or either House of the Legislature of a State, as the case may be,
at the particular date of the sitting, shall be digitized and put in the public domain
within five days of such sitting.”.
Insertion of new
article 361AA.
Digitization and
Publication of
Proceedings of
Parliament and
State Legislatures.
Sessions of the
State Legislature,
prorogation and
dissolution.
Substitution of
new article for
article 174.
5
10
1 5
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Over the last few years, there has been a steep decline in the number of sittings of the
Legislature, the State Legislative Assemblies and the House of Parliament.
Since 1961, on a decadal basis, there has been a progressive decline in the average number
of sitting days of Lok Sabha from one hundred fifteen to sixty-five days per year. Between the
year, twenty-one out of the thirty-one Legislative Assemblies sat for an average of twenty-
seven days. These trends are alarming as they dilute the ‘separation of powers’ structure of our
democracy.
Disruptions caused by parties for political gain damage the sanctity of the legislative
system, and waste the invaluable time of the Assemblies and the Parliament. Due to this, laws are
passed without adequate deliberation, and matters of public importance are overlooked and
ignored.
There is a need to allocate sufficient time for discussions and debates in order to enhance
the productivity of the Legislature. Presently, there is no rule to prescribe the minimum number
of days the Legislature should function for . In Parliamentary democracies like Canada,
conducting one hundred twenty days of sittings in the House of Commons, and sixty days of
sittings at a provincial level is the standard practice .
While there have been attempts at setting minimum standards of productivity in the past
for States, they have been ignored without consequences. These standards have been prescribed
in Rules of Procedures, but not in the Constitution, allowing Assemblies to circumvent them.
The Constitution continues to be a living document, and should be adapted to leverage
the digital revolution to seek greater transparency in the functioning of the Legislature by
mandating the publishing of all Legislative Assembly and Parliament records and documents.
In light of the above, the present Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view provide
for,–
(a)the maximum gap between two sessions of each House of the Legislature of a State or
each House of Parliament to be not more than three months ;
(b)each session of the either House of the Parliament not to sit for less than thirty days;
(c)each session of the either House of the Legislature of a State not to sit for less than
fifteen days; and
(d)digitization and publication of proceedings of each House of Parliament and each
House of the Legislature of a State.
The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives .
NEW DELHI; JAYANT SINHA
 December 20, 2021.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT S FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to
meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its
last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People .
* * * * *
174.(1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of the
Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall
not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first
sitting in the next Session.
(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.
* * * * *
361A. (1) No person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court
in respect of the publication in a newspaper of a substantially true report of any proceedings
of either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either
House of the Legislature, of a State, unless the publication is proved to have been made
with malice:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the publication of any report of the
proceedings of a secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly,
or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature, of a State.
(2) Clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports or matters broadcast by means of
wireless telegraphy as part of any programme or service provided by means of a broadcasting
station as it applies in relation to reports or matters published in a newspaper .
Explanation.—In this article, “newspaper” includes a news agency report contain-
ing material for publication in a newspaper.
* * * * *
Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation
and
dissolution .
Sessions of
the State
Legislature,
prorogation
and
dissolution .
Protection of
publication of
proceedings of
Parliament
and State
Legislatures .

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Jayant Sinha, M.P.)