THE OLD AGE PENSION BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SANKAR PRASAD DATTA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of pension to old age citizens.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Old Age Pension Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 11 of 2015
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

(b) "old person" means any person who has attained the age of sixty years;
and
(c)"prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Every old person who is a citizen of India shall, on an application made in the
prescribed form, be paid rupees two thousand per mensem as pension, by the appropriate
Government.
(2) The pension payable shall be subject to such revision, on the basis of the
prevailing cost of living index, as may be determined from time to time by the Central
Government.
(3) The pension referred to in sub-section (1) shall be disbursed to old persons, by the
appropriate Government through Government Treasury or such nationalized bank, as may
be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that an old person who is receiving pension from the appropriate Government
or who has some source of income which is more than the amount given under this Act shall
not be eligible for pension under this Act.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Old Persons
Pension Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall consist of the sums paid into it by the Central Government after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf and all such moneys received by
way of grants or donations from any individual, organisation or agency including
international agency.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Pension to
old age
persons.
Constitution
of Old Persons
Pension Fund.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
2

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India's social security system is woefully inadequate in comparison even to third
world economies. Some States in India have social security schemes but the scale of benefits
is modest. The Indira Gandhi Old Age Pension Scheme of the Central Government covers
only old age persons living below poverty line. Moreover, the pension amount paid at the
rate of rupees two hundred per month is a meagre amount to meet the bare need of food of
pensioners. Today, we find that millions of senior citizens who do not have sufficient means
or any support system have to lead a life full of hardships. These people, who are without
any source of income, live in hunger and loneliness without anyone to take care of their
needs. Ours is a welfare State. It is the foremost duty of the State to provide for a universal
pension scheme for old age persons.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; SANKAR PRASAD DATTA
December 22, 2014.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the payment of pension at the rate of rupees two
thousand per month to such old persons who have attained the age of sixty years or more.
Clause 4 provides for the constitution of Old Persons Pension Fund by the Central
Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
It cannot be estimated at this stage as to how many old persons will need assistance
from the Central Government. However, an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two
thousand crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure will be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of pension to old age citizens.
————
(Shri Sankar Prasad Datta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4206LS(S3)—09-02-2015.