As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 20 of 2025
THE ABANDONED WIDOWS AND SINGLE WOMEN 
(PROTECTION, REHABILITATION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2025
By
Dr. Kadiyam Ka vya, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the need based rehabilitation, protective and welfare measures by 
the Government for the abandoned, distressed, neglected, infirm and disowned 
widows and single women by providing financial assistance, pension, medical 
care, housing and other facilities through a Welfare Board to such widows and 
single women and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Abandoned Widows and Single Women 
(Protection, Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “abandoned and disowned widow” means a widow who has been 
deserted or thrown out of household by her relatives to fend for herself and who 
has no means to support her and her dependent children, if any;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government 
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “Board” means the Abandoned Widows and Single Women Welfare 
Board established under section 3;
(d) “distressed” in relation to a widow and single women means any 
suffering widow or single woman who lives uncared for and has become infirm 
due to old age or chronic or incurable disease, physical deformity or mental 
imbalance and who has no independent and adequate means of livelihood for 
her and her dependent children, if any;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(f) “single woman” means a female adult human being who is either not 
married or divorced or judicially separated from her spouse for the purposes of 
this Act; and
(g) “widow” means a legally married women whose husband has died.
3. ( 1) The Central Government, shall, as soon as may be, but within six 
months after the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a Board to be known as the Abandoned Widows and Single 
Women Welfare Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by 
the said name sue and be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Hyderabad in the State of 
Telangana and the Board shall establish its branches in all other States 
and Union Territories at conspicuous places as the Board may deem fit and 
necessary. 
(4) The Board shall consist of:— 
(a) the Minister of Women and Child Development of the Union Council 
of Ministers who shall be the ex-officio chairperson of the Board; 
(b) a Deputy Chairperson, preferably a woman with such qualifications 
and experience, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central 
Government; 
(c) one member representing single women with such qualification, as 
may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(d) five women Members of Parliament of whom three shall be from 
the Lok Sabha and two from the Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the 
respective Presiding Officers of each House; 
(e) five members representing Union Ministries of Home Affairs, 
Women and Child Development, Health and Family Welfare, Finance and 
Social Justice and Empowerment; 
(f) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Governments of the States, by rotation 
in alphabetical order, to represent the Governments of the States; and 
2
Establishment
of the
Abandoned
Widows and
Single women
Welfare Board.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(g) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from 
amongst the registered Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) working 
for the Welfare of abandoned widows or single women, as the case may be. 
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions 
of the Deputy Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(6) The Board shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings and the 
quorum for such meetings shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(7) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of a Member Secretary and 
such number of officers, employees and establishments with such conditions of 
service, emoluments and perks, as may be prescribed or determined, from time 
to time, for the efficient functioning of the Secretariat of the Board.
4. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, the Board shall promote and implement such protective and 
welfare measures as it thinks appropriate, expedient, necessary and fit, including 
rehabilitation for the abandoned widows and single women who are in dire need of 
such measures. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
Board shall,— 
(a) maintain district-wise register of the abandoned, disowned and distressed 
widows and single women covered under this Act who are to be rehabilitated 
and are in need of assistance from the Board with such particulars and details 
and in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) collect and get verified the antecedents of every widow and single 
woman covered under this Act to assess her need for assistance in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 
(c) work out plans and formulate schemes for the overall welfare and 
rehabilitation of abandoned, disowned or distressed widows and single women 
covered under this Act and implement them in right earnest; 
(d) conduct a special survey of the abandoned and disowned widows 
subsisting on alms as beggars or forced to turn to prostitution and other  
means to support themselves and their dependents across the country or who  
are languishing in temples as Devdasis in various parts of the country and 
formulate appropriate rehabilitation and reuniting them with their families, 
programmes for such widows and single women in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(e) give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the welfare 
and rehabilitation measures being undertaken by the Board to enable the widows 
and single women covered under this Act to avail them; and 
(f) perform such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of  
this Act, as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to 
time.
5. (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may deem  
fit, by notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf, shall establish a 
fund with initial corpus of rupee fifty thousand crore through due appropriation 
made by Parliament to be called the National Abandoned Widows and Single 
Women Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund to be operated by the Competent 
Authority in consultation with the Board in such manner, as may be prescribed. 
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Functions of
the Board.
Establishment
of National
Abandoned
Widows and
Single women
Rehabilitation
and Welfare
Fund.

(2) The fund established under Sub-section ( 1) shall consist of all receipts 
from— 
(a) The Central Government and Governments of the States and Union 
Territories and their institutions and organisations; 
(b) Body Corporate, both of public and private sector and Banks and 
financial institutions both domestic and foreign; and 
(c) Individuals, associations and others in the form of contributions or 
donations.
6. (1) On the recommendation of the Board or otherwise, the appropriate 
Government shall provide the widows and single women covered under this 
Act, the following facilities, namely,–
(a) monthly subsistence allowance of not less than ten thousand 
rupees if the widow or the single woman, as the case may be, is having any 
dependent children and not less than five thousand rupees in case she has 
no children to support;
(b) residential accommodation free of cost wherever necessary; 
(c) free medical care with medicines and with indoor and outdoor 
facilities as per the need; 
(d) free education to the dependent children including higher, medical, 
engineering and education as per calibre; 
(e) gainful employment as per the physical condition after imparting 
vocational training wherever possible; 
(f) financial assistance for rehabilitation like self-employment wherever 
required; 
(g) free legal aid in case the widow or single woman, as the case may be, 
has been thrown out or abandoned by her kith and kin; and
(h) such other facilities, as may be necessary for rehabilitation, 
welfare, proper development, regaining her lost status in the family and 
for maintaining a respectable life in the society: 
Provided that if, a widow or single woman, as the case may be, covered 
under this Act either gets married, remarried, gainfully employed or taken back 
by her kith and kin in the family, the facilities being provided to her shall be 
accordingly withdrawn by the appropriate Government. 
 (2) the costs incurred by the appropriate government on providing the facilities 
under this Act to the widows and single women covered under this Act shall be 
defrayed from the Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund established under section 5.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in 
force or in any custom prevalent, any widow or single woman covered under this 
Act shall,— 
(a) not be evicted or thrown out of the house of the in-laws or parents, as the 
case may be where such widow or single woman was last residing; 
(b) be entitled to inherit the property or her share of jointly owned property 
from her in-laws or parents, as the case may be; and
(c) be entitled for maintenance from her in-laws or kith and kin who neglect 
or abandon the widow or single woman, as the case may be.
4
Facilities to
be provided
by the
appropriate
Government.
Protective
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of hostels at 
conspicuous places in various parts of its territorial jurisdiction as it may deem 
necessary for board and lodging of abandoned and disowned and distressed 
widows and single women covered under this Act with necessary facilities of 
daily life as may be prescribed. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall also provide necessary free medical 
aid and medicines and means of entertainment for the residents of the hostels 
established under sub-section (1): 
Provided that residents of such old age homes shall not be entitled for 
subsistence allowance under this Act.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide the requisite funds to the States, Union 
Territories and the Board from time to time for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act.
10. The Board shall submit an Annual Report in such form and in such manner, 
as may be prescribed, of its activities in implementing the provisions of this Act to 
the President of India who shall cause the Report to be laid before both the Houses 
of Parliament along with action taken thereon by the Central Government as soon 
as it is received.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force. 
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation 
of any other law for the time being applicable to the widows and single women 
covered under this Act. 
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
Establishment
of hostels.
Central
Government 
to provide
requisite 
funds.
Annual Report
of the Board.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Thousands of widows, most of them disowned and abandoned by their families, 
live in deplorable living conditions in our country. It is very common that when a 
widow does not have any permanent source of income or livelihood, she is driven 
out of her in-laws home or even from her parental home. Her position becomes 
more miserable, if she has dependent children to support and bring them up. 
Sometimes, the condition of such widows become miserable and their problems 
increase manifold due to poverty and other compelling reasons where they have no 
other option but to go for begging for survival and many such widows can be seen 
begging in the streets and public places. Several women who become widows in 
their youth, in particular in rural and far off areas, are not only sexually exploited 
by their known ones but also forced into prostitution many times. At some places 
they are branded as witches and tortured even by their own kith and kin or others 
from the community. In our society, even today they are treated as bad omen and are 
not allowed to attend or appear during auspicious occasions. Many of such widows 
work as housemaids and take up other jobs for survival. Some of them opt for not 
to marry because they have to support their families for various reasons such as to 
educate their siblings or for supporting families as there are no male breadwinners 
or for the treatment of ailing parents etc. It is very common that such women are 
deserted by their siblings once they get their education and settle in their lives. 
Then, there are those single women who are either deserted by their husbands or 
who are legally separated or divorced from their spouses. These women require 
need based rehabilitation, protection and other measures for their welfare and  
well-being. 
 Hence this Bill.
   New Delhi;                                 K A D I Y A M  K A V Y A  
December 16, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Abandoned Widows 
and Single Women Welfare Board. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of 
National Abandoned Widows and Single Women Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund 
with initial corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore to be provided by the Central 
Government. Clause 6 provides for financial assistance and other facilities for 
widows and single women. Clause 8 provides for establishment of hostels. Clause 
9 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite and adequate 
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from the initial corpus of 
rupees fifty thousand crore, it is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore 
may involve as recurring expenditure per annum. 
 A sum of rupees twenty thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring 
expenditure.
7

8
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for the need based rehabilitation, protective and welfare measures by 
the Government for the abandoned, distressed, neglected, infirm and disowned 
widows and single women by providing financial assistance, pension, medical 
care, housing and other facilities through a Welfare Board to such widows and 
single women and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
(Dr. Kadiyam Kavya, M.P .) 