THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS)
BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for protection of rights of  transgender persons and  their welfare and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act,
2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means,—
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment, wholly or
substantially financed by that Government, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or
substantially financed by that Government, or any local  authority, the State
Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No.  210-C of  2016
5
10
15
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA ON 17.12.2018

2
(b) "establishment" means—
(i) any body or authority established by or under a Central Act or a State
Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government
or a local authority, or a Government company as defined in section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013, and includes a Department of the Government; or
(ii) any company or body corporate or association or body of individuals,
firm, cooperative or other society, association, trust, agency, institution;
(c) "family" means a group of people related by blood or marriage or by adoption
made in accordance with law;
(d) "inclusive education" means a system of education wherein transgender
students learn together with other students without fear of discrimination, neglect,
harassment or intimidation and the system of teaching and learning is suitably adapted
to meet the learning needs of such students;
(e) "institution" means an institution, whether public or private, for the reception,
care, protection, education, training, or any other service of transgender persons;
(f) "local authority" means the municipal corporation or municipality or Panchayat
or any other local body constituted under any law for the time being in force for
providing municipal services or basic services, as the case may be, in respect of areas
under its jurisdiction;
(g) "National Council" means the National Council for Transgender Persons
established under section 17;
(h) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(i) "person with intersex variations" means a person who at birth shows variation
in his or her primary sexual characteristics, external genitalia, chromosomes or hormones
from normative standard of male or female body;
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government
under this Act;
(k) "transgender person" means a person whose gender does not match with
the gender assigned to that person at birth and includes trans-man or trans-woman
(whether or not such person has undergone Sex Reassignment Surgery or hormone
therapy or laser therapy or such other therapy), person with intersex variations, gender-
queer and person having such socio-cultural identities as kinner, hijra, aravani and
jogta.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTS
3.  No person or establishment shall discriminate against a transgender person on any
of the following grounds, namely:—
(a) the denial, or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, educational
establishments and services thereof;
(b) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to, employment or occupation;
(c) the denial of, or termination from, employment or occupation;
(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, healthcare services;
(e) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, access to,
or provision or enjoyment or use of any goods, accommodation, service, facility,
benefit, privilege or opportunity dedicated to the use of the general public or customarily
available to the public;
(f) the denial, or, discontinuation of, unfair treatment with regard to the right of
movement;
18 of 2013.
Prohibition
against
discrimination.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(g) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to the right to
reside, purchase, rent, or otherwise occupy any property;
(h) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, the opportunity to
stand for or hold public or private office;
(i) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, Government or
private establishment in whose care or custody a transgender person may be.
CHAPTER III
RECOGNITION OF IDENTITY OF TRANSGENDER PERSONS
4. (1) A transgender person shall have a right to be recognised as such, in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
(2) A person recognised as transgender under sub-section (1) shall have a right to self-
perceived gender identity.
5. A transgender person may make an application to the District Magistrate for issuing
a certificate of identity as a transgender person, in such form and manner, and accompanied
with such documents, as may be prescribed:
Provided that in the case of a minor child, such application shall be made by a parent
or guardian of such child.
6. (1) On the receipt of an application under section 5, the District Magistrate shall
refer such application to the District Screening Committee to be constituted by the appropriate
Government for the purpose of recognition of transgender persons.
(2) The District Screening Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall comprise—
(a) the Chief Medical Officer;
(b) District Social Welfare Officer;
(c) a Psychologist or Psychiatrist;
(d) a representative of transgender community; and
(e) an officer of the appropriate Government to be nominated by that Government.
7.  (1) The District Magistrate shall issue to the applicant under section 5 a certificate
of identity as transgender person on the basis of the recommendations made by the District
Screening Committee in such form and manner, within such time, as may be prescribed,
indicating the gender of such person as transgender.
(2) The gender of transgender person shall be recorded in all official documents in
accordance with certificate issued under sub-section (1).
(3) A certificate issued to a person under sub-section (1) shall confer rights and be a
proof of recognition of his identity as a transgender person.
8. (1) After the issue of a certificate under sub-section (1) of section 7, if  a transgender
person undergoes survery to change gender either as a male or female, such person may
make an application, alongwith a certificate issued to that effect by the Medical Superintendent
or Chief Medical Officer of the medical institution in which that person has undergone
surgery, to the District Magistrate for revised certificate, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The District Magistrate shall, on receipt of an application alongwith the Certificate
under sub-section (1), and on being satisfied with the correctness of such certificate issue a
certificate indicating change in gender in such form and manner and within such time, as may
be prescribed.
(3) The person who has been issued a certificate of identity under section 7 or a
revised certificate shall be entitled to change the first name in the birth certificate and all
other official documents relating to the identity of such person:
Recognition of
identity of
transgender
person.
Application
for certificate
of identity.
District
Screening
Committee.
Issue of
certificate of
identity.
Change in
gender.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
  Provided that such change in gender and the issue of revised certificate under
sub-section (2) shall not affect the rights and entitlements of such person under this Act.
CHAPTER IV
WELFARE MEASURES BY GOVERNMENT
9. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall take steps to secure full and effective
participation of transgender persons and their inclusion in society.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take such measures as may be necessary to
protect the rights and interests of the transgender person, and facilitate their access to
welfare schemes framed by that Government.
(3) The appropriate Government shall formulate welfare schemes and programmes
which are transgender sensitive, non-stigmatising and non-discriminatory.
(4) The appropriate Government shall take steps for the rescue, protection and
rehabilitation of transgender persons to address the needs of such person.
(5) The appropriate Government shall take appropriate measures to promote and protect
the right of transgender persons to participate in cultural and recreational activities.
CHAPTER V
O
BLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND OTHER PERSON
10. No establishment shall discriminate against any transgender person in any matter
relating to employment including, but not limited to, recruitment, promotion and other related
issues.
11. Every establishment shall ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act and
provide such facilities to the transgender person as may be prescribed.
12. Every establishment shall designate a person to be a complaint officer to deal with
the complaints relating to violation of the provisions of this Act.
13. (1) No child shall be separated from parents or immediate family on the ground of
being a transgender, except on an order of a competent court, in the interest of such child.
(2) Every transgender person shall have—
(a) a right to reside in the house-hold where parent or immediate family members
reside;
(b) a right not to be excluded from such house-hold or any part thereof;
(c) a right to enjoy and use the facilities of such house-hold in a non-
discriminatory manner.
(3) Where any parent or a member of his immediate family is unable to take care of a
transgender, the competent court shall by an order direct such person to be placed in
rehabilitation centre.
CHAPTER VI
E
DUCA TION, SOCIAL  SECURITY AND HEALTH OF TRANSGENDER PERSON
14.  Every educational institution funded or recognised by the appropriate Government
shall provide inclusive education and opportunities for sports, recreation and leisure activities
without discrimination on an equal basis with others.
Obligation of
the
appropriate
Government.
Non
discrimination
in employment.
Obligations of
establishments.
Grievance
redressal
mechanism.
Right of
residence.
Obligation of
educational
institutions
to provide
inclusive
education to
transgender
persons.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
15.The appropriate Government shall formulate welfare schemes and programmes to
facilitate and support livelihood for transgender persons including their vocational training
and self-employment.
16.  The appropriate Government shall take the following measures in relation to the
transgender persons, namely:—
(a) to set up separate human immunodeficiency virus Sero-surveillance Centres
to conduct sero-serveillance for such persons in accordance with the guidelines issued
by the National AIDS Control Organisation in this behalf;
(b) to provide for medical care facility including sex reassignment surgery and
hormonal therapy;
(c) before and after sex reassignment surgery and hormonal therapy counselling;
(d) bring out a Health Manual related to sex reassignment surgery in accordance
with the World Profession Association for Transgender Health guidelines;
(e) review of medical curriculum and research for doctors to address their specific
health issues;
(f) to facilitate access to the transgender persons in the hospitals and other
healthcare institutions and centres;
(g) provision for coverage of medical expenses by a comprehensive insurance
scheme for Sex Reassignment Surgery, harmonal therapy, laser therapy or any other
health issues of transgender persons.
CHAPTER VII
N
ATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TRANSGENDER PERSONS
17. (1) The Central Government shall by notification constitute a National Council for
Transgender to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to
it, under this Act.
(2) The National Council shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) the Minister of State, in-charge of the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in the Government, Vice-Chairperson, ex officio;
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment, Member, ex officio;
(d) one representative each from the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare,
Home Affairs, Housing and Urban Affairs, Minority Affairs, Human Resources
Development, Rural Development, Labour and Employment and Departments of Legal
Affairs, Pensions and Pensioners Welfare and National Institute for Transforming
India Aayog, not below the rank of Joint Secretaries to the Government of India,
Members, ex officio;
(e) one representative each from the National Human Rights Commission and
National Commission for Women, not below the rank of Joint Secretaries to the
Government of  India, Members, ex officio;
(f) representatives of the State Governments and Union territories by rotation,
one each from the North, South, East, West and North-East regions, to be nominated
by the Central Government, Members, ex officio;
(g) five representatives of transgender community, by rotation, from the State
Governments and Union territories, one each from the North, South, East, West and
North-East regions, to be nominated by the Central Government,  Members;
V ocational
training and
self-
employment.
Health care
facilities.
National
Council for
Transgender.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(h) five experts,  to represent non-governmental organisations or associations,
working for the welfare of transgender persons, to be nominated by the Central
Government, Members;
(i) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment dealing with the welfare of the transgender persons, Member-
Secretary, ex officio.
(3)  A Member of National Council, other than ex officio member, shall hold office for a
term of three years from the date of his nomination.
18. The National Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to advise the Central Government on the formulation of policies, programmes,
legislation and projects with respect to transgender persons;
(b) to monitor and evaluate the impact of policies and programmes designed for
achieving equality and full participation of transgender persons;
(c) to review and coordinate the activities of all the Departments of Government
and other Governmental and non-Governmental Organisations which are dealing with
matters relating to transgender persons;
(d) to redress the grievances of transgender persons;
(e) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
19. Whoever,—
(a) compels or entices a transgender person to indulge in the act of begging or
other similar forms of forced or bonded labour other than any compulsory service for
public purposes imposed by Government;
(b) denies a transgender person the right of passage to a  public place or obstructs
such person from using or having access to a public place to which other members
have access to or a right to use;
(c) forces or causes a transgender person to leave house-hold, village or other
place of residence;
(d) harms or injures or endangers the life, safety, health, or well-being, whether
mental or physical, of a transgender person or tends to do acts including causing
physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to two years and with fine.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
20. The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, credit such sums to the National Council as may be necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
21. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
22. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the appropriate
Government or any local authority or any officer of the Government in respect of anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act
and any rules made thereunder.
Functions of
the Council.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Offences and
penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
23. ( 1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous
publication, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which an application shall be made under section 5;
(b) the form and manner in which a certificate of identity is issued under
sub-section (1) of section 7;
(c)  the form and manner in which an application shall be made under
sub-section (1) of section 8;
(d) the form, period and manner for issuing revised certificate under
sub-section (2) of section 8;
(e) facilities to be provided under section 11;
(f) other functions of the National Council under clause (d) of section 18;
(g) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under sub-section (1), shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under sub-section (1), shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists
of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
24. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Power of
appropriate
Government
to make rules.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of rights of  transgender persons and  their welfare and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
MGIPMRND—2507LS(S3)—17.12.2018