1
Bill No. 210 of  2018
THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the National Food Security Act, of 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Food Security (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the National Food Security Act, 2013 thereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(a) in clause (5), the words “or any combination thereof ” shall be omitted;
(b) for clause (6), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —
5
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(6) “food security” means the supply to all persons, at all times other than during
war, of the entitled quantity of foodgrains and meals specified under Chapter II, which
meet their dietary needs and food preferences; and
(c) for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —
(9) “meal” means fresh hot cooked food made from locally procured material and
does not include pre-cooked meals or take home ration;”.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(a) for the words “five kilograms of foodgrains”, the words “five kilograms
of foodgrains of the recipient’s choice” shall be substituted;  and
(b) in the first proviso, for the words “thirty-five kilograms of foodgrains”,
the words “thirty-five kilograms of foodgrains as per the recipient’s choice”
shall be substituted.
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
4. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words “entitled quantities of foodgrains or meals”, the words “entitled
quantities of foodgrains of the recipient’s choice or meals” shall be substituted; and
(b) the following provisos shall be added at the end, namely:—
Provided that such food security allowance shall not be less than the market
price of the foodgrains of the recipient’s choice prevailing at the time, as ascertained
by the State Government:
Provided further that such allowance shall be made available to the recipient
within forty-eight hours from the time that the recipient is informed of the unavailability
of foodgrains of the recipient’s choice.”.
5. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (h) shall be omitted.
6. In section 44 of the principal Act,—
(a) the words, “flood, drought, fire, cyclone or earthquake” shall be omitted; and
(b) the proviso shall be omitted.
7.  In Schedule II to the principal Act, in column 3 under the heading “Type of meal”, for
the words “Take Home Ration” occurring against Serial Numbers 1, 3 and 6, the words “Hot
Cooked Meal” shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 3.
Amendment of
section 8.
Amendment of
section 12.
Amendment of
section 44.
Amendment of
Schedule II.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Food Security Act was enacted in 2013 to ensure access to nutritious
food to every person in the country. However, even after five years since the passing of the
Act, statistics show that hunger and starvation continue to be rampant in the country. The
reason for the limited success of the National Food Security Act is that there were intrinsic
shortcomings and contradictions within the Act.
The term “food security” conveys that every person should have access to nutritious
food of his or her own choice at affordable prices at all times. However, the principal Act,
while based on a rights-based approach, failed to provide the element of choice to the
beneficiaries. The Act permitted the Government to provide whatever foodgrains are available,
rather than the ones demanded by the beneficiary. This Bill therefore seeks to ensure that
beneficiaries are able to choose the foodgrains that they consume.
The principal Act also provided that the Government should promote cash transfers
and food coupons. However, this will lead to privatisation and result in higher prices for the
beneficiaries. Moreover, it amounts to abdication of its duty by the State. This Bill seeks to
ensure that beneficiaries are not adversely affected by provision of food coupons in place of
affordable foodgrains.
Further, the principal Act permitted the Government to provide beneficiaries “take
home ration” in place of hot cooked meals for pregnant and nursing women as well as young
children. This Bill seeks to ensure that hot cooked meals are provided to pregnant and
nursing women and to young children.
Finally, the principal Act withdrew the guarantee of food security in situations in
which it may be required the most, that is, in cases of natural calamities such as floods, fire,
cyclone, earthquake or drought. This Bill seeks to make it incumbent upon the Government
to ensure food security to all persons at all times including and especially in cases of natural
calamities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA  PAL
November 27, 2017.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT, 2013
(20 OF  2013)
************
2. (5) “foodgrains” means rice, wheat or coarse grains or any  combination thereof
conforming to such quality norms as may be determined, by order, by the Central Government
from time to time.
2. (6) “food security” means the supply of the entitled quantity of foodgrains and meal
specified under Chapter II.
********
2. (9) “meal” means hot cooked or pre-cooked and heated before its service meal or
take home ration, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
********
3. (1) Every person belonging to priority households, identified under sub-section (1)
of section 10, shall be entitled to receive five kilograms of foodgrains per person per month
at subsidised prices specified in Schedule I from the State Government under the Targeted
Public Distribution System:
Provided that the households covered under Antyodaya Anna Yojana shall, to such
extent as may be specified by the Central Government for each State in the said scheme, be
entitled to thirty-five kilograms of foodgrains per household per month at the prices specified
in Schedule I:
Provided further that if annual allocation of foodgrains to any State under the Act is
less than the average annual offtake of foodgrains for last three years under normal Targeted
Public Distribution System, the same shall be protected at prices as may be determined
by the Central Government and the State shall be allocated foodgrains as specified in
Schedule IV .
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, the “Antyodaya Anna Y ojana” means,
the scheme by the said name launched by the Central Government on the 25th day of
December, 2000; and as modified from time to time.
********
8. In case of non-supply of the entitled quantities of foodgrains or meals to entitled
persons under Chapter II, such persons shall be entitled to receive such food security
allowance from the concerned State Government to be paid to each person, within such time
and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
********
12. (1) The Central and State Governments shall endeavour to progressively undertake
necessary reforms in the Targeted Public Distribution System in consonance with the role
envisaged for them in this Act.
(2) The reforms shall, inter alia, include—
(a) doorstep delivery of foodgrains to the Targeted Public Distribution System
outlets;
(b) application of information and communication technology tools including
end-to-end computerisation in order to ensure transparent recording of transactions
at all levels, and to prevent diversion;
Reforms in
Targeted
Public
Distrubution
System.
Right to
receive food
security
allowance in
certain cases.
Right to
receive food
grains and
subsidised
prices by
persons
belonging to
eligible
households
under Targeted
Public
Distribution
System.
Definitions.

5
(c) leveraging “aadhaar” for unique identification, with biometric information of
entitled beneficiaries for proper targeting of benefits under this Act;
(d) full transparency of records;
(e) preference to public institutions or public bodies such as Panchayats, self-
help groups, co-operatives, in licensing of fair price shops and management of fair
price shops by women or their collectives;
(f) diversification of commodities distributed under the Public Distribution System
over a period of time;
(g) support to local public distribution models and grains banks; and
(h) introducing schemes, such as, cash transfer, food coupons, or other schemes,
to the targeted beneficiaries in order to ensure their foodgrain entitlements specified in
Chapter II, in such area and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
********
44. The Central Government, or as the case may be, the State Government, shall be
liable for a claim by any person entitled under this Act, except in the case of war, flood,
drought, fire, cyclone or earthquake affecting the regular supply of foodgrains or meals to
such person under this Act:
Provided that the Central Government may, in consultation with the Planning
Commission, declare whether or not any such situation affecting the regular supply of
foodgrains or meals to such person has arisen or exists.
********
Force
Majeure.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Food Security Act of 2013.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2264LS(S3)—17-12-2018.