As INTRODUCED IN Lok Sapa

49 7 778 ON

Bill No. 210 of 2000.

THE FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suri Bat Krisuna CHacuan, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Factories Act, 1948.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (2) This Act may be called the Factories (Amendment) Act, 2000. ioe ail
(2) It shall come into force at once. =

2. Insection 51 of the Factories Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Amendment of
5 Act), for the words "forty-eight", the words "thirty-six" shall be substituted. section 51.

3. In section 54 of the principal Act, for the word "nine", the word "seven" shall Amendment of

be substituted. section 54.
4, In section 55 of the principal Act— ‘Amendment of

section 55.
0) in sub-section (7), for the word “five, the word "four" shall be ५
10 substituted;

(i) in sub-section (2), for the word "six", the word "five" shall be substituted.


2

‘Amendment of 5. In section 56 of the principal Act,—
a 2003 (@ for the words "ten and a half", the words "eight and a half” shall be
substituted;
(ii) the priviso shall be omitted.
‘Amendment of 6. In section 59 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 5

section 59.
: (@ for the word "nine", the word "seven" shall be substituted;

(ii) for the words "forty-eight", the words "thirty-six" shall be substituted.

Amendment of 7. In section 67 of the principal Act, for the word "fourteenth", the word "eighteenth"
section 67. shall be substituted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Before the Factories Act came into force in 1948, the working hours for the labourers
in the country were up to 10-12 hours per day but the working hours were reduced since
the Factories Act came into force. With the technical advancements and developments,
labourers have to work with more efficiency, concentration and diligence than ever before.
To make up for the hard work, they need more time for leisure, recreation, etc., in order to
recharge themselves.

| So with the improvements, changes and automation and equipments it would not be
proper both from human and social aspects to continue with old norm of eight hours per
day, Infact the working hours should be reduced from eight to six hours in order to
___ increase the number of shifts in factories from present three to four. Tis will ७९ beneficial
as a large number of unemployed persons can be given employment in factories if the shifts
| are increased.

Therefore, in order to provide for welfare of labourers and to mitigate the
unemployment problem te some extent it is proposed to amend the Factories Act, 1948
suitably.

New Dent; BAL KRISHNA CHAUHAN
November 8, 2000



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clauses 2 to 6 of the Bill provides for reduction in the working hours of the workers
which will result in the factories running in four shifts instead of three shifts and a
consequent increase in the number of workers. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of payment of wages, etc. to the workers.
It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is likely to
be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE Factories Act, 1948
(No. 63 of 1948)

* * * . *

CHAPTER VI
WORKING HOURS OF ADULTS

. 51. No adult worker shall be required or allotted to work in a factory for more than
forty-eight hours in any week.

* * % * .

54, Subject to the provisions of section 51, no adult worker shall be required or
allowed to work in a factory for more than nine hours in any day:

Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Chief Inspector, the daily
maximum specified in this section may be exceeded in order to facilitate the change of
shifts.

55. (1) The periods of work of adult workers in a factory each day shall be so fixed
that no period stiall exceed five hours and that no worker shall work for more than five
hours before he has had an interval for rest of at least half an hour.

(2) The State Government or, subject to the control of the State Government, the
Chief Inspector, may, by written order and for the reasons specified therein, exempt any
factory from the provisions of sub-section (1) so however that the total number of hours
worked by a worker without an interval does not exceed six.

56. The periods of work of an adult worker in a factory shall be so arranged that
inclusive of his intervals for rest under section 55, they shall not spreadover more than ten
and a half hours in any day:

Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be specified in writing, increase
the spread-over up to twelve hours,

* * * * .

59, (1) Where a worker works in a factory for more than nine hours in any day or for
more than forty-eight hours in any week, he shall, in respect of overtime work, be entitled to
wages at the rate of twice his ordinary rate of wages.

* * . * ‘
CHAPTER VII नि
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS

67. No child who has not complete his fourteenth year shall be required or allowed
to work in any factory.

* * * * *

Weekly hours.

Daily hours.

Intervals for

Spreadover.

Extra wages
for overtime.

Prohibition of
Employment

of yong
children,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Factories Act, 1948.

(Shri Bal Krishna Chauhan, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5385LS—1 1-12-2000.