Bill No. 210 of 2015
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015. Short title.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  After article 16 of the Constitution, the following articles shall be inserted, namely:—
“16A. The State shall provide gainful employment to all eligible citizens:
Provided that where any eligible citizen is not provided with employment, he
shall be paid unemployment allowance at such rate, as Parliament may, by law,
determine, till he gets gainful employment.
16AA. The State shall pay subsistence allowance at such rate, as Parliament
may, by law, determine, to all citizens who cannot be provided with gainful employment
under article 16A on account of old age, sickness, disablement or any other undeserved
want.”.
Right to
Employment.
Right to
subsistence
allowance in
cases of old
age, etc.
5
Insertion of
new articles
16A and
16AA.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a fall in the employment generation in the country due to economic
slowdown throughout the world. The rate of unemployment is also on the rise in agriculture
sector, which forms the foundation of Indian economy. Owing to computerization and
industrialization, there has been industrial growth but employment opportunities have not
grown proportionately. Therefore, Government have to create more jobs in different sectors
of the economy to overcome the problem of unemployment in the country. Citizens should
be provided with suitable opportunities for gainful employment for sustaining their livelihood.
Right to employment should be made a fundamental right of the citizens so that every citizen
can get a job and contribute to the development and progress of the nation. Simultaneously,
Government should come forward to provide succor to old aged, sick and differently abled
citizens by providing subsistence allowance to such citizens so that they can also lead their
lives in a dignified manner. Such persons are equally entitled to avail opportunities for their
overall development.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to make right to
employment as a fundamental right by making a provision of —
(i) gainful employment to all eligible citizens;
(ii) unemployment allowance to eligible citizens till the time they are provided with
gainful employment; and
(iii) subsistence allowance to all citizens who cannot be provided with gainful
employment on account of old age, sickness, disablement or any other undeserved want.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
July 6, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the State shall provide gainful employment to all
eligible citizens and payment of unemployment allowance to them till they get gainful
employment. It also provides for payment of subsistence allowance to all citizens who
cannot be provided with gainful employment on account of old age, sickness, disablement or
any other undeserved want. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees one thousand crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

GMGIPMRND—1445LS(S3)—23.07.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)