1
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. In article 124, after clause (7), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(8) The Chief Justice of India shall not be eligible for further office either under
the Government of India or under the Government of any State or in any Public Sector
Undertaking after he has ceased to hold his office.
(9) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be eligible for further office either
under Government of India or under the Government of any State or in any Public
Sector Undertaking after he has ceased to hold his office.".
Bill No.  210 of  2017
Amendment
of article
124.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Independence of judiciary is an essential attribute of rule of law, which is one of the
basic features of the Constitution. Judiciary must be free from all pressures including the
pressures from executive as well as psychological pressure on the Judges related to their
future after retirement. The Judges are required to ensure the independence and impartiality
of judiciary by keeping themselves free from any allurement of employment under the
Government after their retirement.
The Constitution, specifically prohibits the Chairman of Union Public Service
Commission and its Members, the Chairman of the State Public Service Commission and its
Members for further employment either under the Government of India or under the
Government of any State. The Constitution, on the other hand, nowhere restricts or prohibits
retired Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme Court to hold further office/employment
either under the Government of India or under any of the State Governments.
The Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme Court, the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, the Chairman of Union Public Service Commission, the Chairman of the
State Public Service Commission and the Members of these Commissions are constitutional
functionaries and they should be kept free from all kinds of allurement of employment under
the Government after cessation of their office. It is presumed that reappointment of Judges
would have effect of undermining the independence and fairness of judiciary.
The Constitution prohibits the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the Chairman,
Public Service Commission and its members from getting employment after cessation of their
office. However, no such bar is there with regard to the Chief Justice and the judges of the
Supreme Court.
In the present scenario, the Chief Justice and Judges are getting handsome salaries,
other amenities, perks and post retirement benefits. The Chief Justice and Judges of the
Supreme Court are adjudicating the rights of citizens which have been jeopardized by the
Government. The Judges are coming in contact with the Government on every step. As such
need of the moment is to introduce a provision in the Constitution of India for prohibition to
hold any office employment by retired Chief Justices and Judges of the Supreme Court under
the Government of India or under the Government of State.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI LEKHI
November 23, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
CHAPTER IV .— THE UNION JUDICIARY
124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges.
* * * * * *
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act
in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.
* * * * * *
3
Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4134LS(S3)—08-12-2017.