15 of 
1948. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
2 ... 
Bill No. 210 of 1985. 
THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1985 
~ , 
l ~ > 
A 
" . 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act, may be called the Industrial Finance Corporation 
(Amendment) Act, 1985. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
Z. In section 2. of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (c) ,-
(a) for sub-clause (v), the following slIb-clause shall be 
stituted, namely:-
1948 
sub-
.. (v) the generatiOn, storage or distribution of electricity 
or any other form of energy;"; 
(b) in sub-clause (vii), for the word "machinery", the words 
15 "machinery or equipment" shall be substituted; 
(c) for sub-clause (ix), the following SUb-clause shall be sub-
Btituted, namely: - . 
"(i,'t:) the setting up of, Or development of, an industrial are. 
or an industrial estate;"; 
Short title 
aDd 
commence-
ment. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 2. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 4. 
2 
(d) in sub-clause (xi), the word "or" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(e) for sub-clause (Xii) and the Explanation below that sub-
clause, the following sub-clauses and Explanation shall be substi-
tuted, namely:- 5 
'(xii) providing engineering, technical, financial, manage-
ment, marketing or other services or facilities for industry; 
(xiii) providing medical. health or other allied services; 
(Xtv) providing services relating to information technology, 
tele-communication or electronics; 10 
(xv) leasing, sub-leasing or giving on hire or hire-purchase 
of industrial plants. equipments, machinery or other assets, 
including vehicles., ships and aircraft; 
(xvio) such other activity as the Central Government may, 
having regard to the objects of this Act, by notification in the 15 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; or 
(xvii) the research and development of any concept. tech-
nology, design, process or prod.uct, whether in relation to any 
of the matters aforesaid, including any activities specified under 
sub-clause (xvi), or any other matter. 20 
Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-clause (i) " the expres-
sion "processing of ioods" includes any art or process for pro-
ducing, preparing or making an article by subjecting any ma-
terial to a manual, mechanical. chemical, electrical or any other 
like operation;'. 25 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act,-after sub-section (IC), tbe follow-
. ing 8ub-sel'ti~ns shall be inserted, namely:-
"(1D) On or after th~ commencement of the Industria IFinance 
Corporation (Amendment) Act. 1985, the authoriled capital of the 
Corporation may be increased to such amount not exceeding two 30 
hundred and tifty crores of rupees as the Central Government may. 
from til .. .: tu time b~' nfo tltl4,,.jOl1 in tile otIidaI Gazette, fix. 
(IE) The RuthoriSt"d capital increased under sub-section (18B) 
shall be divided into such number of shares of five thousand rupees 
tar.t 8.'1 u:.ay be ~~~a,~', sud file s .... ~ reprefltnting the Cllpifftl 1110 35 
increased may be iSllued with the 8 ... ctif;)" of *~ C.,~tral Government 
as all~ when the Corporation may deem fit.". 

4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) for clause (a). t~e following clause shall 'be substituted, 
namely:-
"(a) a Chairman and a Managing Director to be appointed 
5 by the Central Government after consultation with the Develop-
ment Bank: 
Provided that the same person may be appointed to function 
both as Chairman and as Managing Director."; 
(b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
lu namely:-
'.' (bb) one Director nominated by the Reserve Bank;". 
5. In section lOA of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "Chairman of the Board" 
thp. words "or the Managing Director and, in a case where the same 
person is appointed to function both as Chairman and as Managing 
Director, such person" shall be insertE:d; 
(b) for sUb-section (2), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(2) The Chairman and the Managing Director shall hold 
20 office for such term not exceeding five years as the Central Gov-
ernment may specify in this behalf and shall be eligible for re-
appointment."; 
(c) in sub-section (2A),-. 
(i) for the word "Chairman", at both the places where it 
25 occurs, the words "Chairman or the Managing Director" shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) for the words 1'specified in", at both the places where 
they occur, the words "specified under" shall be substituted; 
(d) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be in-
30 serted, namely:-
35 
45 
"(3A) The Managing Director shall exercise such powers 
and discharge such duties as are assigned to him by this Act or 
as may be delegated to him by the Board or the Chairman."; 
(e) in su'b-section (4), for the portion beginning with the words 
"If the Chairman is of opinion" and ending with the words "the 
Chairman may take such action", the following shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Notwithstanding .!&nything cpntained in sUib.ection (3), the 
Chairman or, in his absence, the Managing Director, is 
of opinion that circumstances exist which render it necessary 
for him to take immediate action in respect of any matter which 
IS within the competence of the Board and that the interests of 
the Corporation may be prejudicially affected if such action is 
deferred until after the next meeting of the Board, then he may 
take such action". 
8. In section 11 of the principal Act,-
(4) in SUb-section (2). for the words "four years", the words 
"three years" shall be SUbstituted; 
Amend-
ment of 
section 10. 
Amend-
mental 
seiiion 
lOA. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 11. 

4 
(b) in the proviso to sub-section (4), for the word "Chairman", 
the words "Managing Director" shall be substituted. 
Amend- 7. In section 12 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after the words 
mentof "the Chairman", the words "or the Managing Director" shall be in-
section 12, serted. 5 
Amend- 8. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words 
ment of "the Chairman", the words "or the Managing Director" shall be in-
section 13, serted, 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
13A. 
Amend-
mentof 
lectloD 17. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 19, 
Amend-
mentof 
aection 20. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 11. 
9. In section 13A of the principal Act. after the word "Board". 
the words "or the Managing Director" shall be inserted. 10 
10. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(5) The Chairman or, if for any reason he is unable to 
attend a meeting of the Board. the Managing Director or, in the 15 
event of both the Cha'innan and the Managing Director being 
unable to attend such meeting, any other Director nominated by 
the Chairman in this behalf and in the absence of such nomination 
any Director elected by the Directors present from among them- ' 
selves, shall preside at the meeting."; 20 
(b) in sub-section (6) ,-
(i) after the word, brackets and letter "clause (b)" at 
both the places where they occur, the words, brackets and letters 
"or clause (bb)" shall be inserted; 
(ii) after the words "Central Government", the words "or 25 
the Reserve Bank" shall be inserted. 
11. In section 19 of the principal Act, after the words "State· Co-
operative Bank", the words "or, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, 
with any bank outside India" shall be added. 
12. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words "the shares of any 30 
financial institution which the Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Development Bank, notify in this behalf", the words "the units 
of the said Unit Trust of India, or the shares, bonds or debentures of any 
financial or development institution or organisation" shall be substituted. 
13. In section 21 of the p.rincipal Ac.t,-
(a) in sUb-section (3), the proviso shall be omitted; 
35 
(b) in suh-section (4), for the words "or, with the genel'8l or 
special approval of the Central Govemment, from any other 
authority or institution in India", the words, "the Life In-
sur¥ce Corporation of India est.ablished under section 3 of the Life 40 
Insurance Corporaticn Ad, 1958, the General Insurance Corporation 31 of 1956. 
of India formed ~nd registered under the Companies Act, 1958, the lor 1956, 
Unit Trust of India established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of 
adia Att., 1963. or, witb the general Or special approval of the Cen- 52 or 1963. 
tnl Govemment, from IIny other authority, institution, organisation 45 
or tl'Wlt within or outside India" shall be substituted. 

lof 1956. 
I 
1(. In section 23' of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (a), in sub-clause (ii), the word "State" shall ·be 
omitted; 
(b) in clause (e) ,_. 
5 (i) after the word "Development", the words "or any other 
international or national institution or organisation" shall be 
inserted; 
(ii) for the words "or debentures subscribed, by either of 
them", the words "or stocks, shares, bonds or debentures sub-
In scribed, by any of them or on their behalf' shall be substituted; 
(e) in clause (k) ,-
(i) after the word "technical", the words ", legal, marketing" 
shall be inserted; 
(ii) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted. 
15 namely:-
20 
"(1) providing consultancy and merchant banking ser-
vices "in and outside India;". 
15. In section 30A of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Directors of that indus-
trial concern", the words "Directors, or. as the case may be. the 
Administrator of that industrial concern" shall be 'Substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words ",firm or company to be 
the managing agents". the words "to be the Manager" shall be sub-
stituted. 
18. In section 30B of the principal Act,-
Amend-
mentof 
stction 23. 
Amend-
mentof 
aection 
30A. 
Amend-
mentof 
(a) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted. section 
namely: - 30B. 
"(a) all persons holding, immediately before the issue of 
the notified order, office as Directors of the industrial concern 
30 or any other offices entitling them to exercise powers of superin-
tendence, direction .and control of the 'industrial concern, shall 
be deemed. to have vacated their offices as suck;"; 
(b) in clause (b). the words "any Managing Agent or" shall be 
omitted: 
35 (e) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(c) the Manager, if any, appointed under section 30A, shall 
be deemed to have been appointed in pursuance of the provi-
sions of the Cempanies Act, 1956 and the memorandum and arti-
cles of asociation of, the industrial concern or. as· the case may 
be, of any law for tbe tim~ being in force relating to co-opera-
tive societies and the memorandum or other instrument of, the 
industrial concern, and toe proviSions of the said Act or law, 
and of the memorandum and articles of association, or, as. the 

Amend-
mentof 
lection 
3OC. 
AmeDd-
meat of 
lIeCtioa 
30D. 
Amcnd-
meat of 
section 38A 
AIDe.Dd-
meat 01 
IeCtioa 40A 
Amead-
mentof 
eectioD 
43. 
II 
case m,ay be.. memorandum or otber' instrument shall, subject 
to the otber provisions contained in this Act, apply accordingly, 
but no such Manager shall be removed from office except with 
the previous consent of the Corporation;"; 
(d) in clause (d), for the word "Directol'l", at both the places .1 
where it occurs, the words "Directors or, as the case may be, Ad-
ministrator" shall be substituted; 
(e) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted.. 
namely:-
.. (e) the Directors appointed under section 30A shall, for all 10 
purp068s, be the Directors of the industrial eoncern duly constituted 
under the Companies Act, 1956 or under any law for the time 1 of 1966. 
being in force relating to co-operative societies, and such Direc-
tors or, as the case may be, the Administrator appointed under 
section 3OA, shall alone be entitled to exercise all the powers 15 
of the Directors (by whatever name called) of the industrial 
concern, whether such powers are derived from the said Act or 
the law or the memorandum or articles of association or. as the 
case may be, the memorandum or other instrument of the indus-
trial concern;" 20 
17. In section 30C of the principal Act, in sub-sections (l) and (2), for 
the word "Directors", the .words "Directors or Administrator" shall be 
substituted. 
18. In section 30D of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words 'ino managing agent, 25 
Managing Director or any other Director of an industrial con-
cern", the words "no Managing Director or any other' DireCtor or 
Manager or holder of any office having the powers of superintendence, 
direction and control of an industrial concern" shall be substituted; 
(b) in SUb-section (2), for the words "managing agent or Manag- 30 
ing Director or any other Director", the words "Managing Director 
or any other Director or Manager or holder of oftlce refeITed to in that 
RUb-section" shall be stlbstituted .. 
19. In section 3'8A of the -principal Act, after the word "Director", at 
both the places where it occurs, the words "or Administrator" shall be 35 
inserted. 
20. In section 40A of the principal Act, after the words "the Chair-
man"; the words "Managing Director" shall be inserted. 
21. In section 43 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1) after the ~ords uDeveloptnent Bank" the 4<> 
words "and by notification in the Oftlclal Gazette" shall be inserted. 
(b) in sUb-section (2),,-
(i) in clause (ee), after tb~ Word "Chalrman" the words ", 
Managing Director" shall be Inserted; 
(ii) in clause (m), after the word "Diretrto~ th, words 45 
"or Administrator'l shall be il1Serted. 

5 
10 
20 
'1 
22. For the Schedule to 1ihe principal Act, the following Schedule shall 
be substitutecl, nAmely:"""-
"THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 39 (3)] 
Dlx::LARATIOIN ON FmELITY AND SEcRECY 
I, ........... '" .. :'" do hereby declare that I will faithfully, 
truly and to the best of my skill and ability execute and perform 
the duties required of me as Director, member of ........ committ~, 
auditor, ofllcer or other employee (as the case may be) of the Indus-
trial Finance Corporation of India and which preperly relate to the 
office or position held by me in or in relation to the said Corporation. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be 
communicated to any person not legally entitled thereto any infor-
mation relating to the affairs of the Industrial Finance Corporation 
of India or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the 
said Corporation, nor will I allow any such person to inspect or have 
access to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession 
of the said Corporation and relating to the bus'iness of the said Cor-
poration or the business of any person having any dealing with the 
said Corporation. 
Signed before me. 
Signature ......... . 
Date .. ' " ........ .". 
Subitieu-
tiCJD 
ofSclae-
dale 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Industrial Finance Corporation of IndiBi was set up in 1948 as 
an All-India Term Lending Institution. Its operations and activities have 
expanded considerably over the years. In or~er to cope up with this ex-
panding role and in the light of the experience gained in the functioning 
of the Corporation, since the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 
was last amended in 19B2, it has become necessary to make some amend-
ments in the Act. 
2·. The amendments are mainly aimed at enlarging the area of opera-
tions of the Corporation in view of the rapid technological developments 
in the industrial field, augmenting its resources, re-organising its manage-
ment pattern, ann removing certain unnecessary restrictions in the pro-
cedural arid operational matters of the Corporation. The main. proposals 
for the ~mendments are as follows:-
(a) Industrial Finance Corporation of India provides various types 
'of facilities to 'industrial concerns'. The present definition of 'indus-
trial concern' as contained in the Industrial Finance Corporation Act 
does not cover many important activities .. It is, therefore. proposed to 
widen tl)e definition of 'industrial concern' by including the concerns 
engaged. inter alia, in areas such as setting up of hospitals and provid-
ing medical services, providin!! telecommunication and electronics ser-
vices and leasing of plants and equipments, etc. It is also envisaged 
to provide fo!' an enablin~ clause so as to confer powers on the Cen-
tral Government to direct the Corporation to undertake any other 
activity which the Central Government may notify. 
(b) In vipw of the constantJy expanding business of the Corpora-
tion and th£' increasing cost or the projects, it is propoc;ed to raise the 
authorised capital of the Corporation from the present limit of Rs. 
100 crores to an amount not ext'eeding Rs. 250 crores as may be fixed 
by the Central Government hy notification. from time to tim.e. 
(c) At present. the Act enablec; the Central Government to ap· 
point a whole-time Cliairman of the Corporation. It i!; proposed to 
provide for thp. office of the Managing Director al!;o. on the same 
pattern as in the case of the Industrial Development Bank of· India. 
Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India and the nationalised banks. 
This wilJ provide v,reater fle:v.il)i1itv to the Government to appoint 
a separate Mnnaf.!in~ Directt'T" if felt necessarY. It iq alRo proposed 
to. have n Director no.minated hv the Reserve Bank of India on the 
Bo:trd of the Corporation. 
(d) The Act. at present. enables the Corporation to. open Deposit 
Accounts with the Reserve ~ank of IndiR or its aftencv or with a 
!':ched111pd bank or It State cnoperathre bank. For better mana~ement 
of its operations of borrowine'i. lendinv. and renavinp. in forei~ cur-
rency. it is proposed that the C"('rporntion mn~T open Deposit ACCOtlnt~ 
8 

with any other bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve 
Bank. 
(e) Presently the Corporation is authorised to invest in the skares 
of any financial institution notified by Central Government. WIth a 
view to enlarge the scope of activities of the Corporation, it is' pro-
posed that the Curporation could subscribe to the shares, bonds, de-
bentures of an!~ financial Or development institution or organisation. 
(f) With a view to provide more flexibility to the Corporation in 
raising resources, it is proposed to remove the present limit of Rs. 15 
crores on borro',,; ings by the Corporation, from the Reserve Bank of 
India. 
(g) It is proposed to make an enabling provision in the Act so as 
to authorise the Corporation to borrow money from the Life In-
surance Corporation of India, the General Insurance Corporation of 
India and the Unit Trust of lndia as alBo from any authority, institu-
tion, organisation or trust in or outside India with the approval of the 
Central Government besides borrowin~ from Central Government or 
the Industrial Development Bank of India. 
(h) At present the -CorpCJl.'ation has no power to guarantee loans 
raised by industrial concerns from cooperative banks other than State 
cooperative banks. In order to provide far greater flexibility to the 
Corporation, it is proposed to enable the Corporation to guarantee 
loans raised from any cooperative bank. 
(i) The Corporation can act as an agent of the Central Govern-
ment or with its approval for the International Bank for Reconstruc-
tion and Development. It is proposed to enable the Corporation to 
act as an agent for any other national or international institution or 
organisation with the approval of the Central Government. 
(j) It is proposed to widen the scope of assistance of the Cor-
poration to industrial concc.:ns by prOViding that the Corporation can 
give 'legal and marketing' assistance to the industrial concerns u 
also consultancy and merchant bankin:g services in or outside India. 
(k) As the institution of "managing agent" has been abolished, it 
is. proposed to omit the references to managing agents in sections 30A 
to 30D of the Act and make the necessary consequential changes 
therein. 
(1) The form of declaration of fidelity and secrecy contained in 
the Schedule to the Act is proposed to be substituted so as to bring 
it in line with that contajned in the Industrial Development Bank 
of India Act, 1 ~64. 
(m) The other changes proposed in the Act are of a minor or 
consequential nature. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
The 13th December, 1985. 

FINANCIAL MEMoRANDUM 
CODSequetlt to the amendment proposed in clause 3 of the 8&, the 
authorised. capital of the Industrial Finance Corporation of Indb may be 
increased· to such amoun't not exceeding Rs. 250 crores as the Ceh"fral G0-
vernment may fix from time to time by notiftcation in the OffiCial'Gazeite. 
Since under section 5 of ~he Indu~trial Finance 'Corporation Act, 'r94B, 'the 
shares of the Corporation shall be guaranteed by the Central Government 
as to the repayment of tbe ,principal and the payment of an annual divi-
dend at such minimum rate a..c; may be fixed by the Central Government 
at the time of issu.mg the shares, when the Corporation issues further 
shares, the Central Government shall have to give similar guarantees for 
the shares so i~s'..led. Furtber, in the event of the Central Government at 
any time, deciding, in terms of section 36 (1) of the Act, to aequire 
the shores held by shareholders other than the Industrial Development 
Bank of India, the Central Government will be required to pay to the 
shiueholders an arn·oUllt equal to the paid-up value of 'the -shares ·together 
with a premium calculated at the rate of one per cent. ofthepaid-ul'va1ue 
for. every year from the date of i!lsue to the date of acqubitionbY the 
Central Government, subject to a maximum of ten per cent. 'in Such 
eventuality, to the extent of additional shares issued out oftlie inereUed 
authorised capital, the liability of the Central Government will increase. 
2. Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21(3)(b) of the Act to 
delete the proviso in the section which provides that the Corporation 
cannot borrow more than Rs. 1!) ('rores from the Raerve Bank of tndia 
for carrying out its functions. The bonds and debentures of the C~lpora­
tidtl referred to in the 'SeCtion are guaranteed by the Central Government 
in terms of sub-section (2) of section 21 as to the repayment of the 'ptin-
cipal and interest. Tt is, therefore, likely that the corrtigent JiabiHties of 
the Central Government In respect of. the guarantees Will alsO be in-
creased. 
'3. The financial implication arising out of clause 3 and clause 13 of 
the Bill are not capable of being quantified at this stage. 
10 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill ~k~ to insert a new su~clause (xvii) in clause 
(c) of section 2 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948, em-
powering the Central Governmcm.t ·to ir:lCl~4e within the definition of 
"industrial concerp", by notjfication in the Official Gazette any other 
activity, having regard to the objects of the Act. 
2. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks t8 empower the Central Go'Yermnent to 
Increase the authorised capital of the Industrial Finance Corporation of 
India, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette. The 
pOw~l' ~~nferred on the Central Government by this ~use is subject to 
the z;I,ljlxi}n~ limit of two hundred and fifty crores of rupees. 
3. At present under section 30A of the Act, the Corporation has power 
to appoint Directors of an industrW concern when management is taM» 
over. With a view to securiJ;lg greater flexibility, particularly in the cue 
of industrial concerns which are cooperative societies, clauSe 15 of the 
_ Bill :.eeks to give ohoice to th~ ~~al GP.v.~~t to aPP.qint e1ther 
Directors or an Administrator. 
4. Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to make the necessary oonaequential 
ameJ)..c:b:p.e~t in eC;~Qn 30C of the Act to provide for the prescribing by 
rul", QJ' r:.~~tJon.s the powers and duties of such ~dminis~tors. 
5. The delegation of the legislative power under clauses 2, 3 and 4 
Of the BID is nonnaI in chuacter. 

Board of 
Directan. 
ANNEXURE 
Ex'DtACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1948 
(15 or 1948) 
• • • • 
z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
• • • • 
(c) "industrial concern" means any limited company or c0-
operative society incorporated by a Central Act or an Act of the 
Legislature of a State 01' under any law for the time being in force 
and registered in India which is engaged or is to be engaged tn-
· . . ~ . 
(v) the generation or distribution of electricity or any 
other fonn of power; 
• ., • • 
(vii) the maintenance, repair. testing or servicing of machi-
nery of any description or vehicles or vessels or motor-boats or 
trailers or tractors; 
• •• • • • 
(ix) the development of any contiguous area of land as an 
lndustrial estate; . 
• • • • 
(xi) providing special or technical knowledge or other Ber-
vices for the promotion of industrial growth; or 
(xii) the research and development of any process or product 
in relation to any of the matters aforesaid. 
Expla.nGtion.-The expression "processing of goods" includes any 
art or process for produclng, preparing or making an article by 
subjecting any material to a manual, mechanical, chemical, electrical 
or any other like operation; 
• • • • • 
It, (1) The Board of Directors shall consist of the following 
name1y:-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government 
after consultation with the Development Bank; 
• • • • 
12 

13 
leA. (1) The Chairman of the Board shall receive such salary and al- 0Wrmu 
lowances as may be determined by the Development Bank with the ap- of tile 
prova} of th~ Central Government. Board. 
(2) The Chairman shall hold office for four years or until his IUC-
cessor is appointed and shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(2A) Notwithstandjng anything contained in su.b-section (2), the 
,Central Government shall have the right to terminate the term of offtce 
of the Chairman at any time before the expiry of the term specified 
in sub-sectiofl (2) by gjvin~ him notiee of not less than three months in 
writing or three months' salary and allowances in lieu of such notice; 
and the Chairman shall also have the right to relinquish his offce at 
any time before the expiry of the term specified in sub-section. (2) by 
giving to the C~ntral Government notice of not less than three months 
In writing. 
(3) The Chairman shall exercise such powers and oh;(,l1::trge such 
duties as are assigned to him by this Act or as may be delegated to 
him by the Board. 
(4) If the Chairman is of opinion that circumstances exist which 
render it necessary for him to take immediate action in respect of any 
matter which is within the competence of the Board and that the 
interests of the Corporation may be prejudicially affected if such action 
{s deferred until after the next meeting of the Board then, notwith-
standing anything contained in sub-section (3), the Chairman may take 
such action in rr'!1nf'rt or that matter as he deems necessary and for such 
plJrpose, he mav exercise all powers and do all acts and things which 
may be exercised or done bv the Board. but in every such case, he 
shall. as SOon as may be, after the action is taken. make a written 
report to the Board containing a statement of the action taken and 
the circumstances under which it was taken. 
11. (1) • • • • • 
(2) An elf!cted Director !;halJ hold office for four years: 
Provided thl:1t one out of the two T)jrectors elected to rel)l"esent the 
shareholders refelTed to in each of the clauses (e), (d) and (e) of 
secfion 10 shall retire at the end of two vears after the ftrst election: 
the Director so to retire shall be determined by lot: 
Provided further that an elected Director shall be required to continue 
in his offi,~e until his !':uccessnr has been elected: 
Provided further that such a Director shall be elhtible for r~tectfon 
for not more than two full Ct'nsecutive terms after the rotattnn of 
elected Director!': has begun. 
• • • • 
(4) Directors shall be naid such fees ae; mav be prpscrib~ct for attentl-
inl! the. mt:!ptinp<: nf tl.p BnRret ;.lnrl ';, t.hev are mpmbe" of anv Com-
mittee apDOinted by the Corporation, for a,ttendlng meetln~ of sucb 
Committee: 
Term of 
ofIk:e IUId 
retlremeat 
of DirecIon. 

DisqualiJi-
~mot\. 
Removal 
of Director 
from office. 
Casual 
vacancy of 
Chairman. 
lIIeetinls 
of Board. 
Deposit 
Accounts. 
Inveet-
mentof· 
funds. 
14 
~ov\w. \h_ 'N)\'t\'m.," \n \'n.u. m'cHlect\on shall apply to the Chair-
aan Ot' to any otner D\.ret.\Of wno 'is a 8el'Vant ot tbe Government ~ of 
the Development Bank. 
12. No person shall be a Director who-
(a.) except in the case of the Chainnan IS a salaried oftlcia1 of 
the COl:poratiGl'l; or 
• • • • • 
1M. 1£ the ct.airman or the Board is by infirmity or otherwise ren-
DeYelopment Bank at any time remove the Chairman from ofD.ce: 
Provided that no person shall be removed from his offtce, under this 
sub-section, unless he has been given an opportunity of showiqg. ca~ 
against his removal. 
• • • • 
13A. If the Chairman of the Board ill by infirmity or otherwi~e ren-
d~red iD;capable of carrying out his c1uties or is absent on leave or other-
wi~ in circumstances not involving the vacaHon of his appointment, the 
. Central Government may, after consultation witli the Devitlopment Bank: 
appoint anoth~r person 'to act in his place during his abllence. 
• • • • 
17. (I) • • • • • 
(5) If fOr any reason the Chairman is unable to be present at A 
meeting of the Board: R Director authorised bv the Chainnan in . wrlt-
. fng in tMs behalf. shall preside at that meetinc;t and in default of such 
authorisation, the Board may elect a Director to reeide at that meatng. 
(6) If. for anv reason, a Director nominated un~er claus~ (aa) or 
clause (b) of section 10 is unable to attend any meE'tinE! of the Board. 
the DevelODmp.nt Bank or ttle Central Government, AS the CMe may be, 
may depute any "ther ~tson to attencJ the ~atd meet.in~ an~ such 
Denon ,wlt· for a.U mtrQPtSes of the :laid meeting. he deemed to be a 
TliNctor .tWJnina~dun~~r clause (atJ) o~ clause (b,. AS the ease may 
be. of the said ~o.n . 
• • • • 
19. The Corporation mav onen DepoBft Accounts with the Reset'vp. 
B4nk or wi~h 81lY aSlencv t)f the ~eserve Bank other th~n a Govern-
. mE!nt trea!'ln~ or '\1I.-i1:h ~ sch:'du1pd h!\nk OT' l'I Statp (!o-operlttfve baTlk. 
20. The Corporation. mav invest its funds in the securities r4 the 
C"ntral Govemment or of any State Government and mav. with the 
aDDroval of the Central Go~mment. contrtbute to the inft{al cIDltal 
·of the Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of Indi~ 
·Aot. 1.96~and' the COT'POration mav also subscribe to. oJ' nut'chase. the 
·sha~ of any flrt~lld,al institution which the Central C'70vernmttnt may, 
in consultation with the Development Bank, notify in this behalf. 
52 of 1983. 

,t1. (1) • • • • . , 
(3) The Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its func-
tions under this Act, borrow money from the Reserve Bank,-
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of ftxed periods not 
e'xceeding ninety days from the dat~ on Which the rndtl~ is so 
borrowed, against securities of the Central GovernMent or of any 
State Government; or 
(b) repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding 
eighteen months from the date on which the mon.ey is so borrow-
ed, against securities of the Central Government of any maturity 
or against bonds and debentures issiled by th~ Corporation unc!er 
SUb-section (1) and guaranteed by theCerttl'ai GoVernment and 
maturing within a period not exceeding eighteen months from the 
date on which the money is so borrowed: 
Provided that the amount borrowed by the Corporation under clause 
(b) shall not at any time exceed fifteen ct'Ores of ru~ in the aggre-
gate. 
(4) The Corporation may also, for the purpose of carrying out its 
fUnctiol'ls under this Act, borrow tnoney from the Cen'U'alGovemment 
'01' the D~elopmE!tltBank or, W'fth the general or speciaJ approval of 
the Central Government, fI"om any ot~ authoritybr i~tutton in 
India on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon: 
• • • .. '* 
23. The Corporation shall, subject to the proviSions (}f this Act, be Busi. 
authorised to carry on and transact the following kinds of business, ness which 
n'amely:- the 
(a) guaranteeing,-
• • • • 
(ii) loaM rllised by industrial .roneems from sCheduled 
banks, State Co-operative Banks or such other financial institu-
tidnsasn'iay 'be notified by the central Govemm~t in this 
behalf; 
• • • • 
(e) acting as agent for the Central Government or, with its 
approval, for the International Bank for Reconstruction and Deve-
lopment in the transaction of any business with an industrial con-. 
cern in respect of loans or' advances granted, or debentures sub-
scribed, by either of them; 
• • • • • 
(k) pro"td.ing technical and administrative assistance to any 
industrial concern for the prOrhotion, management or expansion of 
any industry; 
(1) undertakine merchant banking operations; 
Corpora_ 
tionmay 
transact . 

PoWKof 
Corpora-
tiontG 
appoint 
Directon 
otan 
bIduatrid 
COIICtI1l 
... 
1D8.IIIF-
IIIeDt • 
tatoo 
O¥er. 
Elect· 
oiDOti-
ftedorder 
a,poJatin, 
DlNcton. 
11. 
3OA. U) When the management of an industrial concern is taken over 
by the Corporation, the Corporation may, by order notified in the Official 
Gazette, appoint as many persons as it thinks fit to be the Directors of 
that industrial concern and nothing in the Companies Act, 1956, or in 
any such law or instrument relating to the industrial concern in so far 
as it makes, in relation to a Director, any provision for the holding 
ol any share qualification, age limit, restrictions on the number of direc-
torships, retirement by rotation or removal from offi,ce shall apply to 
any Director appointed by the Corporation under this section. 
(2) The power to appoint Directors under this section includes the 
power to appoint any individual, firm or compjllly to be the managing 
agents of the industrial concern' on such terms and conditions as the 
Corporation may think fit. 
3OB. On the issue of a notified order under section 30A.-
(a) all persons holding office as Directors of the industrial 
concern immediately before the issue of the notifted order shall be 
deemed to have vacated, their offices as such; 
(0) any contract of management between the industrial concern 
and any managing agent or any Director thereof holding office as 
such immediately before the issue of the notified order shall be 
deemed to have terminated; 
(c) the managing 'agent, if any, appointed under section 30A 
shall be deemed to have been duly appointed in pursuance of the 
Companies Act, 1956 and the memorandum and articles of associa-
tion of the industria} concern and the provisions of the said Act 
and of the memorandwn and articles shall, subject to the other 
provisions contained in this Act, apply accordingly, but no such 
managing agent shall be removed from office except with the pre-
vious consent of the Corporation; 
(d) the Directors appointed under section 30A shall take such 
steps as may be necessary to take into their custody or other their 
control all the property, effects and actionable claims to ~hich the 
industrial concern is, or appears to be, entitled, and all the propEU"ty 
and effect.s of the industrial concern shall be deemed to be in the 
custody of the Directors as from the date of the notified order; 
(e) the Directors appointed under section 30A shall be" for all 
purposes, the Directors of the industrial concern duly constituted 
under the Companies Act, 1956 and shall alone be entitled to exer-
cise all the powers of the Directors of the industrial concern, whe-
ther such powers are derived from the said Act or from the memo-
randum or articles of association of the industrial concern or from 
any other source. 
3OC. (1) 'Subject to the control.of the '. Corporation, the Directors 
appoinied under section 30A shall take sueh steps as may be necessary 
for the purpose of efficiently managing the business of the industrial 
concern and shall exercise such powers and have such duties alt may 
be prescribed. 
1 of 19$6. 
1 of 1956. 
t of 19$6. 

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers vested in them 
under sub-section (1), the Directors appointed. under section 30A may, 
with the previous approval of the Corporation, make an application to 
a Court for the purpose of cancelling or varying any contract or agree-
ment entered into, at any time before the issue of the notified order 
uhder section 3OA, between the industrial concem and any other person 
.and the Court may, if satisfied: after due inquiry that such contract or 
agreement had been entered into in bad faith and is detrimental to the 
interests of the industrial concern, make an order cancelling or vary-
ing (either unconditionally or subject to such 'conditions as it may think 
fit to impose) that contract or agreement and the contract or agreement 
shall have effect" accordingly. 
=->. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force, no managing agent, Managing Director or any other 
Director of an industrial concern shall be entitled to any compensation 
for the loss of office or for the premature tennination und'V this Act 
of any contract of management entered into by him with such concern. 
(2) Nothing contained in sUb-section (1) shall aftect the right of any 
such managing agent or Managing Director or any other Dirt!Ctor to 
recover· from the industrial concern moneys recoverable otherwise than 
by way of such compensation. 
lit ... • • ... 
38A. No suit. prosecution or other lega] proceeding shall lie against 
any Director of any industrial concern appointed by the Corporation 
under section 25 or section 30A for anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done by him as such Director. 
40A. T~e Board may, i_,y general or special order, delegate to the 
Chairman or any oftlcer of the Corporation, subject to s~h conditions 
and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, sueh of its 
powers and duties under this Act as it may deem necessary . 
.. .. .. • .. 
43. (1) ThE.> Board may, with the previous approval of the Development 
Bank make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or 
expedient for thE.> purpose of Riving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In paniculClr and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, RUC1': r(>~ulatlo~!> may provide fot"-
(ee~ the delegation of powers and functions of the Board to the 
Chairm~m or to officers of t'l(' Corporation; 
• • • • 
(m) the taking over of the managing of any industrial concern 
on a breach of its agreement with the Corporation and the powers 
and duties of Directors under section 3OC; 
lit • • • • 
Norigbt 
tocompen-
IatioD 
fortermi-
uatiOnof 
c:ontract of 
!ID8IIag;DI 
.,CDts. 
Pmfec:tion of 
IMltion taten 
!by Director 
aJlPOinff'd 
uDder wee-
tions 25 and 
30A. 
DelepllOD 
ofpowen. 
Power of 
Board eo 
make relUla-
tlons. 

18 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 39 (3')] 
OI:cLAaATION OF FIDELITY AND SIlCRIICY 
I, ................ , do declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the 
best of my judgment, sldll and, ability, execute and perform the duties 
required of me as a Director, officer, employee or auditor (as the case 
may be) of the Industrial Finance Corporation of India and which pro-
perly relate to any office or position in the IBid Corporation held by 
me 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com-
municated to any person not legally entiUed thereto any information 
relating to the affairs of the Corporation nor will I allow any such person 
to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or 
in the possession of the Corporation and relating to the business of the 
COiporation. 
Signature .. .......... . 
Signed before me. 
Date ............... . 

LOR SABHA 
.6: 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948. 
(Shri Vishwanath Prata.p $if&(lh, Minister at .Fi.tt4~.) I .. 