THE FARMERS WELFARE BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a National Commission for the welfare of farmers
and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the SeventiethYear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Farmers Welfare Act, 2019.
 (2) It extends to the whole of  India.
2.   In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
S-3\F\BILL2019\2828LS
Bill No. 210 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
5

2
(ii) "National Commission" means  the National Commission for Farmers
established under section 3;
(iii) "natural calamity" includes drought, flood, cyclone, hailstorm, landslide,
cloud burst, tsunami, earthquake or fire especially in forest and adjacent areas or such
other conditions as may be notified by the appropriate Government from time to
time;
(iv) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(v) "State Commission" means the State Commission established under  section 5.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Farmers.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(i) Union Minister of Agriculture, who shall be its Chairperson, ex-officio;
(ii) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst the persons having special knowledge in the field of agriculture; and
(iii) three members representing the farmers to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Commission shall have such number of officers and staff including experts
as may be required for its efficient functioning.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the National Commission to take such steps, as it may
deem appropriate, for the welfare of farmers and their family members.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the National
Commission shall ensure the following provisions for the benefit and welfare of farmers,
namely:—
(i) good quality seeds, manure, pesticides, fertilizers and other necessary tools
and machineries at reasonable price as per their requirements;
(ii) uninterrupted power and water supply at reasonable rates for agricultural
operation;
(iii) fix and declare minimum support prices of agriculture commodities before
the sowing seasons after taking into consideration all the relevant factors and in
particular the following factors, namely:—
(a) input cost including capital investment;
(b) labour charges; and
(c) maintenance cost of the farm;
(iv) transportation and marketing facilities for agricultural produce;
(v) payment of adequate compensation to farmers or their family members
in case of accident or death during agricultural operations;
(vi) free medical and health insurance facilities to the farmers and their
family members;
(vii) adequate cold storage facility for agricultural products at appropriate places;
(viii) provision of loan facilities or financial assistance to farmers; and
(ix) provision of a comprehensive crop insurance scheme for reparation of loss
of crops due to natural calamities.
Establishment
of a National
Commission
for Farmers.
Functions of
the National
Commission.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

3
5. ( 1) There shall be established a State Commission for Farmers by the
appropriate Government in each State.
(2) Each State Commission shall work under the National Commission for
Farmers to assist it in discharge of its functions.
(3) The State Commission shall consist of—
(i) Minister of Agriculture in the State, who shall be its Chairperson, ex-officio;
(ii) three members to be appointed by the appropriate Government from
amongst the person having special knowledge in the field of agriculture; and
(iii) three members representing the farmers to be appointed by the
appropriate Government.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions
of service of the members of the State Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(5) Each State Commission shall have such number of officers and staff including
experts to be appointed by the National Commission as may be required for its efficient
functioning.
6. (1) The State Commission shall establish its District Office in every district
within its territorial jurisdiction.
(2) The District Office shall be headed by a District Officer to be appointed by
the Chairperson of the State Commission.
(3) The District Office shall maintain, review and publish a tehsilwise list of the
farmers once in every six months.
7. (1) Any farmer who intends to avail benefits under this Act shall apply to the
District Officer concerned in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The District Officer shall forward each application to the State Commission within
three days of the date of receipt of the application.
(3) The State Commission shall, after holding such enquiry as it may deem necessary,
either admit or reject the application, within thirty days from the date of receipt of  application:
Provided that in case no decision is made on an application within thirty days,
the applicant shall be deemed to be eligible for availing benefits under this Act:
Provided also that where an application is rejected by the State Commission, it
shall record, in writing, the reasons for such rejection and communicate them to the
applicant.
(4) Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Commission may prefer
an appeal to the National Commission in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the applicant shall be given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
8. The mode of providing relief or benefit to the family members, in case of
death of a farmer, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
9. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the National Commission to ensure effective
implementation and proper monitoring of the provisions in this Act.
Establishment
of a State
Commission
for Farmers.
Establishment
of District
Office by the
State
Commission.
Application
for availing
benefits.
Mode of
providing
relief or
benefit to
family
members of
farmers.
Responsibility
of the
National
Commission.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

4
(2) For the purpose of sub-section ( 1), the National Commission shall have power
to issue such directives, as it may deem appropriate, to the State Commissions.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the National
Commission and State Commissions for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
13. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
4
Central
Government to
provide
adequate
funds to the
National
Commission.
Power of the
Central
Government to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
About seventy per cent. of the population of the country lives in villages out of
which approximately ninety per cent. people are engaged in agricultural activities.
The economic condition of farmers have remained more or less unchanged so far.
They are always trapped in the vicious cycle of debt and the debt burden passes on to
their next generation. The farmers always live in penury and remain apprehensive of
their future. Therefore, the Government should take the responsibility of providing
them their minimum requirements so as to enable them to perform their agricultural
activities. The farmers work not only for earning their livelihood but they also provide
succour to the entire nation. Of late, the incidents of committing suicides by the debt
ridden farmers have increased manifold. Such cases of suicides can be avoided by
providing certain facilities to farmers. If the farmers are provided with agricultural
inputs at reasonable rates, the agricultural production will increase manifold which
will ultimately benefit not only the farmers but the whole nation. Besides, certain
other welfare measures like insurance, health service and financial assistance to farmers
will go a long way to alleviate their sufferings.
Therefore, the Bill seeks to provide certain basic facilities like compensation,
insurance cover, health services to farmers and their family members. It also provides
for supply of good quality seeds, pesticides, manure and fertilizers and uninterrupted
power and water supply, etc. to farmers for agricultural activities at reasonable cost so
that they may carry out agricultural activities in an efficient manner without any hurdle.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH
August  6, 2019.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a National Commission for
Farmers. Clause 4 provides for transportation and marketing facilities for agricultural
produce, payment of adequate compensation in case of accident or death and free
medical and health insurance facilities to the farmers and their family members.
Clause 5 provides for establishment of a State Commission for Farmers in each State.
Clause 6 provides for establishment of District Office in every district by the State
Commission. Clause 10 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
funds to the National Commission for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand and five hundred crore will be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand and five hundred
crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a National Commission for the welfare of farmers
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2828LS(S3)—23-10-2019.