1
Bill No. 211 of  2018
THE RIGHT TO DISCONNECT BILL, 2018
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish an Employees' Welfare Authority to confer the right on every employee to
disconnect from work related telephone calls and emails beyond work hours and on
holidays and right to refuse to answer calls and emails outside work hours and for
all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Right to Disconnect Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
5
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “annual report” means a report giving the details of developmental activities
taken up over the year by the Authority and detailing about targets set and achieved;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “Authority” means the Employees' Welfare Authority constituted under
section 3;
(d) “company” means an entity registered under the Companies Act, of 2013;
(e) “Out-of-work hours” means the time other than which is agreed upon, between
the employer and employee, in the work contract as the work hours;
(f) “society” means an entity registered as society under the Societies Registration
Act, of 1860; and
(g) “prescribed” means  prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority, to be known as
the Employees' Welfare Authority consisting of the following members, namely:—
(a) Minister of State, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology—
Chairperson ex-officio;
(b) Minister of State, Ministry of Communication—Vice-Chairperson
ex-officio;
(c) Minister of State, Ministry of Labour and Employment—Vice Chairperson
ex-officio;
(d) Secretaries of the Union Ministries of Electronics and Information
Technology, Communication, Labour and Employment and Statistics and Programme
Implementation—member  ex-officio;
(e) Chief Labour Commissioner—member  ex-officio;
(f) Director General, Labour Bureau—member  ex-officio;
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services of
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(2) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the members referred to in sub-
clauses (a) to (f) of section 3, shall be borne by the Ministry concerned.
5. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as may be necessary to ensure
the welfare of employees in the country and formulate a charter that outlines the terms and
conditions to be negotiated between employees and employers of a company or society,
within one year from the date of its constitution.
(2) The Authority shall disseminate any necessary knowledge and information
collected on the use of digital and communication tools, to the State Governments, to be
disseminated to the companies and societies.
Definitions.
Functions of
the Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Constitution
of the
Employees'
Welfare
Authority.
21 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(3) The rights and benefits bestowed on employees, prescribed in this Act, shall be in
addition to those already enjoyed by them under different ongoing Government employee
welfare schemes.
6. (1) The Authority shall undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data
about usage of digital and communication tools outside work hours and in personal life by all
workers either employed in a company or society, which shall be completed within one year
from the date of its constitution.
(2) The Authority may direct the appropriate Government, societies and companies to
assist in conducting the baseline study.
7. Every employee shall have the right to disconnect out of work hours.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section:—
(a) 'right to disconnect' means that while the employer may contact the worker
after work hours, the employee is not obliged to reply or shall have right to refuse to
answer such calls; and
(b) In case an employee refuses to reply any call during out-of-work hours, such
employee shall not be subject to any disciplinary action by the employer.
8. (1) The Authority shall direct every individual, company and society having more
than ten employees to conduct negotiations with employees, unions or employee
representatives to decide the terms and conditions for working out-of-work hours:
Provided that the right to disconnect rules and protocols shall be negotiated at the
level of individual company or society taking into consideration the diverse work cultures of
different entities and their competitive needs.
(2) The individual registered entity (company or society) shall produce its own Charter
detailing clarification on the out-of-work hours, service conditions of employees and the
respective demands of the employers.
9. (1) The Charter of individual entity made under sub-section ( 2) of section 8 shall
identify on an individual basis, as to when an employee be contacted during out-of-work
hours and holidays which are arrived at through negotiations and mutual agreement of
employer and employee.
(2) Every employee shall be entitled to right to disconnect, when contacted for work
related purpose during time other than that agreed upon under sub-sections ( 1) and (2).
10. An employer may contact any employee either through telecom, videocall, message,
email in other form of communication out-of-work hours, during the time mutually agreed
upon by such employee and employers.
11. Every employee working during out-of-work hours mutually agreed, shall be entitled
to overtime at the normal wage rate.
12. Every registered company and society shall constitute a Employees' Welfare
Committees consisting of its employees to assist or represent the employees for negotiation
of terms and conditions of out-of-work hours with employers.
13. The appropriate Government shall ensure that the negotiations for conditions of
outside-work-hours, between employees and employer are conducted at regular intervals, to
ensure flexibility in the rules of right to disconnect.
Right to
disconnect of
employees.
Baseline study
to collect data.
Drafting of
customised
Charter by
individual
companies
and societies.
Charter to be
included in
the Charter
of individual
entities.
Contact via
call, message
and email,
etc.
Overtime pay
for working
outside work
hours.
Employees
Welfare
Committees
of individual
entitites.
Negotiations
to be
conducted at
frequent
intervals.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
14. The Charter of the individual entity shall explicitly mention normal the out-of-work
hours to be followed until an agreement is reached between the employer and its employees:
Provided that if any employer contacts his employee during the period when there is
no mutually agreed out-of-work period, the employee, during out of work hours,—
(a) shall not be obliged to respond and shall have right to disconnect; or
(b) may choose to respond, for which he shall be entitled to get overtime pay in such
manner as may be prescribed.
15. Every individual registered entity, company or society, shall frame a policy for its
employees who are working in remote areas or, involved in teleworking or working from
home, such policy has to be mutually agreed by employees.
16. Every individual registered entity, company or society, shall undertake awareness
programmes to sensitive its employees, on reasonable use of digital and communication
tools, for work related purposes, during travel and teleworking.
17. The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the individual entities,
provide counseling services  to employees to help them maintain work-life balance.
18. The appropriate Government shall set up digital detox centres and provide digital
detox counseling services to citizens for reasonable  personal use of digital and
communication tools.
19. Every individual entity shall pay penalty at the rate of one per cent of total employees'
remuneration for,—
(a) any out-of-work service condition not defined in the Charter made under section 9;
(b) any out-of-work service condition not defined in the policy for employees working
remotely under section 15; and
(c) any non-adherance to any of the provisions of this Act.
20. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, an annual
report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes it has undertaken and
recommended to the Government over the year and it shall contain statements of annual
accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and the
Central Government shall lay the report before each House of Parliament.
21. The Central Government, shall from time to time after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
22. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or
give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be
necessary or expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
23.(1) The Cental Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may be
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
In   case   of
agreement not
reached.
Policy for
employees
working
remotely.
Awareness
increasing
activities by
entities.
Counseling
for work-life
balance.
Degital Detox
Centres.
Penalty to be
paid by the
entity for
non-
compliance
with the.
provisions of
the Bill.
Annual report
and its laying
before the
Parliament.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With the advent of digital and communication technology, an average worker can work
directly from his smart-phone. According to the report released by the World Economic
Forum, the proportion of mobile workers who could work from any location, is expected to
rise beyond seventy per cent. While this has benefits interms of work flexibility, it also carries
with it a significant risk of erosion of boundaries between professional and personal life.
Studies have found that if an employee is expected to be available round the clock, they tend
to exhibit risks of over-work like sleep deprivation, developing stress and being emotionally
exhausted. This persistent urge to respond to calls and e-mails (termed as 'telepressure'),
constant checking of e-mails throughout the day, and even on weekends and holidays,is
reported to have destroyed to work-life balance of employees.
According to a study, the constant monitoring of work related messages and e-mails,
may over tax employees' brains leading to a condition called 'info-obesity'. The condition is
characterised by stress, burnouts and sleeplessness. Studies show that when employees are
overburdened with work, either their productivity stays constant or even reduces with
increase in work hours. In the year 2014, a study conducted by the University of Stanford
found that the output and productivity of employees plateaued off after  fifty work hours per
week. In fact, workers’ productivity declined when they were over burdened with sixty work
hours per week. Research depicts that employees who respond to work related calls and
mails after 9 pm, had the worst quality of sleep which consequently had a bearing on their
productivity. The need is to respect the personal space of the employees by recognising
their right to disconnect and not respond to their employer's calls, e-mails etc., during out-of-
work hours. The need is also to recognise the rights of the employees, it also takes into
consideration the competitive needs of the companies and their diverse work cultures.
Flexibility in the right to disconnect rules and leaves it to the individual companies to negotiate
terms of service with their employees is need of the hour.
The digital transformation has direct impact on conditions in the employment contract,
like  the time and the place of work. Hence if an employees agrees to works during out-of-
work hours, overtime pay at the same rate as his wage rate is also necessary to check the
surge in unpaid overtime work, brought about by digital transformation.
Cases of lack of consensus between employer and employee during negotiations
needs to be addressed. In such cases the company is required to explicitly lay out their
out-of-work demands from their employees, in the Charter, and the employees can either
choose to work or enforce their right to disconnect. The companies shall be mandated to
draft their own policy towards employees working remotely, tele-working and travelling for
work. The Constitution of Employees' Welfare Committees at every company to assist the
employees in negotiations with employers is also required. Provision to ensure that these
negotiations are held frequently at regular interval, to keep in line with the dynamic business
demands are to be incorporated. The present Bill impose seeks to sanctions at the rate of one
per cent of its total employees' remuneration, on entities (companies or societies) for any
non-compliance with the provisions of the Bill. To rein in the adverse effects of hyper-
connectivity on employees' personal life, the Bill also provides for counseling services to
increase awareness among employees and citizens, on reasonable use of digital and
communication tools, for professional and personal use.
To free an employee from digital distractions and enable him to truly connect with the
people around him, the Bill provides for digital detox centres. The Bill thus champions for the
rights and welfare of employees, by mandating individual entities to negotiate out-of-hour
service conditions with their employees, and upholding the right of employee to disconnect.
6

7
The Bill seeks to recognise right to disconnect as a way to reduce stress and ease tension
between an employees personal and professional life.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
November 22, 2018.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Employees Welfares Authority.
Clause 4 provides for expenditure incurred in conducting meetings of the Authority. Clause 5
provides for the various functions of the Authority. Clause 17 provides for counseling
services for maintaining work-life balance. Clause 18 provide for setting up digital detox
centres. Clause 21 provides for requisite funds for carrying out the functions of this Act. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of a rupees one thousand crore would be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
9

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish an Employees' Welfare Authority to confer the right on every employee to
disconnect from work related telephone calls and emails beyond work hours and on
holidays and right to refuse to answer calls and emails outside work hours and
for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2317LS(S3)—17.12.2018.