                                                            Bill No. 211 of 2022
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1)This Act may be called the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
49 of 2016.

2
2. After section 9 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
(hereinafter referred to as principal Act), the following section shall be inserted,
namely:–
“9A. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government
to establish residential accommodation for the persons with disabilities
in every district within their jurisdiction.
(2) The residential accommodation established under sub-section (1)
shall be provided free of cost to the persons with disabilities.”.
3.  In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the following
provisos shall be inserted, namely:–
“Provided that the disability pension to persons with disabilities
under clause (g) shall not be less than rupees six thousand per mensem
which may be revised from time to time, keeping in view the prevailing
cost of living index as may be determined by the Central Government:
Provided further that the amount of pension shall be disbursed
to persons with disabilities by the appropriate Government either
through its treasury or through any branches of a Nationalised bank
in such manner as may be prescribed.”.
5
10
15
Amendment of
section 24.
Insertion of
new section 9A.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
We have huge number of persons with disabilities in our country. They
have to face numerous problems due to non-availability of adequate
measures for care, livelihood and treatment. In this modern age they are
living a pathetic life.
It is customary in our country to look-after the persons with disabilities
but now the economic conditions are such that it is not possible for the low
income persons to support them. Today we find millions of persons with
disabilities who are unable to take care of themselves or who do not have
sufficient means or any support to lead a happy life. These people, who are
without any source of income, live in hunger and are left uncared for. The
majority of the persons with disabilities are still left to fend for themselves.
Our country, being a welfare State, should provide social security to such
persons with disabilities and infirm persons.
In our country, assistance is provided to the persons with disabilities and
blind persons under the social security system, but these measures are
inadequate in today’s perspective. Many countries of the world, including
countries such as United States of America, Canada, Denmark, etc. provide
financial assistance to the persons with disabilities and also take proper care
for their treatment.  In our country also, there is a need for social upliftment
of persons with disabilities and blind persons by making proper arrangements
for their pension and treatment of their diseases for their welfare and
maintenance.
It is true that under the leadership of our esteemed Prime Minister, several
welfare schemes are operational for the rehabilitation of the persons with
disabilities and some States of the country are also doing good work for their
welfare, but still specially in the wake of the global pandemic like Corona
their condition has become more distressing and worrisome.
The need is to give impetus to the new social order and  provide pension
and residential facilities to persons with disabilities in addition to other social
security already guaranteed under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Act, 2016.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                               GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
8 August, 2022.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the appropriate Government to
establish residential accommodation to be provided free of cost to persons
with disabilities in each district. Clause 3 provides for the payment of
pension at the rate of rupees six thousands per month to such persons with
disabilities who have no independent and adequate means of livelihood.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees two thousand crore is likely to be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of about
rupees thirty crore will also be involved at the initial stage.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT, 2016
(49 OF 2016)
     * * * *          *
24. (1) * * * *          *
(3) The schemes under sub-section (1) shall provide for,—
(a) * * * *                    *
(g) disability pension to persons with disabilities subject to such
income ceiling as may be notified;
     * * * *          *
Social Security.
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)