30 of 1954. 
~' .. 
.A$ INTRODUCED IN LOIC SAsaA ON 
Bill No. 211 of 1985 
1.'HE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF 
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend the Salary, Allowances an.d: Pension of Members of 
Parliament A.ct, i954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Mem- Short 
Ders of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1986. title. 
!l 2. h. section 3 of the Salary, Allowances .. ud Pension of Memhen of Amead-
ment of 
section 3. 
10 
15 
Parliament Act, 1954 (hcreiuftcr referred to as the principal Ad), for 
the word. "_ven hundred and fifty rupees", the words ''one tbousand 
rupees" shan be substituted. 
3. In section 5 of the principal Aet,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) in clause (b), for the words "if the journey", the words 
"if the journey, being a journey during a sitting of the Com-
mittee;" shall be substituted; 
(14) for the second proviso and the Ezplanation, the follow-
ing proviso shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided further that nothing In the first proviso shall 
apply, if the member performs the journey by air for visit-
ing any place in· India not mote than once during a sitting 
of the Committee."; 
Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 

Amend-
mentot 
section 6D. 
Substi-
tution of 
neWBeC-
lion for 
stction 8. 
Consti-
tuency 
allowance 
and 
amenities. 
Amend-
mental 
1IeC-
tion8A. 
2 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sedion and ExplanA-
tions shall be substituted, namely:-
'(2) Every member shall be entitled to an amoUDt equal to 
the fare hy air (or (!ach sinele journey by air (other than a 
joul",ney referred to in r.t"ction .. or the second proviso to sub- 3 
sect;on (1) of this section or section 6C) performed by him from 
any plact: in India tn any other place in India during his term. of 
ofti('P as such membe,': 
Provided that net Ille-mber shall be entitled to any payment 
under th;s suh-section in respect of s.~y journeys in excess of 10 
sixteen per!01med by hjm during any year. 
Explanation I.-The provisions of clause (c) of sub-section 
(1) and of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall, so far as may be, 
apply to travelling allowances payable under this section as they 
apply to travelling allowances payable under that section. 
Explanation H.-For the purposes of this section, "year" 
means,-
(i) in the case of a person Who is a member at the com-
mencement of the Salary. Allowances and Pension of Mem-
bers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985, the year begin- 20-
ning with such commencement and each of the subsequent 
years; 
(ii) in the case of a person who becomes a member after 
such commencement, the year beginning with the date on 
which his term of office as such member commences and 
each of the subsequent years!. . 23 
4. In section 6D of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and 
ftgures "sub-section (1) of section 5", the words, brackets and figures 
"sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 5" shall be substituted. 
5. For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shaH be 30 
substituted, 'namely:-
us. r\ member sball he entitled to sueh constituency a1lowanee 
and to sucb medi('AI facilities for himself and for members of his 
family and to sucb hOUSirlg',. telephone, water, eleetriclty facilities or 
sueh amount in ca~h in lieu of all 01" any of such facilities, as may be 33 
prescribed by rule'~ u"d(~r section 9.". 
6. In section SA of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) for the words ''three hundred rupees", at both the places 
where they occur, the words "five hundred rupees" shall be sub-
stituted; 
(b) in the second proviso, the words "so, however, that in no 
case the pension payable to such person shall exceed five hundred 
rupees per mensem" shall be omitted. 

5 
10 
15 
43 of 1951. 20 
3 
(c) after the second proviso. the following proviso shall be 
added, namely:-
"Provided also that every penon, who has served for any 
period as a member of the ProvlslODall Parliament and who Is 
not entitled to any pension under the foftplDr provlslons of 
tbls sub-section, shall. with dect from the CODQDeDcelDeDt of 
the Salar,;" , Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament 
(Amendment) Act, 1985, be entitled to a pension of Ave hundred 
nQJeeS per mensem."; 
(d) the E.l.pZanation shall be renumbered as Explanation 1 and 
in the Explanation as so renumbered, for the words" brackets and 
figures "clauses (iv) and (1') of sub-section (1) ", the words "this 
sub-section" shall be substituted; 
(e) after Explanation 1 as so renumbered, the following Ex-
pZanation shall be inserted. namely:-
"Explanation 2.-Where in any General Election held for 
the purpose of constituting a new House of the People, poll could 
not be taken in any Parliamentary constituency or any part 
thereof on the date originally fixed under clause (d) of section 
30 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 on account of 
snow-falls or other weather cQllditions of an extreme nature in 
such constituency or part thereof or on account of such consti-
tuency or part thereof being inaccessible for any reason, the 
member ejected to such House from such constituency shall be 
deemed, for the purposes of this sub-section, to have served as 
a member of such House from the date of publication, under 
section n of the said Act, of the notification relating to such 
House.". 
7. After section 8A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
'IBB. There may be paid to a member by way of a repayable 
advance such sum of money not exceeding twenty thousand rupees as 
may be determined by rules made in this behalf under sectiOn 9 for 
the purchase of a conveyance.". 
8. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3) for clause (1), 
35 the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
"(f) the constituency allowance and medical and other facili-
ties mentioned in section 8 and the amount to be paid in cash in lieu 
of such allowances and facilities; 
(ff) the amount which may be paid by way of repayable ad-
vance for the purchase of conveyance; the rate of interest thereon 
and the mode of recovery of such amount and interest thereon; 
and". 
mser-
tionot 
newaec-
tion SB. 
Advances 
for pur-
chase of 
con-
veyance. 
Amend-
ment ef 
eectiGn9. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Keeping in view the· recommendations of the Joint Committee on 
Salaries and Allow.ances of Members of Parliamen.t and the demand 
made by the members. it is proposed to amend the Salary, Allowances 
and Pension of Members of Parliament Act. 1954, with a view to provide 
for the following:-
(1) increase in salary from Rs. 750 to Rs. 1,000 per month. 
(ii) facility of 16 single air journeys throughout the year to 
member.; without any limitation as to its use only during the session~ 
(iii) (a) increase in minimum pension of ex-members of Par-
liament from Rs. 300 to P.s. 500 per month and .the abolition of the 
ceiling with respect to pension; 
(b) in cases where the elections are not held due to weather 
conditions, etc., such as in Ladakh in Jammu and Kashmir and Mandi 
in Himachal Pradesh, such period should be counted towards their 
eligibility period for grant of p~nsion; 
(c) grant of pension to the members of the Constituent Assem-
bly who are not at present entitled to the same; 
(iv) advance for purchase of conveyance. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW PELHJ; H. K. L. BHAGAT. 
The 19th December, 1985. 
4 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill f:eeks to amend section 3 of the Salary, Allow-
ances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954, to increase th~ 
salary of the members of ParUament from Rs. 750 per mensem to Rs. 
1,000 per mt-nsem. 
2. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 of the Act to provide 
for the facility of sixteen single air journeys throughout the year to mem-
bt:rs of Parliament without any limitation as to its use only during the 
sessions jnstead of the existing eight to and fro intermediate air' journeys 
during the sessions. 
3. Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for the eX,-
isting section 8 to provide for payment of constituency allowance to a 
member and medical facilities to such member and the members of his 
f{lmily. 
4 Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section SA of the Act for provid-
ing for the following:-
(i) increase in the minimum pension of ex·members of Parlia-
ment from Rs. 300 to Rs. 500 without any ceiling on maximum 
pension; 
(ii) grant of pension to persons who have been members of 
Provisjonal Parliament/Constituent Assembly. 
5. The above provisions would involve expenditure from the Conso-
lidated Fund of India to the tune of Rs. 2.32 crores. 
6. The provisions of the Bm will not involve any other expenditure 
C!ither recurring or non-recurring. 
5 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill which seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 9 
of the Salaryt Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act. 
1954 empowers the Joint Committee of both the Houses of Parliament to 
make ruJes to provide for certain additional matters. These matters 
relate to the constituency allowance and the medical ~nd other facilities 
which a member shall be entitled to under section 8 of the Act and the 
amount to be paid in cash in lieu of such allowance and' facilities and the 
amount which may be paid to a member by way of repayable advance for 
tbe purchase of conveyance, the rate of interest thereon and the mode of 
recovery of such amount and the interest thereon. The matters with res-
pect to which rules may be made under the proposed amendments relate 
to matters of detail Or procedure. The delegation of legislative power 
is thus normal in character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSJON OF MEMBERs OF 
PARLIAMI:NT Act, 1954 
(30 OF 1954) 
... ... ... • • 
3. A member shall be entitled to receive a salary at the rate of seven 
hundred and fifty rupees per mensem during the whole of his term of 
office and subject to any ntles made under this Act an allowance at 
the rate of seventy-five rupees for each day during any period of resi-
dence on duty. 
... ... ... ... ... 
5. (l) Where a member absents himself for less than fifteen day~ 
during a session of a House oC Parliament or a sitting of a committee for 
visiting any place in India, he shall be entitled to receive travelling 
allowances in respect of such journey to such place and for the return 
journey-
... • • • • 
(b) if the journey is performed by air, equal to one fare by :iir 
for each such journey: 
Provided that such travelling allowances shall not exceed the total am-
ount of daily allowances which would have been admissible to such mem-
ber under section 3 for the days of absence if he had not SO remained ab-
sent: 
Provided further that nothing in the first proviso shall apply, if the 
member performs the journey by air for visiting any place in India-
(a) not more than four times during a session lasting mere than 
seventy-five days; 
(b) not more than twice during a session lasting for seventy-five 
days or less; and 
(c) not more than once during a sitting of the committee. 
ExpZanation.-The provisions of clause (e) of sub-section (1) and of 
sub-section (2) of section 4 shall, so far as may be, apply to travelling 
allowances payable under this section as they apply to t~avelling allow-
ances payable under that section. 
(2) Where in any year R member does not perform during any session 
any such journey as is referred to In the second proviso to sub-section 
(1), bt the number of such journeys performed by him during any setlsion 
7 
Salaries and 
daily 
allowances. 
Travell1n, 
allowances 
for inter-
mediate 
journeys. 

Special 
facility to 
blind and 
physically 
incapacita-
ted mem-
bers. 
Advanct';1 
to officers 
()i Pariia-
. ment for 
purchase 
of motor-
cars. 
Pension. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
is less than the maximum specified in that proviso with respect to such 
session, then, such member shall be entitled to perform all or. as the 
case' may be, the remaining number, of such journeys during any other 
session or sessions in that year, in addition to the number of journey,; 
which he is otherwise entitled to perform under that proviso during such 
other session or sessions. . 
• • • • • 
6D. A member who is blind or who is, in the opinion of the Chairman 
of the Council of States or, as the case may be, the Speaker of the House 
of the People, so incapacitated physically as to require the facility of an 
attendant shall. with respect to each such journey by air as is referred 
to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 or clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 5 or section 6C which he performs along with an attendant. 
be entitled (in addition to the allowances which he is entitled under sec-
tion 4 or section 5 or, as the case may be, section 6C) to an amount equal 
to one fare by air for such journey. 
• • • • • 
8. There may be paid to any officer of P~rliament by way of a repaya-
ble advance such sum of money as may be determined by rules made in 
this behalf under section 11 for the purchase of a motor-car in order that 
he may be able to discharge conveniently and efficiently the duties of his 
office. 
• • • • • 
8A. (1) With effect from the commencement of the Salaries and 
Allowanc. of Members of Parlflment (Amendment) Act, 1976, there 
shall be paid a pension of three hundred rupees per mensem to every 
person who has served for a ~riod of five-years, whether continuous or 
not,-
• • • • • 
Provided further that where any person has served as aforesaid for 
a period exceeding five years. there shall be paid to him an additional 
pension of fifty rupees per mensem for every year in excess of five, so, 
however, that in no case the pension payable to such person shall exceed 
five hundred rupees per mensem. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of clauses (iv) and (v) of SUb-section 
(1). "Provisional Parliament" shall include the body which functioned 
as the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately before 
the commencement of the Constitution. 
• • • • • 
t. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The Joint Committee constituted under sub-section (1) may after 
consultation with the Central Government make rules to provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(f) medical •. housing, telephone, postal, water, electricity, consti-
tuency and secretariat facilities mentioned in section 8' and the 
amount to be paid in cash in lieu of all or any of such facilities; and 
• • • • • 
105 of 1976. 

LOK SABHA 
-
'. BILL 
further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1954. 
-
(Shri H. K. L. BhJJgQ.t, Minist'er of P4f li4mentary Affairs IIU Tourism.) 