AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2.  After article 324 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“324A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Election Commission
shall, as far as possible, endeavour to conduct elections to the House of the People
and to the Legislative Assemblies of all States simultaneously.”.
Bill No.  211 of  2017
Short title.
Insertion of
new article
324A.
Election
Commission
to Conduct
elections to
the House of
the People
and
Legislative
Assemblies of
all States
simultaneously.
5

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, general elections of  Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies are being
held in different years and, in many cases, even at different periods of the same year. The
tenure of both Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies have been fixed at five years
by the Constitution.
Presently, the cost of holding elections for Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies of
States and Union territories has been pegged at rupees four thousand and five hundred
crores by the Election Commission.
Suggestions are being received from certain quarters that a scheme should be devised
whereby the general elections to the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies are
held simultaneously.
The rationale given is that this will result in huge saving to the public exchequer,
avoidance of replication of efforts on part of administration and law and order machinery in
holding repeated elections and bring considerable savings to political parties and candidates
in their election campaigns.
Another argument in support of the above suggestion is that now asynchronous
Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly elections including bye-elections result in prolonged
enforcement of  Model Code of Conduct with its concomitant adverse impact on development
and welfare programmes.
Under the Parliamentary democracy envisaged in our Constitution, situations may
arise from time to time, where the five years term of the Lok Sabha may have to be either
curtailed or extended. The same would be the situation in relation to the State Legislative
Assemblies. The proposal for simultaneous elections, however, would involve having fixed
term for the Union and State Legislative bodies.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI LEKHI
November 23, 2016.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2442LS(S3)—08-12-2017.