1
THE MENTAL HEALTH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Health Act, 1987.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Health (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Mental Health Act, 1987, after chapter III, the following Chapter shall be
inserted namely:—
Bill No. 211 of 2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Insertion of
new chapter
IIIA.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
"CHAPTER IIIA
RIGHTS OF MENTALLY ILL PERSONS
14A. Every mentally ill person shall have the right to—
(a) live in, be part of and not be segregated from the society;
(b) access to mental health care services run or funded by the appropriate
Government with good quality services without discrimination of any sort;
(c) access to rehabilitation establishments and shelter homes for the mentally ill
patients; and
(d) such other facilities as may be provided by the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be.
14B. For the purposes of section 14A, every State Government shall—
(i) designate a nodal officer not below the rank of District Collector in every
district to compile the details of mentally ill persons residing in that district;
(ii) authorise every nodal officer to take up the issue of social discrimination
against mentally ill persons with the appropriate authorities;
(iii) integrate mental health services into general health care services at all levels
of healthcare including primary, secondary and tertiary health care and in all health
programmes run by the Government;
(iv) ensure that as a minimum, mental health services run or funded by the
Government are available in each district;
(v) meet, if minimum health services are not available in the district where a
mentally ill person resides, all costs of treatment at other such establishment in the
district;
(vi) make provision of community based rehabilitation establishments and
shelter homes for treating mentally ill persons; and
(vii) ensure payment of old age pension to every mentally ill person, after the
age of sixty years, at such rate as the Central Authority may deem appropriate.
14C. (1) Every State Government shall cause to be maintained a Register of mental
healthcare establishments in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) The Register maintained under sub-section (1) shall be opened for inspection by
general public once in a year.
14D. The nodal officer designated under clause (1) of section 14B shall promote
awareness amongst general public about the rights of mentally ill persons and safeguards
available for their protection.".
Rights of
mentally ill
persons.
State
Government
to designate a
nodal officer
in every
district for
collecting
data of
mentally ill
persons and
provide
mental health
services, etc.
State
Government
to maintain a
Register of
mental
healthcare
establishments.
Nodal Officer
to promote
awareness
about rights
of mentally ill
persons
among public.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mental disorder afflict nearly five crore of the Indian population and these persons
need special care. Mentally ill persons do not have any respect in our society and are
frequently secluded from the community. The Mental Health Act, 1987 could neither protect
the rights of persons with mental illness nor promote their access to mental health care in the
country.
Stigma and discrimination because of mental illness are still major obstacles in the path
of treatment and rehabilitation of those impaired by mental illness.
Mentally ill persons in our country are one of the most vulnerable communities facing
variety of issues. The joint family system has  assimilated and provided care for many of the
mentally ill persons in their homes but with increasing nuclear families, care to these persons
demands more attention.
The present Bill aims to provide a legislative impetus to clearly outline the rights of the
mentally ill persons and facilities need to be made available to them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIY A SULE
June 29, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that every State Government shall meet the cost of
expenditure of treatment, establishment of rehabilitation and shelter homes, payment of old
age pension of mentally ill persons. It also provides for maintaining a register of mental
healthcare establishment and promoting awareness amongst general public about the rights
of mentally ill persons. The expenditures relating to States shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Funds of the respective State. However, the Central Government shall bear the
expenditure in implementing the provisions of the Act in Union territories. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Though, at this
stage, it is difficult to assess the exact expenditure, it is estimated that a sum of rupees five
hundred crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to amend the Mental Health Act, 1987.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1478LS(S3)—23-07-2015.