AI INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA ON 
BiU No. 212 of 1885 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF OFll'lCERS OF 
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1985 
BILL 
further to amend. the S414ries and AUcnoonces of Of1i,ceTs ,of 
Pa,.liam.en.t Act, 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Officers 
of Parliament (Amendm.el'lt) Act, 1985. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint • 
Short title 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
. 2. For section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parlia- Substitu. tion of ment Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred. to as the principal Act), the follow- newaection 
10 
ing section shall be substituted, namely: - for seef-ton 
3. 
"3. (1) There shall be paid to the Chairman of the Council of Salaries, 
States a salary or seven thousand five hundred rupees per mensem. :~~ of 
(2) Each oftlcer or Parliament other than the Chairman of the 
Council of States. shall he entitled to receive a salary per meDsem 
Parlia-
ment. 

Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 5. 
Sumptuary 
allowance. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 6. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
lOA. 
Exemp-
tion from 
liability to 
pay 
income· 
tax on ccr-
tain per· 
quisites 
. received 
by an 
otftcer of 
Parlia-
metr.. 
2 
and an allowance rClr each day cIudug the whole of his term as such 
officer at the same rates ItS are specified in section 3 of the Salaries, 
Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1154 with 30 of 1954. 
retlpect to members of Parliament. 
(3) Each officer of Parliament, other .than the Chainnan of the 5 
Council of States, shall be entitled to receive a constitu~ucy allow-
ance at the sanle rate :lS is specified under section 8 of the said Act 
with respect to members of Parliament.". 
3. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"5. There shall 1.(.' paid to the Chairman of the Council of States 
and the Speaker of the House of the People a sumptuary allowance 
of one thousand rupees per mensem and to the Deputy Chairman and 
the Deputy S))eaker n sumptuary allowa.uce of fiVe hUndred· rupees 
10 
per mensem.". 15 
4. In section 6 of the p.rincipal Act, after sub-section (1), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
'( 1. ~) An officer of Parliament and 8,uy one member of his family 
accompanying him shall he entitled to travelling allowanees in res-
pect of not more than six return journeyS performed, during each 20 
year, withi.u India, at the same rates at which travelling allowances 
are payable to such ofticer under cla1llle (b) of sub-sedlon (1)' in 
respect of tours referred in in that elause. 
Explanation.--For the PUQlOS8S of this sub-section, "retUllll 
journey" means Il journey from one place to another place and the ~ 5 
return journey from such other place to the ftrst mentioned place.'. 
5. In the principal Act, after section'10, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
'lOA. Notwithstanding anything ·contained in the Income-tax 
Act, 1961, the value of rent free furnished residence (including 30 43 ot 1961. 
maintenance thereof) provided to an ofticer of Parliament under 
sub-section (1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computation 
of his income chargeable under the head "Salaries" under section 15 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
. This Bill is complementary to the Salary, Allowances and Pension 
of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 1985 and the Salaries and 
Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Bill, 1985. ' 
2. The Bill seeks,-
(a) to provide that the Chairman of the Council of States shall 
be entitled to a salary of seven thousand five hundred rupees !pel' 
mensem and that the other officers of Parliament shall be entitled t~ 
a salary, daily allowance and constituency allowance at the same 
r~tes. as a member of Parliament; 
(b) to inc.rease the amounts payable to officers of Parliament· by 
way of sumptuary allowance and to exempt from income-tax the 
value of the official residence provided to an officer of Parliammt; 
(c) to extend the facility of free travel in respect of six return 
journeys per year within India to one member of the family of an 
officer of Parliament accompanying him on such journeys. . 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW Da.m; H. K. L. BHAGAT. 
The 19th December, 1985. 
3 

FINANCIAL ME}40RANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 of/the Salaries and Allow-
ances of OJBcers of ParU~t Act, 1953 to increaae the salary of the 
Chairman of the Council of States from Rs. 2,250/- per mensem to 
Rs. 7,5001- per mensem. It further seeks to provide for grant of daily 
allowances throughout the term and the constituency allowance. at the 
rate of Rs. 1,2501- per mensem to each of the officers of Parliament except 
the Chairman, of the Council of States. -
. 2. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section S of the Act to provide 
for the increase in the sumptuary allowance from Rs. 500 to Bs. 1,000 
in respect of the Chairman of the Councll of States and the Speaker and 
from Rs. 250 to Rs. 500 per month fOr the Deputy Chairman and the 
Deputy Speaker. 
3. Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section for p.roviding tor 
the facility of six return journeys in a year between any two places in 
India accompanied by anyone member of the family. , 
4. The above provisions would involve expenditure from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India to the tune of Rs. 2.34 lakhs. 
5. The prOvisions of the Bill will not involve any other expenditure 
either recurring or non-recurring. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
Ex'rRACTS FROM THE SALARD:S AND ~WANCES OF OFnCIBS OF 
PABLIAlIrlENT Aer, ~ 
(20 01' 1953) 
• • • • • 
3. A member shall be entitled to receive a salary at the rate of seven 
hundred fifty rupees per mensem during the whole of his term of office 
and subject to any rules made under this Act and allowance at the rate 
of seventy-five rupees fo.r each during any period of Il"eSidence on duty • 
• • • • • 
5. (1) Where a member absents himself for less than fifteen days 
during a session of a House of Parliament or a sitting of a committee 
for visiting any place in India, he shall be entitled to receive travelling 
allowances in respect of such journey ·to such place and for the return 
joumey-
(4) if the journey is perfo.rmed by rail, equal to one first class 
fare for each such journey irrespective of the c1B'SS in which the 
member actually travels; . 
(b) if the iourney is performed. by air, equal to one fare by air 
for each such joumey: 
Provided that such travelling Bllowances shall not exceed the total 
amount of daily allowances which would have been admissible to such 
member under section 3 for the days of absence if he had not so 
remained absent: . . 
Provided further that nothing in the first proviso shall apply, if the 
member performs the journey by air for visiting any place in India-
(a) not more than four times du.ring a session lasting more than 
seventy-five days; 
(b) not more than twice du.ring .a session lasting for seventy-five 
days or less; and 
(c) not more than once during a sitting of the committee. 
Explanation.-The provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (1) and 
of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall, so far as may be, apply to travel-
ling allowances payable under this section as they apply tei travelling 
allowances payable under that section. 
(2) Where in any year a /member does not perfo.rm during any 
session any such journey as is referred. to in. the second proviso to sub-
section (1). 01' the number of such journeys performed by him during 
any session is less than the maximum specified in that proviso with 
respect to such session, then, such member shall be entitled to pe.rform 
all or, as the case may be, the remaining number, of such journeys during 
any other session or sessions in that year, in addition to the number of 
Journeys which he is otherwise entitled to perform under that proviso 
during such other session or sessions. 
• • • • • 
5 
Salaries 
and daily 
allowan-
ces. 
. Travelling 
allowan-
ces tor 
interme-
diate jour-
neya. 

LOK &ABHA 
A 
BILL 
'.:. 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of OfBcers of 
P~lia:ment Act, lB. . I' 
' .. 
(S'hri H. K. L. B1wI41at, Minister of Parliamentary Agairs aM \ J 
Tourism.) 