Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE WORKING WOMEN (BASIC FACILITIES AND WELFARE)
BILL,  2019
By
SHRIMATI RITI PATHAK,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of women from discrimination, and for the basic facilities
like creche, recreational facilities, maternity benefits, hostel and transport facilities,
and for the welfare measures to be taken by the employers and the State for the
women employees working in Government establishments; public sector
enterprises including banks and ports, educational institutions
including universities, colleges and schools; factories, mines,
plantations, agricultural fields, orchards and such other
places and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Working Women (Basic Facilities and Welfare)
 Act, 2019.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill  No. 212 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" includes a still born child;
(c) "employer" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of an
appropriate Government, the person or authority appointed by the appropriate
Government for the supervision and control of the employees or where no person
or authority is so appointed, the head of the establishment;
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local self-government or
authority, the person appointed by such authority or local self-government for
the supervision and control of the employees or where no person is so appointed
the Chief Executive Officer by whatever name called of the local self-government
or the authority, as the case may be;
(iii) in other cases, the person who or the authority which has the ultimate
control over the affairs of the establishment;
(d) "establishment" include an office of the appropriate Government, quasi
Government or department including telegraph office, post office, telephone exchange,
a mine, a plantation, an agricultural field, a hospital or nursing home, a shop or any
business establishment, a brick kiln, construction site, any banking establishment, any
private office or house, any school, college university or like institution, establishment
for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances and any other such
place where a woman is employed for any work whatsoever;
(e) "factory" means a factory as defined in the Factories Act, 1948;
(f) "industry" means an industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "working woman" means a woman who is employed whether directly or
indirectly through any agency or contractor, as the case may be, for wages in any
establishment, factory or industry.
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that no discrimination
is done by any establishment on gender basis with its women employees particularly in the
matter of payment of wages which are paid to her male counterpart in such establishment.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every employer shall provide basic childcare facilities such as milk, tiffin, clothes,
toys, trained ayahs and other essential facilities for the children of women working in
the establishment.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every employer of an
agricultural field provide mobile childcare facilities for the working women in his
establishment:
Provided that two or more such employers may provide common childcare
facilities for their establishments.
(3) The appropriate Government shall open such number of creches at such places
as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definition.
Appropriate
Government to
ensure non-
discrimination
and equal
wages for
working
women.
Employer to
have childcare
facilities for
working
women.
14 of 1947.
63 of 1948.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every employer provides retiring
rooms with facilities like bathroom, latrine, drinking water at the workplace or worksite
of the working women and recreational facilities like radio and television for working
women and their children.
6. The appropriate Government along with the employer shall provide adequate
and proper security measures for the safety of working women in the establishment,
factory or industry, as the case may be, well as to and from their places of residence.
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure reservation of
beds and proper and adequate maternity facilities for the working women in the
hospitals and dispensaries having indoor patient facilities therein.
8. The appropriate Government as well as an employer shall provide hostel and
residential facilities both for married and unmarried working women nearest to their
place of work and cheap, safe and quick transport facilities for such working women.
9. The appropriate Government shall ensure protection from health hazards
particularly for the women working in factories or industries like beedi, tobacco, stone
mines, cashew, fish processing, salt, silk construction projects and such other
establishments as may be prescribed.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain a register of working women
in such manner and at such place as may be prescribed;
(2) The appropriate Government may require an employer to furnish for the
purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information, in such form and within
such period as may be prescribed.
11. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the working women.
12. (1) The Central and State Governments may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each house of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council, as
the case may be, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Recreational
facilities.
Security
arrangements.
Maternity
facilities.
Hostel and
transport
facilities.
Protection
from health
hazards.
Register of
working
women.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Despite the unabated female foeticides and dwindling population of girls in the country
and the conservative attitude of the society towards women, more and more women are
venturing out of their houses to work to support their families. As a result, the number of
working women in Government services, factories, industries, commercial establishments,
agriculture, mines, fish processing sector, silk industry and so on so forth is increasing day
by day, but their conditions of employment need amelioration. Various basic and essential
facilities which are supposed to be made available to the working women by the Government
and private employers are either absent or not adequate and satisfactory. Unfortunately, in
most of the private sector including agricultural sector, the facilities are rather minimal or
negligible and the working women are exploited a lot there. The existing labour laws also do
not provide for proper medical, educational, recreational and other facilities for the working
women and their children. As regards, other social security measures like security, transport,
accommodation have also not been made so far. In many establishments they are not given
equal pay for work. This discrimination has to be stopped.
Hence it has become necessary to provide adequate welfare measures for the working
women.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RITI PATHAK
July 19, 2019.
4
THE WORKING WOMEN (BASIC FACILITIES AND WELFARE) BILL, 2019
BY SHRIMATI RITI PATHAK, M.P.
[Copy of letter No. WWH-1201 1/3/2019-WWH dated 13 August, 2019 from
Shrimati Smriti Zubin Irani, Minister of Women and Child Development and Textiles to the
Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Working Women
(Basic Facilities and Welfare) Bill, 2019 by Shrimati Riti Pathak, M.P., has recommended
the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha.
————
————

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain childcare facilities of the working women.
Clause 5 provides for recreational facilities for working women and their children, Clause 6
provides that the appropriate Government to provide adequate and proper security measures
for the safety of working women. Clause 7 provides for maternity facilities. Clause 8 provides
for hostel and transport facilities for the working women. Clause 9 provides for appropriate
Government shall ensure protection from health hazards of the working women. The
expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of the State
Government concerned. However, the expenditure in relation to Union territories shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand crore
may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to involve.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of women from discrimination, and for the basic facilities
like creche, recreational facilities, maternity benefits, hostel and transport facilities,
 and for the welfare measures to be taken by the employers and the State for the
women employees working in Government establishments; public sector
enterprises including banks and ports, educational institutions
including universities, colleges and schools; factories, mines,
plantations, agricultural fields, orchards and such other
places and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Riti Pathak, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2825LS—23-10-2019.