LOK jABHA
CO RRI GENDUM
to
THE ALIGARff 1v!USLIM UNIVERSITY (THIRD 4.l'1El'Dl1E]\;T) BILL, 1980
1
(To be/As introducedinLok Sabha)
Page4, line27,-
~
after "commencement"insert-
11, asamendedby thatAct,11
December22, 198r
P"ausa1, 1902 (Saka)


40 01. 1920. 
.. 
A'S IN'l'BOwerb Dr LoK. S....,. .. 
(l.t3 U\:.~ \9S0 I 
. ~ ... 8U1 No. 212 of 1980 
THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY (THIRD AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the illigarh Muslim University Act, 1920. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Aligarh Muslim University (Third 
Amendment) Act, 1980. 
Short 
title 
and 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government commen-
om 1 G t . cement. 
10 
may, by notification in the . cia aze te, appoint. 
2. In the Aligarh Muslim University -Act. 1920 (hereinafter referred Amend-
to as the principal Act), in the long title and in the preamble, the words ment of 
"establish and" shall be omitted. long title and. pre_ 
amble. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(i) after clause (h), the fol1owing 
. namely:-
Amend-
clause shall be inserted . n;lent of , section 2 . 
'(hh) "non-teaching staff" means the'employees be 
versity other than the teachers;'; . 
the Unl-

Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 8. 
Univer-
sity open 
to all 
persons. 
Amend-
'ment of 
section 16, 
, Amend-
ment of 
section 17. 
(ii) clause (j) shall be omitted; 
(iii) for clause (1), the fQllowing clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(Z) "University" means the educational institution of their 
choice established by the Muslims of India, which originated as S 
the Muhammadan Anglo-Orjental College, Aligarh, and which 
was subsequently incorporated as the Aligarh Muslim 
University.' . 
4. In section 5 of the principal Act.-
- (i) in clause (2), after sub-clause (b). the fQllowing sub-clause 10 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(c) to promote especially the educational and cultural 
advancement of the Muslims of India;"; 
(ii) in clause (7). the words "and determine their conditions of 
service in accordance with the Statutes" shall be added at the end; IS 
(iii) for clause (9). the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(9) to institute and maintain Halls for the students of the 
University;"; 
(iv) in clause (11B). the words "and determine their conditions 20 
of service in accordance with the Statutes" shall be added at the end. 
5, For section 8 of the principal Act. the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"8, The University shall be open to all persons (including the 
teachers and taught) of either ~ex and of whatever race. religion, 25 
creed. caste or class: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent 
religious instruction being given in the manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances to those who hf.lve '!onsented to receive it.". 
6. In section 16 of the principlll Act.- 30 
(i) after clause (.~A). the followin,~ clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
",(3B) The Honorary, Treasurer;"; 
(ti) existing c1ause~ (3B), (Se) and (3D) shall be renumbered 
as clauses (3C). (3D) and (3E) thereof respectively. 
7, In section 17 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1). the fflllow-
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(1) The Chnncellor of the University shall be e'ected by the 
'. Court in such manner .and .tor .s~~b .terl'l'.\ /ils: may be prescribed by 
3S 
the Stat\ltes.... t4C 

· . 
:3 
8. In section 18 of the principe.l Act, for sUb-section (1), the follow- ~ AnllUlcl .. 
ing sub-seCtion shall be substituted, nam'l!ly: _ ment of 
section 18. 
"(1) The Pro-Chancellor sb::tll be elected by the Court in such 
lJl:8I)ller and for such term as may be prescribed by the Statutes.". 
5 9 .. sections 20A and 20B of the principal Act shall be renumbered as Insertion 
of new 
section 
20A. 
sections 20B and 20C respectively, and before section 20B as so renum-
bered, the followlOg section shall be inserted, namely:-
"20A. (l) The Honorary Treasurer shall be elected 'by the Court The 
in such rnanner a'nd for such tcrm as may be ptescribed by the HonorSTY 
10 Statutes. Treasurer. 
(2) The Honorary TrcasufI'lr shall exercise such powers and per-
form such functions as may bf' prescribed by the Statutes.". 
10. In section 21 of the principal Act. after the words "the Pro-Vice-
Chancellor,", the words "the Honorary Treasurer," shall be inserted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 21. 
-IS 11. In section 22 of the principal Act,- Amend-
ment of 
20 
(i) after clause (3), the fcHowing clause shall be inserted, section 22. 
namely:-
"(3A) The Finance Committee;"; 
(ii) in clause (3B), the word "and" shall be inserted at the end; 
(iii) dause (3C) shall be omitted. 
12. For section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substi-
substituted, namely:- tution 
of new 
section 
for 
section 23. 
"23. (1) The Court shall cI)nsist of the Chancellor, the Pro- The 
Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor end the Pro-V ice-Chancellor (if any) Court. 
for the time being, and .:;uch other persons as may be specified in 
lZ5 the Statutes. 
30 
35 
(2) The Court shall be the supreme governing body of the Uni-
versity and shall exercise all the powers of the University, not otber-
wise provided for by this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinancesa,nd the 
Regulations and it shall have power to review the acts 0'£ the Execu-
tive and the Academic Councils (save where such Councils have 
acted in accordance with powers conferred on them under this Act, the 
Statutes or the Ordinances). 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act. the Court shall exercise 
the following powers and perforrr.. the following duties, namely:-
(a) to make Statutes and to amend or repeal the same; 
(b) to consider Ordinances; 
......,.. (c) to co~derand pass resolutions on the annual te~, 
the' aDBual ~~oUD1l. and tbe . twine's) eat' ..... ,." 

Amend-
ment of 
section 26. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
26A. 
Disqualifi-
cationsror 
member. 
ship. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 27. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section 
for 
section 28. 
Statutes. 
4 
(d) to elect su~h per~pns. to. serve~n theauthori~es. 'of. ~ 
University and to appoint such officers as may be prescribed by' 
this Aet or' the Statutes; ,md 
(e) to exercise such cth~r po~er~ and' Perform'~uch other 
duties as may be conferrepo.r iPlposed upon it by this ~ct or the 5 
Statutes.", . 
13. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the' words ;'and r'unctions of 
the Faculties and of ,the, Students', Council", ttte, y,rords "and functions of 
the Finance, Committee ando.f the F'al;ulties" shall, ~e substi~uted. 
14., After section 26 of the prin<.:ipal Act, the following section shall 10 
be inserted, namely:-
"26A. A person shall be di~qualified for being chosen as, and for 
being, a member of any of the authorities of the University if he is 
not a citizen of India.". 
15. In section 27 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (a), the words ", the Finance Cpmmittee" snail be 
omitted; 
(ii) for clause (c), the 'fr.Jluwing clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
IS 
"(c) the manner of ~l.~ction or appointment, as the case may 20 
be, of the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor 
and other officers of the University;". 
16. For section 28 of the prinCipal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"28. (1) On the commencement of the Aligarh Muslim Univer- 2S 
sity (Third Amendment) Act, 1980, the Statutes in force imme-
'diately before such commencemeont shall be the Statutes of the 
University. ! 
(2) After the commencement of the Aligarh Muslim University 
(Third Amendment) Act, 1980, the Court may, notWithstanding any- 30 
thing contained in sub-section (1), make new or additional Statutes 
or may amend or repeal the Stfitutes referred to in sub-section (1) 
in the manner hereinafter provit1ed in this section. 
(3) The Executive Coun('il may propose to the Court the draft 
of any Statute for its consideration and such draft shall be consider- 35 
ed by the Court at its next mneting: 
Provided that the Executbe Council shall not propose, the draft 
, of 'any Statute ,or ?f any~endt~iC~'nt. o.fa Statute aftecting the status, 
powers or con:stltutionot "my authority 'of the' UniV6r&fty Until .... 
• 

.. 
5 
~~rity has been .givf:n an opportunity of expressing an Op'l~n .. 
~ writing upon the··proposal and any opinion so expressed shall be 
.c~idered by the Court. 
(4) The Court may' approve any such draft as is referred to in 
5 sub-section (3) or reject it or rt'turn it to the Executive Council for 
~eC6nstderaiioti, efther in whole· or in part, together. with any 
amendments' which the Court may suggest. 
(5) Any member of the C(lurt may propose to the Court, the draft 
of any· Statute and the Court I'1ay reject. the proposal or refer such 
10 draft for consideration to thp Executive Council, which may either 
rej.ect the proposal or submit the draft to the Court in such form as 
the Executive Council may approve and the provisions of this section 
shall apply in the case of any draft so submitted as they apply in 
the case of a draft proposed by the Executive Council. 
15 (~) No new Statute or amendment or addition or repeal of any 
Statute shall come into force unless it is approved by the Visitor, who 
may sanction or disallow it, or return it for further consideration.". 
:If. 
17. In sub·section (3) of section 31 of the principal Act, after the Amend-
words "this section", the wurds ", other than any Regulation made by ment of 
20 the Court," shall be inserted. . section 
18. In section 34 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the 
following sub-section shall be inSErted, namely:-
"(3) A copy of the annual report as submitted to the Visitor 
shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as 
31. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
34. 
25 soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament." . 
19. For section 35 of the prip..cipal Act, the following section shall be Substitu-
substituted, namely:- tion of 
new 
section 
for 
section 
35. 
"35. (1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of the Univer- Annual 
30 . 'sity shall be prepared under the direction of the Executive Council accounts. 
and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not more than 
3S 
fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India or by such person or persons as he may authorise in this 
behalf. 
(Z) A copy of the annual accounts, together with the audit 
report thereon, shall be submitted to the Court and the Visitor along 
with the observations of the Executive Council 
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual 
accounts shaiI be brought to thp notice of the Cow-t and the obser-
vations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the 
. Executive Council, be S'llbmitted to the Visitor, 
" . ~ \", .... 

Amend-
ment of 
Statutes. 
The 
Chan-
cellor. 
The Pro-
Chancel-
lor. 
.. 
6 
• (4) A copy of the annual 2CCOuntS, together with . the a.1J&t 
report, as submitted to the Vlsitor, shall also be subrriitted··to'· die 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be,ca1ise·the'nme 
to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
(5) The audited anIlual accounts, after having been Wd ~re S 
both the Houses of Parliament, shall be pUblished in the Gazette of 
India.". 
20, Notwithstanding anything conta;ned in the princip.ll Act, the 
Statutes of the University shall be amended as follows:-
(i) throughout the Statutes, for the \yords "Head of Depart- 10 
ment", wherever they uccur, the words "Chairman of Department" 
shall be substituted, and such consequential amendments as the ru1es 
of grammar may reqUire shall also be made; 
(ii) for Statutes 1 and lA, the following Statutes shall be sub-
stituted, namely:- IS 
"1. (1) The Chancellor shall be elected by the Court by 
a simple majority. 
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three years 
and shall be eligible for re-election. 
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside over the 20 
meetings of the Court. 
(4) Every prc.?osal for the conferment of an honorary d~gree . 
shall be subject to confirmation by the Chancellor. 
lA. (1) The Pro-Chancellor shall be elected by the Court by 
a simple majority. 25 
(2) The Pro-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three 
years and shall be eligible for re-election. 
(3) Any casual vacancy in the office of the Pro-Chancellor 
shall be filled by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the 30 
Executive Council and the person SO appointed shall hold office 
until the next annual meeting of the Court. 
(4) The Pro-Chancellor shall, in the a.bsence of the Chan-
cellor, perform the functions of the Chancellor."; 
(iii) in Statute 2, for claw'~ (1) and (2), the folloWing claUse 35 
shall be substituted, namely:-· 
"(1) The Vice-Chan('ellor shall beappoi.Il~ by, t,J;1e Visi-
tor from a panel of at least three persons recommended by 
the Court from a panel of five persons recommeiideCl by the 
Executive Council: 40 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of 
the Qersons recommended by the Court, he may call fDrfresh 
recommendations." ; 

, 
. tiv).atter ..statute 4, the following Statute shall be lnst!rted, 
namely:-
"~. (1) The Honorary Treasurer shall be elected by the 
Court by a simple majority. 
S (2) The Honorary Treasurer shall hold office for a term of 
three years and shall be eligible for re-election for another term. 
(,1) 'PIe Honorary Treasurer shall hold office on such terms 
andcQndUions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 
(4) The Honorary Treasurer shall be a member of the Fin-
10 ance Committee and shall exercise general supervision over the 
funds of the University."; 
(v) in Statute 6, for clause (4), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(4) The Finance Officer shall advise the University as re-
IS gards its financial policy and perform such other financial func-
tions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or as 
may be prescribed by these Statutes or the Ordinances: 
Provided that the Finance Officer shall not incur any expen-
diture or make any investment exceeding ten thousand t'l.II;Jees 
20 without the previous approval of the Executive Council."; 
(vi) Statute 9 shall be omitted; 
(vii) for Statute 14, the following St.atute shall be substituted, 
namely:-
Honorary 
Treasurer. 
"14. (1) The Court shaH consist of the following members, Court. 
25 namely:-
35 
045 
Ex-offi·cio mem'bers 
(i) Chancellor; 
(ii) Pro-Chancellor; 
(iii) Vice-Chancellor; 
(iv) Pro- Vice-Chancellor; 
(v) Honorary Treasurer; 
(vi) All Ex-Vice-Chancellors; 
(vii) All Deans of Faculties; 
(viii) Dean of Students' Welfare; 
(ix) Librarian: 
(x) Registrar; 
(xi) Five Provost~ by rotation according to seniority; 
(xii) Proctor; 
.Representatives of the Departments and Colleges 
(xiii) Twenty Chairmen of Departments. by rotation 
according to seniority; . , 
(riv).Principals of Colleges; 
RepTesentatit'es of teachers other than Chairmen of 
Departm.ents and Principals of Colleges 
(:tv) .Two PrOfeSSf'f!ll. who are not Chainnen of Depart-
ments, to be elected from amongst themselves; 

·~ 8 
(xvi) Three Readers to be elected tram· ...... ·~ 
selves; 
(xvii) Five Lecturers to be elected from amongst them-
selves; 
Representatives of Schools maintained by the U",iversity 
(xviii) Two Principals of Schools maintained by the 
University by rotdtion according to seniority; 
Representatives of non-teaching staff 
(xix) Five representatives. of non-teaching staff, to be 
s 
elected from amongst themselves; 10 
Repre.'1entath'es of ex-students 
(;rx) Twenty-five l'('presentatives of ex-studenta to be 
elected by the Alumni (Old Boys') Association; 
Representati1'es of donors 
(x.n) Ten representatives of donors wbp.''have donated 15 
at least a sum of ten thousand rupees or transferred Qroperty 
worth at least ten thousand rupees to the University, to be 
elected from amongst themselves; 
Representatives of learned professions, industry and commerce 
(xxii) Ten perso",,-~ representing the learned prafe&. ~ 
sions. industry and commerce, to be elected by the Court; 
Representatives Of the AU-India Mu.slim Education Conference 
(xxiii) Five representatives of the All-India Muslim 
Education Conference; 
Representatives of Parliament 
(xxiv) Ten members of Parliament, six to be elected by 
the House of the People (Lok Sabha) from amongst its 
members and four Lo be elected by the Council of States 
(Rajya Sahha) from amongst its members; 
Representat.i1'es of Muslim cutture and learning 
(xxv) Fifteen persons representing Muslim culture 
and learning to be elected. by. the C9urt, of whom ten shall 
be persons residing outside the State of Uttar Pradesh; ... 
(xxvi) Six persons representing Muslim Colleges of 
30 
Oriental Learning in India, ,lobe el~ted, by the Court;. 3S 
(xxvii) Four peI'3ons from .among.t the Chairmen (inclu-
ding Presidents) of the Wild Boards constituted under lie 
Wakf Act, 1954. (29 of 1954), orund«. 'a!ly other I." !D. 
force in a Stclte,tobe electeq by tAe.~Court; 
(ttxviii) Two persons'representing Urdu Lanpa .. aDd 4'l 
literature, .to be elected by the pourti.. ., 

10 
•• 
9 
(.r.rix) Five persons representing Muslim EducatJonal 
and Cultural Societies situated outside the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, to be elected by the Court; 
Representa.tives of students 
(xxx) (a) President, Vice-President, Secretary and one 
nominee of the Executive Cooncil of the Students' Union, 
e:r:-ojJicio ; 
(b) Eleven students to be elected by a simple majority 
by stUdents of the various faculties classified into groups in 
the manner prescribed by the Ordinances; 
Nominated persons 
(xxxi) Five persons to be nominated by the Visitor; 
(xxxii) One person to be nominated by the Chief Rector; 
(xxxiii) One per£on to be nominated by the Chancellor. 
IS Provided that in making nominations under items (xxxi) to 
25 
3S 
,. .... '. '" I/' ~ 
p. ,...-. '. 
(xxxiii), due regard shall be had to the representation of the 
different areas of the country in view of the all-India character 
of the University: 
Provided further that no employee of the University shall 
be eligible to be a member under items (xx) to (xxix) or under 
items (xxxi) to (xxxiii). 
(2) All the members of the Court, other than ex-officio 
members and members representing students, shall hold office 
for a term of three years. 
(3) An ex-afJicio member shall cease to be a member of the 
Court as soon as he vacatf'S the office by virtue of which he is 
such (l member. 
(4) Members representing students shall hold office for a 
.period of one . year or till such time as ij1ey continue to be stu-
dents, whichever is earlier."; 
(viii) in Statute 11>-
(a) for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(3) One-third of the members of the Court shall form 
. a quorum .for a meeting of the. Court."; 
.' ' (b) .' in the proviso to' clause .( 4), for the words "thirty-five 
members'\ the' words "one-third' of the members" shall be 
t substituted~ .. 
'r ., ..... (i::e) for Statute 16, the following'Statute &hall be substituted, 
4O·· .. "'hamel:t:- . 
, . ,. ~ , ~. 
c;~ "16.' "(h"Th~ Exec~tive Council Sh~. ~~ist of the follow-
ing members, namely: - . 
Executive 
CounCil 

· . 
10 
(i) Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) Pro-Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii.i) Honorary Treasurer; 
(iv) Five Deans of Faculties, by rotation, according to 
seniori ty ; ~ 
(v) Two Princip",ls of Colleges, other than the Principal 
of the Women's College, by rotation according to seniority; 
(vi) Principal, Women's College; 
(vii) One Provost, by rotation according to seniority; 
(viii) Proctor; 
(ix) Six members of the Court, none of whom shall be 
an employee of the University, to be elected from amongst 
themselves; 
(x) Two representatives of Professors and Readers to 
10 
be elected from amongst themselves; IS 
(xi) Two representatives of Lecturers to be elected 
from amongst themselves; 
(xii) Three persons to be nominated by the Visitor; 
(xiii) One person to be nominated by the Chief Rector: 
Provided that no employee of the University shall be eligible 20 
for nomination under items (xii) and (xiii). 
(2) All the members of the Executive Council, other than 
ex-otJi.cio members, shall hold office for a term of three years. 
(3) Fifteen members of the Executive Council shall form a 
quorum for a meeting of the Executive Counci1."; 25 
(x) in Statute 18-
(a) in clause (1)-
(1) in item (iv) , for the word "Heads", the word 
"Chairmen" shall be substituted; 
(2) item (vii) shall he omitted; 30 
(3) after item (xii). the folJowing items shall be 
inserted. nameJy:-
"(xiii) The President, Student'3' Union; 
(xiv) Two ~%t-graduate studen.ts, one research 
student and one under-graduate student, to be elected 3S 
by the students from amongst themselves: 
PrOvided that no student member of the Academie 
Council shall participate in the discussions in respect of 
matters relating to examinations, Selection Committees, 
appointment and condit.ions of service of the teaching 40 
staff."; 

.. 
________ . __ 11 ..... ""'~ _ 
• ,(b) in ciause(2). after the words "e;r-olficiO membtn", 
the words "and stuoent members" sball be inserted; 
(c) alter clause (~), the fOJ.!owlllg clause sball be inlel1ed, 
namelY:;-
s "(2A) The President, Students' Union shall hold office for so 
10 
long as ne ConLlnUes to nolO tne oltice oJ: tne .t'resluent, j:;~uae.nts' 
Uruou, ana every otner stuaent-memoer snau nOla olllce tor a 
pen{)d of one year: 
Provided that a student-member shall cease to hold office 
upon hlS ceasmg to oe a f:.tuaem of the Uruverslty."; 
(Xl) Statutes 24 and 25 shaH be omItted. 
21. (1) The Court and the ExecutIve Councll of the Ali'garh Muslim 
Umversny snaH, as soon as may oe, aILer tne COl1uut!J1ct!meuL 01 UUB .li.Ct, 
be constLLur.ea 10 accoraance WHn tne pr·ov.::'Jons 01 tne PL'lllCL.1'Cll .li.ct ana 
IS 0,[ IDe ;)La.uLes, as ameuaea oy trus act, ana unu! the Lourt or Ule 
J!:xecuuve CounCIL is so constJtutea, the CoUrt or tne LxecUtlVe COWICl! 
iunCLlOhlhg lInmeOJatelY oeIOre such commencement, snall conLLhue to 
exerCIse all the powers and perlorm ail the lunCLJollS unaer the pnnclpal 
Act, as so amenaed. 
20 (2) The Chancellor and the Pro-Chancellor shall, as soon as may be, 
after the commencement of thIS Act, be elected 10 accoraaIlce w.tn tne 
proviswns 01 the prillcJpal Act and of the ::itatutes, as amended by tJus 
Act, and the person holding any such oltice lmmediaLely oel0re such 
commencement, shall contlnue to hold that offiCe untIl hIS successor enters 
2S upon nlS oltice. 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor and the Pro-Vice-Chancellor and the Heads of 
Departments of the Allgarh Muslim University holding office imme-
wately before the commencement of thIS Act, shall, on and from such 
commencement, hold their respective offices by the same tenure and upon 
30 the same tenns and condltlOns as they held it immediately before such 
commencement. 
Transi. 
tional 
pru-
visiona. 
22. Anything done, any action taken or any degree or other academic Saving. 
distinction conferred by the Aligarh Muslim UniverSity before the com-
mencement of this Act shall, notWithstanding any change made by this 
Ac:t in the constitution of the Court or the Executive Council, be valid as if 
3S such thing was done, action was taken, or degree or academic distinction 
was conferred under the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by 
this Act. 

_ ••• ".' _ ,~ __ ••• 4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
- .~ - - \, - . °':1 
-x Sill to' ameIidthe Allgarh Muslim University Act, 1920; w'a~i'in~ 
duCea. in -the -LOk Sabha on 12tIi August; 1980, so as' to amend the defini-
tion of the expression 'University' and introduce' various other changes 
in the Act. Subsequently, representations were received from various 
Muslim organisations, the Vice-Chancellor and the representativ~ of the 
University teachers and student~ that amendments to the Statutes of 
the University should also be incorporated in the Bill and passed by 
P¥,liament along with the amennments to the Act. After examining 
these representations, it has been .decided to introduce a consOlidated 
Bill to amend both the Act and Statutes of the Aligarh Muslim University. 
2. The main features of the Bill are as follows:-
(If Omission of the words "establish and" from the long title' 
and preamble to the Act; 
(2) Amendment of the d~f.nition of the expression "University" 
" -occulTing in the Act; 
(3) . Empowering the Uni.v('fsity to promote especially the "edu-
cational and cultural advancement of the Muslims of India; 
.. (4) Restoring the status of the supreme governing body of the-·· 
University to the Court and modifying its composition; 
. (5) Change in the procedu:e of appointment of theC~cellor, 
Pro-Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor; . -
(6) Restoration of the office of the Honorary Treasurer; and 
(7) Modification of the composition of the Executive Council and 
the Academic Council. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DBLHI; S. B-. CHAVAN.-·--
The 19th December, 1980. 

,~~·..:.~r ':'.) ~:t',J 
Clause 16 of the Bill which proposes to substitute a new "~ :rot 
section 28 of the Aligarh Muslim. University Act, 1920,' enables the Court· 
of the University to make new I)';' additional· Statutes of the University 
or to amend or repeal such Statt!te-s. The matters in respect of which 
the Court may exercise this power relate to the constitution, powers and 
functions of the authorities of t!1e University, the manner df appOint:-
ment or election, of the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, the Vice-Chan<:el~ 
lor and other officers of the University, the manner of appointment ot 
teachers and other employees of the University and other matters. .. 
2. The above matters pertain to matters of procedure or detail and 
as such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character . 
, " 
J' 
.. 
.. " . ,J 
'. 
f (', • 
" .J .• , ' .) "; r: 'q 
, f'~ \ •.• 
(:1 ",. L) 
,-

De6Di-
tieDB. 
Powers of 
the Uni-
venltir. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS 'FROM '11IE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY Aer, 1920 
(40 or 1920) 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and residential Muslim 
University at Aligarh. 
• • • • • 
WHEREAS it is expedient to establish and incorporate a teaching and 
residential Muslim University at AUgarh, and to dissolve the Societies 
registered under the Societies' Registration Act. 1860 (21 of 1860), which 
are respectively known as the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, 
Aligarh, and the Muslim University Association. and to transfer to and 
vest in the said University all properties and rights of the said Societies 
~d of the Muslim University Foundation Committee; 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context 
otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(j) "Students' C<1UIlcil" means the Students' Council of the 
University; 
• • • • • 
(1) "University" means the Aligarh Muslim University . 
• • • • 
5. The University shall have the following powers, namely:-
• • * • • 
(2) (a) to promote Oriented and Islamic studies and give ins-
truction in Muslim theology and religion and to impart moral and 
physical training; 
• • • • • 
(7) to institute Professorships, Readerships, Lectureships and 
other teaching or academic posts required by the University. and to 
appoint persons to such Professorships, Readerships, Lectureships 
and other posts; 
• • * • • 
(9) to institute and maintain, within a radius of twenty-five 
kilometres of the University Mosque, Halls and hostels and to recog-
nise places of residence for the students of the University within the 
said limits and to withdraw such recognition accorded·to any such 
place of residence; 
• • .. • • 
(llB) to create administrative, mi.nist.erial and other posts aDd 
to make appointments thereto; 
• • • • • 
• 

j4 of 1972. 
•• 
IS 
8. The University shall be 9{)eIl to peraons of either sex and: ~t wha,," 
ever race, creed, caste, or class, an 1 it shall not be lawful for the Univer-
sity to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious 
belief or profession in order to entitle him to be admitted therein, as a 
teachel" or student, or to hold any office therein, or to graduate thereat, 
or to enjoy or exercise any privi1~ge thereof, except in respect of any 
particular benefaction accepted by the University, before the commence-
ment of the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1972, where 
such test is made a condition thereof by any testamentary or other 
instrument creating such benefaction: 
Provided that nothing in this s!'ction shall be deemed to prevent reli-
gious instruction being giVe'll in the manner prescribed by the Ordinan-
ces to those who have consented to receive it. 
• • • • 
16. The following shall be offirers of the University:-
• • • • • 
17. (1) The Chancellor of the University shall be appointed by the 
Visitor in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
• • • • • 
18. (1) The Pro-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
• • • • 
21. The powers of officers other than the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancel-
lor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor. the Registrar and the 
Finance Officer shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
• • • • • 
22. The following shall be the authorities of the University:-
• • • • 
(3B) The Faculties; 
(3C) The Students' CounciJ; and 
• • • • • 
.23. (1) The constitution of the Court and the terttn of ofIice of its 
meinbers shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the 
following powers and functions, namely:-
(a) to review from time to time, the broad policies and pro-
grammes of the University and to suggest measures for the improve-
ment and development of the University; 
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the ann\1&l report, Mn~l 
accounts of the University and. the audit report thereop; 
Univer-
sity 
open to 
all 
classes, 
castes 
and 
creeds. 
Officers 
If the 
University. 
The 
Chancel-
lor. 
The 
Pru~ 
Chan-
ceJl.oe. 
Powers 
of other 
officers. 
Authori-
ties ot the 
Univer-
sity. 
The 
Court. 

, ' 
Other 
authori-
ties of 
the 
Univer-
sity. 
Power to 
make 
Statutes. 
Statuia 
" 16 
(e') to advise the ViBitor in respect of any matter which'may be 
referred to it for' advice: and . 
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by . the 
Statutes. 
• • • • 
26. The constitution, powers and functions of the Faculties and of 
the Students' Council and of such other authorities as may be declared 
by the Statutes to be authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes. 
27. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the StatutE!6 may provide 
for all or lUly of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities of 
the University, the Finance Committee and such other authorities as 
may be comtituted from time to time; 
• • • • • 
(c) the manner of appointm~nt of the Chancellor. Vice-Chancel-
lor, and other officers of the l:niversity; 
• '. • • 
28. (1) On and from the commencement of the Aligarh Muslim Uni-
versity (Amendment) Act, 1972, the Statutes, as set out in the Schedule, 34 ot 1972. 
shall be the Statutes of the University: 
Provided that the provisions of Statutes 29 to 45, both inclusive. of the 
University (relating to provident fund, pension and gratUity for the em .. 
ployees of the University), as in force immediately before such com-
mencement, shall be deemed to be included in the Statutes set out in the 
Schedule and shall, until new Statutes are made under gu,b-section (2), 
continue in force subject to such modifications [being modifications 
necessary for bringing them into accord with the provisions of this Act 
as amended by the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1972] 
as the Executive Council may, with the approval of the Visitor, make. 
(2) After the commencement df the Aligarh Muslim University 
(Amendment) Act, 1972, the Executive Council may, notwithstanding 
anything contained in sub-6ection (1), make new or additional Statutes 
or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section (1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal 
any Statute affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority 
,of the University until such autho,rity of the University has been given 
an opportunity of expressing the opinion on the proposed changes whiCh 
shall be in writing and shall be considered by the Executive CounciL 
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any 8J!l8II1dment 
or repeal of a Statute shaUrequire the previous approvlll ,Df.the Visitor 
who may sanction or disallow it or return it to the Executive Council for 
further eonsideration. ... 
• • '" • • 
340t 1972. 
34 ot 1972. 

• • • • 
(3) The EXeC'l.ltive Council may direct the amendment, in such :man-
ner as it may specify, of any Regulation made under this section or the 
annulment of any such Regulation . 
• • • • • 
BeauJa .. 
tiOIll. 
35. (1) The annual accounts and balance-sheet of the University.hall Annual 
be prepared under the direction of the Executive Council, and shall once accOUIlb. 
at least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen months be 
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The annual accounts when audited shall be published in the om-
cial Gazette, and a copy of the accounts, together with the report of the 
C()mptroller and Auditor-General shall be submitted to the Court, the 
Visitor and the Chancellor alongwith the observations of the Executive 
Council. 
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts 
shall be brought to the notice of the Court and of the Chancellor and the 
observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the 
Executive Council, be submitted to the Visitor . 
• • • • • 
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY 
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor on the re- The Chan-
commendation of the Court. cellor. 
(2) The Chancellor '.>hall hold office for a term of three years and 
shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
lA. (1) The Pro-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor on the 
recommendation of the Court. 
(2) The Pro-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three years and 
shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
2. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from 
a panel of not less than three persons selected by' a Committee as cons-
tituted under clause (2) and the panel shall be prepared in the 'alphabe-
tical order and will not indicate any order of preference: 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons 
included in the panel, he may call for a 'fresh panel. 
(2) The Committee referred to :n clause (1) shall consist of three 
persons, none of whom shall be an ~mployee Of t?-e UniverSity or a mem-
ber of the Court, Executive CouncIlor Acadenuc Council. Out of the 
three persons, two shall be nominated .b~ the Executive Council and one 
by the Visitor. The nominee of the VISItor shall be the Convener . 
• • • • • 
The Pro-
Chancel-
lor. 
The Vice-
Chancel-
lor. 

, .~inance 
,'Officer. 
Court. 
18 
6. (1) • • • • • 
(4) The Finance Officer shall-
,,(4) exaer.cise-general supervision over the f\W.ds; Of Ute ,University 
and shall advise it as regards its fiDancial policy; and 
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned 
to him by the Executive Council or as may be prescribed by these 
Statutes or the Ordin-anees: 
Provided that the Finance Officer shall not incur any eIXpeaditure or 
, make any investment exceeding Rs. 10,000 without the previous,'approval 
of the Executive Co.uncil. 
• • • • • 
14. (1) The Court shall consist of the following members, namely:-
Ex-ofjicio members 
(i) V ice-Chancellor, 
(ii) An ex-Vice-Chancellors, 
(i.ii) Pro-Vice-Chancellor, 
(iv)' All Deans of Faculties, 
(v) Chairman, Students' Council, 
(vi) Dean of Students' Welfare, 
(vii) Librarian, 
(viii) Registrar, 
(-ax) 50 per cent. Provosts, by rotation according to seniority, 
(x) Proctor; 
Representatives of Departments and CoUeges 
(xi) All Principals df CoJl<.>ges and Polytechnic, 
(xii) Heads of Departments of Studies by rotation according to 
seniority in each Faculty as shown below-
Faculty of Arts 4 
Faculty of Engineering and Technology 1 
Faculty of MediCine 5 
F'aculty of Science 5 
FaCulty o'f Social Sciences; 4 
Represet'atatwes of UnioeTsity Teachers otheT than' Heads Of ~Pments 
and Principals 
(rii'i) '(a) Five' Professors to be eh!cted from ambngst them-
selves, 
1 (bVFi've Readers to be elected from amongst "the:iMelves, 
'(c)'Five ,Lecturers to be- elected tram amOngst th8nu1e1.vesj 
Repraemaiiues of 'Students 
(xi~) (a) President, Vice-President, secretary and one nominee 
of the Executive Committee of the- Students' Union, 

(b) Secretary, Students' Council, 
(C) Two persons to be elected by the Students! C01.mbt} frctim: its 
own members, provided that on~ Of them shall be a Secret.aty":Of"the: c 
Studen~ Advisory Committee of a Faculty, I 
(d) J'aur membeIIs to be elected by -an eleetoralcollege,mDIiI" 
lng. of.tudents who have shown their academic merit in the manner 
prescribed by the Ordinances, : 
(e) Four members to be elected. by an electoral college or col-
leges· consiSting of the student members of the Cultural CQimmttee, 
Social Service Committee 'and the Games Committee in the manner' 
prescribed by the Ordinances; 
Representatiues Of e;v.stu.dents 
(.w) Fifteen representativec; to be elected by the Alumni (Old' 
Boys') Association; 
Representatives of Parliament 
(xvi). Ten representatives of Parliament, six to be nominated by' 
the Speaker of the Lok Sabh3 from among the members thereOf and" 
four to be nominated by thE' Chairman of the Rajya Sabha from 
'among the members thereof; 
Persons representing learned professions and special i'llte1"es" 
(xvii) Ten members from learned professions and special inte-
rests including representatives of Industry, Commerce, Trade trnioris; 
Banking and Agriculture to be nominated by the Visitor; 
Nominated Members 
(xvi'ii) A person nominated by the Chief Rector; 
(xix) Three person'S nominated by the Chancellor; 
Remaining members Of the Executive Cou~il 
(xx) The members of the Executive Council not specified above; 
'I" I' . 
Representatives of Non-Teaching Staff 
(xxi) Ten representatives of the non-teaching staff to be el~ted 
from amongst themo.selves; 
Representatives of Muslim Culture and Learning 
(xxii) Five persons reprc!:cntlng Muslim Culture and Learnil'lg' 
to be elected by the Court; 
Representatives Of Donors 
(xxiii) Representatives of persons making to. the University a 
donation of Rs. 5,000 or more or transferring property of like value 
to be elected from amongst them.>elves. . There shall be one repre-
sentative for every fifty such donor/! lIut>ject to a ~mum. of ~ 
representatives; 
10 

Meetings 
of the 
Court. 
Executive 
Council. 
20 
DonOTS 
(xxiv) Every person who has made to the Univen>ity, a donation 
of one lakh of rupees or more or transferred property of the like 
value; 
Representatives of AU-India Muslim Education Conference 
(xxv) Two representativt':'! to be elected by the All-India 
Muslim Education Conference: 
Provided that the election under items (xiii), (xiv), (xv), (xxi), 
(xxii) and (xxiii) shall be in accordance with the system of propor-
tional representation by means of single transferable vote. 
(2) (i) All the members of the Court other than ex-OjJicio members 
and members representing the stwients, shall hold office for a term of 
three years. 
(ii) An ex-offiCiO member shall cease to be a member of the Court 
as soon as he vacates the office by virtue of which he is such member. 
(iii) Members representing students will hold office for a period of 
one year or till such time as they continue to be students, whichever is 
earlier. 
(3) No student, who has pass~d the High School or an equivalent 
examination more than eight years earlier or the Pre-University or an 
equivalent examination more than SE"ven years earlier or has taken more 
than one year in excess of the period prescribed for the course for which 
he is a student shall be eligible to hecome a member under item (xiv): 
Provided that no student shall be eligible to b~ome a member of the 
Court unless he has been on the rolls of the University for at least one 
year before he enters upon his offic~ as such member. 
(4) No employee of the University or of a recognised institution shall 
be eligible to be a member of the Court under any of the items (xv) 
to (xviii), 
15. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Thirty-five members of thE" Court shall form a q'Uorum. 
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive 
Council or the Vice-Chancellor, or, if there is no Vic~Chancellor:, by the 
Pro-Vice.oChancellor, or, if there is no Pro-Vice-Chancellor, by the 
Registrar: 
Provided that a special meeting of the Court shall also be called if 
thirty-five members of the Court make a requisition in writing in this 
behalf. 
16. (1) The Executive Council shall consist of the following membera, 
namely:-
(i) Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) Pro-Vice-Chancellor; 
(iii) (a)' ~p, Faculty of Arts; 
1 
1 

21 
(b-) Dean, Faculty of Soci&l Sciences; 
(c) Dean, Faculty of Sci~nce; 
.. 
(d) One Dean, by rotation from among the Deans of the Facul-
ties of Medicine and Engineering; 
(e) One Dean, by rotation from among the Deans of the Facul-
ties 0'£ Law, Commerce and Theology; 5 
(iv) One Principal from the Principals of Women's College, 
Zakir Husain Engineering Collf:'ge and Jawaharlal Nehru Medical 
College by rotation according to seniority !lSi Principal; 1 
(v) One Professor, other than a Dean or a Principal by rotation 
according to seniority; 1 
(vi) Three teachers to he E"lected by the teachers of the Uni-
versity from amongst themselves in accordance with the system of 
proportional representation by means of single transferable vote; 3 
(vii) Five persons to be elected by the Court from among its 
members by a system of proportional representatiOn by means of 
a single transferable vote none of whom shall be an employee or a 
student of the University or a college maintained' by the University 
of whom at least three shall bE' persons normally residing outside the 
State of Uttar Pradesh; 5 
(viii) Four persons to be Mminated by the Visitor: 4 
21 
Provided that until the members referred to in sub-clause (vii) are 
duly elected, the Executive COI.Incil shall consist of the members specified 
in sub-clauses (i) to (vi), both inclusive, and sub-clause (viii). 
(2) All the members of the Executive Council other than e:r-ojJicio 
members shall hold office for a term of three years. 
(3) No employee of the University shall be eligible to be a member 
under S'Ub-clause (viii) of clause (1). 
(4) Seven members of the Executive Council shall form the quorum. 
(5) When an elected member of the Executive Council becomes also 
an ex-afficio member thereof he shall cease to be an elected. member 
thereof and continue as such ex-OjJicio member . 
... ... • ... • 
18. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, 
namely:-
... ... • • 
' . 
(iv) Heads of Departments of Studies; 
... ... ... ... • 
(vii) Chairman, Students' Council; 
... • • • 
(ix) Three Professors; five Readers; and seven Lecturers to be 
elected from each categorv by the teachers in that category in 
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means 
of a single transferable vote; 
... ... • • 
Academic 
Counc'll 

Students' 
CoUDdl. 
Powers 
and 
functions 
of 
Students' 
Council. 
.. _. -~ ... 
22 
(2) ~The members of the Academic . Council, otherthane:t..,o~ 
members shall hold office for a term of two years. 
• • • • • 
24. V)', The.,compositioD of ,the Students' Council m~y be as foUow~:,­
(i) Chafrman; 
(~. All tbe.tu~t members, of the Court; 
(iii) Fifteen students be elected by the students in accordance 
with ,the' system' 'Of ·proportiona.l representation and by means ·of ostngle 
traftsferable vote on the basIs of 'allocation of seats to difterent .. Facul .. 
ties.!",.ccording to their strength as may be prescribed I ' in the 
Orairumcaa:. 
Proy\~e~. that no student who has passed the High School or an equi-
valent exaI!]ination more than eight. years earlIer or the Pre-University 
or an equivalent! examination more than seven years earlier or has 
taken mWe th~. one year in. excess of the period prescribed for' the 
course for whi~h he is a stuqent. shpU be eligible to become a member 
of the Students' Council. 
(2) 'The ~cretaryof 'the Studenfls' Council shall be elected by it from 
amongst. its members through the system of proportional representation 
by meas of single transferable vote. 
25. (1). ThepoweJ;s and function·s Of the Students' Council shall be as 
fal1o~=-
(i) to make recommendatIons to the Executive and Academic 
Councils in matters ~ffecting the academic work of the students such 
as the structure of courses, pattern of instruction, food, the corporate 
life of the University in so far 3S it concerns the students, and the 
co~curri'cular and extra-curricular activities in the University; 
(ii)~ all" rules affecting dift'iptine, welfare, sports, literary and.· 
d~r.tIll~n.tal. ~ieties, management Of hostels, student homes, non-
resj~ .. stu4~tlt centres, extension work, '.~ocial work, stude.pts 
health, National Service Scheme, National Cadet Corps, etc., shall 
ordimuily be placed before the Students' Council for obtaining its 
views, which will then be communicated to the Academic and Execu-
tiv~, C~~.ils for deciosion; 
(im the Council shall have the right to communicate its views, 
observations and recommendations to the Vice-Chancellor or any 
authority of the University, in respect of any matter which concerns 
the '.3tudents. 
(2) The meetings o.f the Students' Counci.l shall be held at least three 
times every year, and not more than six months shall elapse between 
two meetmgs. Extraordinary meetings may be held either at theinst&nce 
of the Chairman, or at the request of not less than half ·Of the membel:s: 
of the CoUncil. Ten members of the Council shall form the quwllm fO'l" 
a meeting of the Student'S' Council. 
• • • 

WK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920. 
(Shri S. B. Chavan, Minister of Education and SociD1. Welfare.) 