Short title and
commencement.
THE   CODE  OF  CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE  (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI  BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB,  M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
   Bill No. 212 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, after section 199, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
"199A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything in this Code, every report or
complaint of a missing child shall be presumed to be an offence of abduction or
trafficking and such report or complaint shall be recorded in accordance with
the provisions of section 154.
(2) Where the Investigating Officer, in the course of investigation, is
satisfied that the presumption of abduction or trafficking is not maintainable,
he shall forward to a magistrate empowered to take cognizance of such offence,
a report in the form prescribed by the State Government in this behalf.".
Insertion of new
section 199A.
Investigation
procedure in
cases of missing
children.
2 of 1974.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, a countless number of children disappear every year. What is worse
is that only a little less than two-third of them are traced and restored to their families.
Often such untraced children are pushed into forced labour, commercial sexual
exploitation, illegal adoption rackets, organ trade, medical testing and other crimes
including begging, pick pocketing, addiction, etc. In 2005, the National Human Rights
Commission (NHRC) informed that on an average 44,000 children are reported missing
every year. Of these, as many as 11,000 remain untraced.
A major reason for untraceability of such a large number of children is the
inadequate provisions in law for giving priority investigation to such cases. While
many cases of missing children go unreported, in many other cases a mere missing
report is filed wherein no cognizable offence is made out until and evidence to
corroborate such offence is found. As a result, a missing child appears merely as an
entry in the policy diary.
The 'Bachpan Bachao Andolan' raised the issue of missing children before
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a Public Interest Litigation. The Court ruled that the
cases of missing children should be treated as cognizable offence and a First
Information Report be lodged accordingly to facilitate proper and timely investigation
into the matter.
With the above objects in view, the Bill seeks to provide that in the case of
every report or complaint of a missing child, there will be an initial presumption of
abduction or trafficking and an F.I.R. will be lodged accordingly.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
July 6,  2015.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1493LS—(S3)—23.07.2015.