1
Short title
and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2018
By
SHRI KUNW AR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL,  M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause ( k), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(l) to participate in the efforts for de-addiction and propagate the ill-effects of
addiction to intoxicants.".
Bill  No. 212 of  2018
Amendment
of article
51A.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is estimated that the number of people addicted to intoxicants in the country is
around eight crores which is a huge number. This menace has spread its wings across India
and both men and women are affected by this bad habit. But the most affected are the
women. Though, in India when compared to men, women are less addicted to intoxicants but
it is the women who bear the brunt of it the most. The increase in the number of cases of
violence against women is only due to addiction to intoxicants and the main reason behind
sexual exploitation and sexual violence is consumption of intoxicants as a result of which
women feel insecure not only in the outside world but in the safe environment of their homes
also.
Further, addiction to intoxicants among the youth has become a grave issue. Youth are
the future of our country and by getting addicted to intoxicants they have gone astray
thereby ruining not only their future but also of the country. This does not augur well for a
land of wisdom like India. Hence, every alert citizen must actively participate in the efforts to
prohibit the addiction to intoxicants and to take every possible effort to protect himself/
herself and the society from the ill-effects of intoxicants.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
November 19, 2018.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
51A.  It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
* * * * * * *
(k) Who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his
child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
* * * * * * *
3
Fundamental
duties.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2229LS(S3)—18-12-2018.