Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No.  212 of  2022
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)  
BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Kඎඇඐൺඋ Dൺඇංඌඁ Aඅං,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2022.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and commencement.

   2.   In section 58 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act),—
     ( a) in sub-section (1), clause (aa) shall be omitted; and
     ( b) in sub-section (2), in clause (b), the words '' the  mechanical  failure  of  the    
  voting machine or'' shall be omitted.
   3 .  Section 61A of the principal Act shall be omitted.
   4 .  In section 135A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the Explanation,—
     ( a) in para (a), the words ''or voting machines'' shall be omitted; and
     ( b) in para (d), the words ''or voting machines'' shall be omitted.
   5 .  In section 169 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
     ( a) clause (ee) shall be omitted;
     ( b) clause (gg) shall be omitted; and
     ( c) in clause (h), the words ''voting machines,'' shall be omitted.
   
Amendment of 
section 58.
Omission of 
section 61A.
Amendment of 
section 135A.
Amendment of 
section 169.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
      Free and fair elections are vital for the democratic values of any nation. It includes fair, 
accurate and transparent election process that can be independently verified. The traditional 
voting system accomplishes many of these goals. Electronic V oting Machine (EVM) are 
prone to errors and several countries in the world have stopped using EVMs as doubts 
have been raised about its veracity. Electronic V oting Machines should be replaced with 
traditional ballot papers in our country also. V oting through ballot papers is a more reliable 
and transparent method for the election process of any country. EVMs can be tampered 
with during manufacturing process itself and in such cases there is no need for any hacker 
or rigger to tamper with the actual voting. No machine in the world is hundred percent 
free from errors. Questions about the reliability of Electronic V oting Machines have been 
continuously raised.
      Therefore, voting machines should be replaced with more reliable system of vote through 
ballot papers so that free and fair elections are conducted in the country and the public’s faith 
in the democracy remains intact.
 Hence this Bill.
          Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                KUNWAR DANISH ALI
      11 August, 2022.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Rൾඉඋൾඌൾඇඍൺඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Tඁൾ Pൾඈඉඅൾ Aർඍ, 1951
(43 ඈൿ 1951)
*                         *                            *          *
 58.   (1)  If at any election,—
*                         *                            *          *
   ( aa) any voting machine develops a mechanical failure  during the  course of  
  the recording of votes; or
  ( 2)  Thereupon the Election Commission shall, after taking all material 
circumstances into account; either—
*                         *                            *          *
  ( b) if satisfied that the result of a fresh poll at that polling station or place will not, 
in any way, affect the result of the election or that 5 [the mechanical failure of the voting 
machine or] the error or irregularity in procedure is not material, issue such directions to 
the returning officer as it may deem proper for the further conduct and completion of the 
election.
*                         *                            *          *
 61A .  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder, the 
giving and recording of votes by voting machines in such manner as may be prescribed, may 
be adopted in such constituency or constituencies as the Election Commission may, having 
regard to the circumstances of each case, specify. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, "voting machine" means any machine or 
apparatus whether operated electronically or otherwise used for giving or recording of votes 
and any reference to a ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or the rules made thereunder 
shall, save as otherwise provided, be construed as including a reference to such voting 
machine wherever such voting machine is used at any election.]
*                         *                            *          *
 135A . (1)*                       *                    *              *
Explanation.— For the purposes of [this sub-section and section 20B], "booth capturing" 
includes, among other things, all or any of the following activities, namely:— 
  ( a) seizure  of a  polling  station  or  a  place fixed for  the poll  by   any  person    
 or persons, making polling authorities surrender the ballot papers or voting  machines  
 and  doing of any other act which affects the orderly conduct of elections;
*                         *                            *          *
  ( d) seizure  of   a place  for  counting  of votes  by any person or persons, making  
 the counting authorities surrender the ballot papers or voting machines and the doing   
 of anything which affects the orderly counting of votes;
*                         *                            *          *
V oting 
machines at 
elections.
Oﬀence of 
booth 
capturing.
Fresh poll in 
the case of 
deﬆruction, 
etc., of ballot 
boxes.

 169 .  (2)    In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
         ( ee)   the  manner of  giving and  recording of votes by means of voting machines  
and  the procedure as to  voting to be followed at polling  stations where such machines are  
used;
  ( gg) the procedure as to counting of votes recorded by means of voting machines;
  ( h) the safe custody of ballot boxes, voting machines, ballot papers and other 
election papers, the period for which such papers shall be preserved and the inspection and 
production of such papers;
*                         *                            *          *
                               
Power to 
make rules.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri  Kunwar Danish Ali, M.P .)