1
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 213 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE WOMEN AND GIRL CHILD (PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES)
BILL, 2019
By
SMT. RITI PATHAK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for stringent punishment to curb atrocities against girl child and women,
rehabilitation measures for victims of atrocities and constitution of special
courts to try cases of atrocities against women and girl child and for
 matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women and Girl Child (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions.5

2
(b) 'atrocity' includes,—
(i) parading any woman or girl child naked or painting their face or body
black or similar acts;
(ii) compelling or enticing any woman or girl child to do begaar or bonded
labour or any work without payment;
(iii) using one's position to harass any woman or girl child or sexually
exploit or insult or intimidate with intention to humiliate publicly;
(iv) taking pictures or video without consent, or forcing any woman or girl
child into prostitution;
(c) 'girl child' means any female who has not completed the age of eighteen
years;
(d) 'stripping' means forcible removing or tearing of cloth or part thereof worn by
a girl child or woman with the intention of exposing the body or any part thereof of
such girl child or woman, as the case may be;
(e) 'teasing' includes uttering words, song, making the sound of whistle or gesture,
exhibiting any object or part of the body, throwing any object or doing any unwanted
act to attract the attention of a girl child or woman;
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, any person,
who outrages the modesty of any woman or girl child by stripping them publicly shall be
punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten
years and with fine which may extend to rupees ten lakh.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, any person,
who teases any woman or girl child shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be
less than three years and with the fine which shall not be less than rupees two lakh but which
may extend to rupees five lakh.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, or any other
Act, for the time being in force, any person who offers any woman or girl child as devdasi or
forces them into prostitution shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be less
than three years and with fine which shall not be less than rupees two lakh but which may
extend to rupees five lakh.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, any person,
who commits any atrocity on any woman or girl child at any place and at any point of time
shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than five years and with fine
which may extend to rupees five lakh.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, any person
who commits the offence of rape on any woman or girl child shall be punished with death.
8. Whoever, being a public servant, is convicted of wilfully neglecting his duties
required to be performed under this Act, shall be,—
(a) dismissed from service; and
(b) punished with imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less than one year
but may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to rupees two lakh.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Punishment
for outraging
the modesty
of a woman or
girl child.
Punishment
for offering
any woman or
girl child as
devdasi or
forcing them
into
prostitution.
Punishment
for teasing of a
woman or girl
child.
Punishment for
committing
atrocity on a
woman or girl
child.
Punishment for
committing
rape on a
woman or girl
child.
Punishment
for public
servant for
wilfully
neglecting his
duties.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The appropriate Government shall, with the concurrence of the concerned
High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Special Court in each district
to try offences under this Act.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide such relief to the victims under this
Act by framing appropriate schemes as may be notified, from time to time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the relief and
rehabilitation measures shall include,—
(a) free medical facilities;
(b) free boarding and lodging facilities;
(c) recreational facilities;
(d) vocational training;
(e) employment in deserving cases; and
(f) such other facilities as the appropriate Government may deem necessary
and expedient to provide for the purposes of this Act.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any custom or usage or any instrument having effect by virtue of any other
law.
14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Establishment
of special
courts.
Offence to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Relief and
rehabilitation
measures.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
2 of 1974.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
30
20
25
35

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our society, despite reforms and awakening, it is very unfortunate that young girls
and women are still most vulnerable to various atrocities and violence. Teasing and molesting
them even at public places, public transport, etc. have become order of the day. These
teasers have become fearless. The anti-social elements pass vulgar remarks, make obscene
gestures and meddle hastily with girls and women, which many a time cause bodily injury to
them. No person, who witnesses these incidents, dares to come to rescue of such hapless
girls or women. They are subjected to all kinds of torture in public transport, public places.
Most of these cases go unreported. Many a time women are reportedly stripped and paraded
naked in villages and streets and beaten ruthlessly. In some parts of the country, the women
are being branded as witches and killed ruthlessly which needs to be dealt with severely by
providing deterrent punishment. Similarly, in some parts of the country, girls are offered as
devdasis to deities in the temples which ultimately makes them sex workers. Similarly, young
girls and women are abducted and forced into prostitution. The number of cases of rape of
girl child and women are increasing rapidly. Some of these girls and women are brutally killed
after rape. There is no fear of law among the rapists. Hence, it has become necessary to
provide deterrent punishment for the perpetrators of atrocities against the girl child and
women in order to restore a respectable position to the women and girl child in the society. It
is expected that such stringent measures will curb the atrocities against the girl child and
women in the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RITI PATHAK
July 19, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Courts. Clause 11 provide
for relief and rehabilitation measures for victims by the appropriate Government. Clause 12
provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds to the State Governments
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand crore
will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of  India.
A sum of rupees seven thousand crore will also be involved as non-recurring
expenditure.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of  a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for stringent punishment to curb atrocities against girl child and women,
rehabilitation measures for victims of atrocities and constitution of special
courts to try cases of atrocities against women and girl child and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Riti Pathak, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2810LS(S3)—23.10.2019.