1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE TUBERCULOSIS (PREVENTION AND ERADICATION)
BILL, 2018
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish a Tuberculosis Prevention Authority for prevention and complete
eradication of tuberculosis and for all matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
WHEREAS India ratified the World Health Organisation Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control in 2005,
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tuberculosis (Prevention and Eradication) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "annual report" means a report giving the details of developmental activities
taken up over the year by the Authority and detailing about targets set and achieved;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
Bill  No. 213 of  2018
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
18 of 2013.
Constitution
of the
Tuberculosis
Prevention
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
(c) "Authority" means the Tuberculosis Prevention Authority constituted under
section 3;
(d) "company" means an entity registered under the Companies Act, 2013;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(f) "tuberculosis" means an infectious disease caused by a bacterium,
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis that is spread through the air; and
(g) "society" means an entity registered as society under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette specify, there shall be constituted an Authority to be known as the
Tuberculosis Prevention Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority consist of,—
(a) Minister of  State, Union Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare—Chairperson,
ex officio;
(b) Minister of State, Union Ministry of Women and Child Development—Vice-
Chairperson, ex officio;
(c) Director General of Health Services, Union Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare—member, ex-officio;
(d) Secretaries of the Union Ministies of Women and Child Development, Health
and Family Welfare and Statistics and Programme Implementation—members, ex officio;
(e) Chairperson, National Commission for Women—member, ex-officio; and
(f) Director, National Institute of  Health and Family Welfare—member, ex-officio.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(3) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of services of officers and staff of
the authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(2) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the Members referred to in
sub-clauses (a) to (f) of section 3, shall be borne by their concerned controlling authorities.
5. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as may be necessary for prevention
and eradication of tuberculosis in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of forgoing provisions, the authority shall,—
(a) formulate a Charter outlining its objectives along with roadmap to eradicate
tuberculosis, within one year of its constitution;
 (b) disseminate any necessary knowledge and information collected on the
control of tuberculosis to the State Governments to be disseminated to tuberculosis
Control Centres;
(c) undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about causes of
tuberculosis, risk factors and vulnerable population, within one year of setting up of
the Authority.
(d) direct the appropriate Government to assist in conducting the baseline study;
Functions of
the Authority.
21 of 1860.
35
40

3
(e) direct the State Governments to establish Tuberculosis (TB) Control Centres
at district level within one year of the commencement of this Act;
(f) direct healthcare service providers to follow the standard tuberculosis
diagnosis and treatment protocol; and
(g) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it, from time to time for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The tuberculosis Control Centres shall provide free screening of tuberculosis
and cost-free treatment to the patients, until complete recovery from the disease.
(2) The State Government shall also provide healthcare coupons to patients diagnosed
with tuberculosis, which may be redeemed for cost-free treatment at private hospitals.
7. (1) The State Government shall provide for mobile tuberculosis vans for active
screening of tuberculosis, especially in remote rural areas.
(2) The patient screened tuberculosis positive with the mobile vanas, shall be referred
to the nearest tuberculosis Control Centres for follow-up care and treatment with the
assistance from the appropriate Government.
8. The State Government shall undertake mobile tuberculosis immunization drive to
vaccinate children who were either not vaccinated or underwent incomplete vaccination.
9. The State Government shall direct the concerned authorities to undertake air borne
infection control in high risk and vulnerable areas.
10. The appropriate Government shall provide additional nutritional support to
tuberculosis patients at tuberculosis Control Centres, to incentivise patients  in increasing
their adherence to treatment and reduce drop outs.
11. The Central Government shall issue notification mandating the registered
companies and societies manufacturing and distributing tobacco related products, to
contribute five per cent. of their annual sales value for research on new drugs and diagnostic
tools for tuberculosis.
12. The State Governmetn shall provide extensive facilities at the primary health
centres and tuberculosis Control Centres for diagnosis and  treatment of drug resistant
strain of tuberculosis.
13. (1) The appropriate Government shall undertake outreach activities to communicate
to citizens of the factors contributing to tuberculosis, symptoms of tuberculosis and its ill
effects, especially in rual areas.
(2) The nurses and the staff at the tuberculosis Control Centres shall educate the
tuberculosis patients on the cough etiquette.
(3) The appropriate Government shall nobilise the local population in increasing
awareness of tuberculosis in citizens.
14. The appropriate Government shall provide for tobacco cessation counselling
services at all tuberculosis Control Centres.
15. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) undertake outreach and communication activities to increase awareness in
women, especially in rural areas, of ill effects of tobacco consumption on their
reproductive health and babies;
Cost-free
screening and
treatment of
tuberculosis.
Mobile
tuberculosis
vans for
active
screening.
Mobile
tuberculosis
vaccine
immunization
drive.
Air borne
infection
control in
high risk
areas.
Nutritional
support to
tuberculosis
patients.
Funding
research on
new drugs and
diagnostic
tools for
tuberculosis.
Facilities for
treating drug
resistant
strain of
tuberculosis.
Outreach
activities to
increase
awareness of
tuberculosis.
Tobacco
cessation
services.
Awareness in
women of ill
effects of
tobacco
consumption
on reproductive
health.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
(b) provide for tobacco cessation counselling services at all antenatal clinics
and primary health centres; and
(c) increrase awareness in rural households about the lethal potential of indoor
air pollution from chulhas, and undertake necessary steps to curb the same.
16. (1) The Central Government while allocating resources to a State Government for
tuberculosis control, shall take into consideration the health and development indicators
alongwith the past years spending potential of that State.
(2) The Central Government shall increase the proportion of health sector budget to at
least three per cent. of Gross Domestic Product by the year 2020.
17. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, an annual
report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes it has undertaken and
recommended to the Government over the year and it shall contain statements of annual
accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and the Central
Government shall lay the report before each House of Parliament.
18. The Central Government, will from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
19. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Governments, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give
such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be
necessary or  expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the pruposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as  soon as may be after it is made,
before each Houses of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of  thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annualment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
State's budget
for tuberculosis
control to be
indexed so its
health and
development
indicators.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual report
and its laying
before the
parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As per the statistics of World Health Organisation, India accounts for half a million
deaths annually due to tuberculosis. The data from the Central Bureau of Health Intelligence
also identifies tuberculosis as the leading cause of deaths in the country, accounting for
63,297 deaths in 2015. The Bill provides for free screening and treatment of tuberculosis at
tuberculosis Control Centres established at district level in every state. The patients are also
provided with an alternative of healthcare coupons that can be redeemed at any private
hospital for free tuberculosis related treatment and care. Mobile tuberculosis vans are provided
for active screening of tuberculosis in high risk population, especially in rural areas.
Tuberculosis positive patients thus screened are referred to the nearest tuberculosis Control
Centres for follow-up treatment and care. The Bill directs the State Government to undertake
mobile tuberculosis immunization dirve to vaccinate children. The Bill also directs the
government to undertake air borne infection control activities in areas vulnerable to disease.
The Bill aims to reduce drop outs from treatment and increase the patients compliance,
through provision of nutritional supplements at tuberculosis Control Centres. To fund research
in new drugs and diagnostic tools for tuberculosis, the Bill mandates all private and
government companies involved in manufacture and distribution of tobacco related products,
to contribute five per cent. of their annual sales value. The Bill also proposes 100% tax onall
tobacco and tobacco related products, including smokeless tobacco like ghutka etc. The Bill
has provision to mobilise local population to increase outreach to citizens about factors
contributing to tuberculosis, symptoms of tuberculosis, cough etiquette. As per the Global
Report 2017 of the World Health Organisation, India accounts for 24 per cent. of global cases
of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis. The Bill provides for active screening and extensive
facilities for treatment of multi-drug resistant strain of tuberculosis at tuberculosis Control
Centres.
Tobacco use is one of the main causes of tuberculosis, contributing to 7.9 per cent of
tuberculosis related deaths in the country. Research has shown that providing tobacco
cessation services to tobacco users, has proved to reduce the disease burden of tuberculosis.
Recognising tobacco as a major contributor to tuberculosis, the Bill provides for integration
of tobacco cessation counselling services at all tuberculosis Control Centre. As per the
World Health Organisation statistics, India is home to second highest number of women
smokers globally. According to the National Family Health Survey-3, the proportion of children
with low birth weight, is greater among children born to mothers who use tobacco. The Bill
also has provision to educate women of the ill effects of tobacco consumption on their
reproductive health, provide for tobacco cessation couselling services at all antenatal clinics
and primary health centres. The Bill also provides for measures to curb indoor air pollution
created by chulhas (used in rural areas for cooking purposes).
In 2016-17, health sector budget accounted for a mere 1.5 per cent, of the Gross Domestic
Product. The Bill provides for increasing the health budget to at least three per cent. of Gross
Domestic Product in next two years. The Bill stipulates that a State's budget for tuberculosis
control must be indexed to the respective State's health and development indicators, along
with its past years spending profile. The Bill thus champions for the control, prevention and
complete eradication of tuberculosis in the country, by mandating free of cost diagnosis and
treatment for tuberculosis.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA SULE
November  22, 2018.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clasue 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Tuberculosis Prevention Authority
and also appointment of such number of officers and staffs for its functioning. Clause 5
provides for establishment of Tuberculosis Control Centre. Clause 6 provides for free
screening and cost-free treatment to the patients. Clause 7 provides for mobile tuberculosis
vans for active screening of tuberculosis. Clause 8 provides for mobile tuberculosis
immunization drive. Clause 11 provides for funding research on new drugs and diagnostic
tools for tuberculosis. Clause 12 provides for facilities for treating drugs resistant strain of
tuberculosis. Clause 18 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Billl. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
recurring expenditure of five hundred crore rupees per annum which shall be charged from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make necessary rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a Tuberculosis Prevention Authority for prevention and complete eradication
of tuberculosis and for all matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2189LS(S3)—18-12-2018.