$

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

2 3 FEB 204

Bill No. 213 of 2000

THE PAYMENT OF UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE BILL, 2000
By
‘Suet HANNAN Mo.tan, M.P.
A,
BILL

to provide for the payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed persons
and for matters connected therewith,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (/) This Act may be called the Payment of Unemployment Allowance Act, 2000,
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different
States and Union territories.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) ‘allowance’ means the monthly payment to be made to an unemployed
person under this Act;

Short title,
extent and

‘commence-
‘ment,

Definitions.


‘Unemployment
allowance to
unemployed
persons.

Central
Goverment to

bear eighty
percent of total
expenditure.

Power to make
rules.

2

(6) ‘unemployed person’ means any adult person who has no means of livelihood
and whose name is registered in an employment exchange; and

(©) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (1) Every unemployed person shall be entitled to the payment of a monthly
allowance at a rate and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed after
consulting the Governments of the States and Union territories.

(2) While fixing the rates of allowance under clause (/), educational qualification,
skill, experience and other relevant conditions of the unemployed person shall be taken
into consideration.

4. The Central Government shall bear eighty percent of the total expenditure
incurred on the payment of unemployment allowance under this Act and the rest of
the expenditure shall be met by the respective State Governments and Union territory
Administrations.

5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,—

(a) the maximum and minimum amount of allowance payable under section 3
depending on the qualification of the applicant;

(b) manner of making application for payment of allowance;

(c) requirements which an applicant for payment of allowance may fulfill,
such as educational qualifications, skill, experience, etc.

(d) such other matters which may be necessary to prescribe for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rules or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, thétany such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The problem of unemployment has assumed alarming situation in our country
| in rural areas of economically backward regions. This has caused and is causing
gravated frustration amongst younger generation, Their energy is not being utilised for
suilding the nation. They, driven to extreme desperation and deprivation, take to the path of
jiolence and crime. Empty sermons of morality, ethics, nationalism, religious discourses
and pious assurances of social, political and religious leaders are unable to check the
0 of youth taking to violence and criminality. Itis imperative for the political leadership
f the country to take urgent corrective measures to generate employment opportunities

the youth but in the nature of things it is a long process before projects and schemes
throw up adequate employment opportunities to the young men and women, Alternative
“to this is that the country should bear the burden of paying some unemployment allowance
“to the unemployed persons till they get employment enabling them to earn their daily
bread. The Bill seéks to achieve the above objective.

New Detut;, HANNAN MOLLAH
November 2, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for payment of unemployment allowance to unemployed
Persons in the country. Clause 4 provide that the Central Government shall bear eighty
percent of the total expenditure incurred on the payment of unemployment allowance and
rest of expenditure shall be borne by the respective State Governments and-Union territory
administration.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees two thousand crore per annum will be
involved as a recurring expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Non-recurring expenditure will be insignificant.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
the provisions of the Bill. The delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed persons and
for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Hannan Mollah, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—S425LS—11-12-2000.