1
THE WASTE SEGREGATION AND COLLECTION BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of household waste by prescribing norms and
fixing duties on citizens and municipal authorities with regard to segregation
and collection of municipal solid waste and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment held at Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take appropriate
steps for protection and improvement of human environment;
A
ND W HEREAS it is considered necessary further to implement the decisions of
aforesaid Conference in so far as they relate to the protection and improvement of
environment and the prevention of hazards to human beings, other living creatures, plants
and property.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Waste Segregation and Collection Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 213 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “municipal authority” means Municipal Corporation, Municipality,
Nagarpalika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including Notified
Area Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under the relevant statutes
and where the management and handling of municipal solid waste is entrusted to
such agency;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “segregation” means separation of the municipal solid wastes into organic,
inorganic, recyclables and hazardous wastes.
3. No person shall throw or dispose of any household waste in public place or on the
property of any other person, except in the dustbins or waste collection points demarcated
by the municipal authority.
4. It shall be the duty of the every citizen to segregate the household waste before
disposal.
5. It shall be the duty of the municipal authority to,—
(i) ensure collection of segregated waste from households for further treatment
and disposal;
(ii) notify sites demarcated as collection points;
(iii) conduct educational and informational activities relating to segregation
of waste at such interval, as may be prescribed, for the local residents; and
(iv) organise cleanliness drives from time to time to promote cleanliness among
citizens.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall prescribe minimum standards and requirements
for the collection of solid waste, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provisions, the
minimum standards shall provide for—
(a) equipments for all collectors and other personnel directly dealing with
collection of solid waste to protect themselves from the hazards of handling municipal
solid wastes;
(b) necessary training to the collectors and personnel to ensure proper
handling of solid wastes; and
(c) manner of collection of solid waste to prevent damage to the container and
spillage or scattering of solid waste at collection points demarcated by the municipal
authority.
7. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the State Governments for carrying out the proposes
of this Act.
Definitions.
Prohibition
on littering.
Duty of every
citizen.
Responsibilities
of the
municipal
authorities.
Minimum
standards and
requirements
for collection
of solid
waste.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
sums.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to maintenance of
public cleanliness and waste management or in any instrument having effect by virtue of
any law other than this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both House agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India generates about sixty million tonnes of trash every year. Ten million tonnes of
garbage is generated in the metropolitan cities only. The landfills of most of these cities are
already overflowing, with no space to accommodate fresh garbage waste. The reason why
most landfill sites are overflowing is the inefficiency of the current waste disposal system.
Effective management of garbage is extremely important as it affects the health of our
citizens in an extremely severe manner. Nearly twenty per cent of methane gas emissions in
India are caused by landfills. Due to the decomposition of inorganic waste, the ground
water is contaminated. There is also the problem of leachate when rain water percolates
through the waste in a landfill.
Inefficiency in waste disposal system can only be solved by segregating waste at the
source location. Recyclable waste like construction and demolition waste, organic waste
like household garbage and toxic waste like medical waste, needs to be separated. “Swaach
Bharat Abhiyan” launched by Government of India encourages citizens not to pollute the
community and make more use of dustbin to drive cleanliness. But awareness of segregation
of waste is still a distant dream. Even before cleaning up the city, the government needs to
sort out a concrete waste management system that ensures segregation and recycling.
The Bill aims to provide a legislative impetus to the issue of waste management by
clearly outlining the roles and responsibilities of the Government, municipal authorities and
the citizen. The Bill also seeks to provide for necessary standards for the collectors and
personnel dealing with collection of the waste to ensure effective waste management system.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
 June 29,  2015.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 provides for certain steps to be initiated by municipal authorities for promotion
of waste segregation. Clause 6 provides for provision of equipments, necessary training for
collectors and other personnel directly dealing with collection of solid waste. Clause 8
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate sums to the State Governments
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about five hundred crore will be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of household waste by prescribing norms and
fixing duties on citizens and municipal authorities with regard to segregation
and collection of municipal solid waste and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1399LS(S3)—23-07-2015.