THE DECLARING OF HABITUAL OFFENDERS LAWS AS VOID
BILL, 2018
By
SHRI A. P. JITHENDER REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
to render certain enactments tagging nomadic, semi-nomadic and migrating tribes as
habitual offenders or criminals by birth as inoperative.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Declaring of Habitual Offenders Laws as V oid Act,
2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette specify, all laws in force in the territory of India or a part thereof tagging,
naming, identifying or declaring, explicitly or implicitly, any nomadic, semi-nomadic or migrating
tribe as habitual offenders or criminals by birth shall be void and shall always be deemed to
have been void.
Bill No. 214 of 2018
Short title and
commencement.
Laws tagging
naming or
identifying
nomadic,
semi-nomadic
or migrating
tribe to be
void.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The British colonialists, based on their past experiences of dealing with nomadic tribes
in Europe, considered all wandering communities to be nuisance for public law and order.
Combined with their misjudged understanding of the caste-system in India, they assumed
that criminals beget criminals and thus, enacted the Criminal Tribe Act (CTA) in 1871, notifying
certain tribes to be hereditary criminals excluding them from societal and economic reforms
and subjecting them to  severe State-sanctioned repression.
While the CTA was repealed post-independence, several States introduced Habitual
Offenders' Act circa 1959 (HOA) through State Legislature, which essentially carried forward
this vestige of the colonial era and further strengthens the stigma associated with the nomadic
and semi-nomadic communities. This Act is currently enforced in ten Indian States—in
Himachal Pradesh through the Himachal Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act (1969), in Karnataka
through the Karnataka habitual offenders Act, (1961), in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
through the Andhra Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act (1962), in Gujarat through the Habitual
Offenders Act (1959), in Maharashtra through the Bombay Habitual Offenders Act (1959), in
Kerala through the Kerala Habitual Offenders Act (1960), in Punjab through the Restriction
of Habitual Offenders Act (1918), and the Punjab Habitual Offenders (Control and Reform)
Act (1952), in Rajasthan through the Habitual Offenders Act (1953) and in Tamil Nadu through
the Restriction of Habitual Offenders Act, (1948).
Although the 'Criminal Tribes' were later re-classified as 'De-notified Tribes' (DNT)
little was done to bring about substantial changes in their lives. The erstwhile Governments
sought to alleviate their problems by haphazardly and inconsistently distributing them among
the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes categories crowded
out by other dominant sections in their respective categories, the de-notified tribes sunk to
the very bottom of the societal pyramid, as a result of which developmental policies and
positive affirmation initiatives could not reach them.
The present Bill is of high importance since it fulfils the dual purpose and finally draws
curtain on centuries of State-sanctioned repression of the nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes
in India and function as a confidence-building measure in the Government machinery.
However, the need is to be necessarily accompanied with re-invigorated State-led
reforms in addressing the outstanding developmental needs of the DNTs. Their very mode
of  life presents an inherent hurdle in them benefitting from welfare schemes—the lack of
permanent residency is the biggest deterrent in bringing these communities in the mainstream
society. Considering their precarious situation, it is urged to recognise them as separate
entities in positive affirmation policies of the Government, while protecting their rights under,
or in similar scope and spirit to, the provisions in the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act. Therefore, the repeal of the abovementioned  Acts needs to
be immediately followed by a new Act of the Parliament to address the reforms needed to
empower the De-notified Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes.
N
EW DELHI; A. P. JITHENDER REDDY
November  26, 2018.
2

MGIPMRND—2227LS(S3)—18.12.2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to render certain enactments tagging nomadic, semi-nomadic and migrating tribes as
habitual offenders or criminals by birth as inoperative.
————
(Shri A. P . Jithender Reddy, M.P.)