1
Bill No.  215 of  2017
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAGHAV LAKHANPAL, MP
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. After article 24  of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted
namely:—
“24A. (1) All citizens shall have the right to adequate contamination free
potable water, swachhata and sanitation.
(2) The State shall take steps by suit able legislation or schemes or in any
other way to provide adequate contamination free potable water, swachhata and
sanitation to every citizen.
(3) The Union Government shall provide funds required for the implementation
of the right conferred under clause (1)”.
Insertion of
new article
24A.
Right to
contamination
free potable
water,
swachhata
and
sanitation.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water is essential for the survival of all living things be it humans, animals, insects,
reptiles, trees, plants etc. Water is also required for other necessities of life and cleanings. It
is also required for irrigation, producing electricity etc. But unfortunately there is acute
shortage of water particularly potable water though  seventy per cent of our earth is covered
with water mostly of the oceans. Mother nature also blesses the earth with adequate water in
the form of rain and snow but most of it goes waste due to lack of conservation. In fact the
pathetic condition today is that people are forced to drink water from stagnated ponds in
some places from drains and such other sources. Most of the people particularly in rural
India are compelled to consume ground water which is often contaminated with dangerous
arsenic, fluoride, zinc, iron and such other metals and minerals which cause various diseases
affecting the bones and other parts of the body as they have no other source of potable
water.
Then there are drought prone and water scarce regions like Marathwada, Vidharbha
and Madhya Maharashtra, Bundelkhand and areas in Eastern, Western and Southern parts
of the country where drinking water is a luxury. Sanitation is another requirement for healthy
life of the people. The present Government has launched nationwide Swachhata Abhiyan
but much more needs to be done in this regard because heaps of waste can be seen everywhere
including the national capital.
In the recent past the Supreme Court of India has interpreted article 21 of the
Constitution as encompassing the right to food, safe water and sanitation as part of right to
life. Though Parliament has enacted a law to provide food to every citizen, right to
contamination free water and sanitation does not find any clear mention in either the
Constitution or any other law of the land. Though there is no denying the fact that Union
Government and State Governments are making consistent efforts to provide potable water
and sanitation facilities to the citizens but much more desired to be done.
If the right to contamination free potable water, Swachhata and sanitation is made
fundamental right the Union and State Governments will be forced to provide potable water
and sanitation to all the citizens otherwise citizens can go to courts for enforcement of their
fundamental right. This deterrence will force the Union and States to prepare comprehensive
potable water and sanitation schemes and implement them more seriously.
Hence this Bill.
RAGHAV LAKHANPAL
N
EW DELHI;
November 29, 2017.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides right to contamination free potable water, Swachhata and
sanitation to all the citizens. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the expenditure at this juncture. However, it is
estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 of 1974)
* * * *
CHAPTER IX
ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS
125. (1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or Order for maintenance of wives,
refuses to maintain— children and parents.
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether
married or not, unable to maintain itself, or
* * * *
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a) ‘‘minor’’ means a person who, under the provisions of
the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) is deemed not to
have attained his majority.
(b) ‘‘wife’’ includes a women who has been divorced by, or
has obtained a divorce from, her husband and has not
remarried.
* * * *

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Raghav Lakhanpal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2654LS(S3)—12-12-2017.