As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 215 of 2024
THE NATIONAL FLORICULTURE BOARD BILL, 2024 
By
 DR. K. SUDHAKAR,  M.P.
A
BILL
    to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of floriculture in India 
and for the promotion of floriculture farming across the country and  
for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Floriculture Board of India Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board” means the National Floriculture Board constituted under sub-section (1) 
of section 3;
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5
Definitions.

(b) “floriculture” means a branch of horticulture that deals with the cultivation, 
processing and marketing of ornamental plants vis-à-vis landscaping of small or large areas 
and maintenance of gardens so that the surroundings may appear aesthetically pleasant 
and shall include annual (seasonal), biennial and perennial ornamentals, such as cacti and 
other succulents, bromeliads, trees, shrubs, climbers, bulbous plants, lawn and ornamental 
grasses, bamboos, orchids, palms, cycads, foliage, bedding, pot and house plants, cut and 
loose flowers, fillers, ferns, seed and bulb production of ornamentals, dried flowers or plant 
parts, and other value-added products, such as extraction of essential oils, edible pigments 
and their marketing vis-à-vis making and maintenance of gardens;
(c) “export” and “import” mean, respectively, taking out of or bringing into India by 
land, sea and air; and
(d) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
3.(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, 
a Board, to be called the National Floriculture Board. 
(2) The Board Shall have its headquarters at Chikkaballapur, Karnataka and shall have 
regional offices across the country as it deem fit.
(3) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to contract 
and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.
(4) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding thirty-two, as 
may be prescribed and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise provide, the Board 
shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson; 
(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of the 
People and one by the Council of States;
(c) Secretary Union Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare who shall be  
Ex-officio Member;
(d) Secretary of the four State Government to be nominated in rotation by the 
Central Government;
(e) five representatives from the farmers organisations; and
(f) five prominent floricultural farmers;
(5) Salary and allowances payable to and other the terms and conditions of service of 
the nominated members shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, 
exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated to him by 
the Board and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed.
(7) The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice-Chairperson who shall 
exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairperson as may be 
prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.
4. (1) The Board may— 
(i) device schemes to develop and promote floriculture across the country; 
(ii) recommend the procedure for grant certificate for export of flowers and 
other floricultural products and register brokers therefore;
(iii) undertake programmes and projects for promotion of floriculture; 
(iv) assist and encourage studies and research into making India flower 
capital of the world; 
(v) undertake a market research into economic costs involved in the 
production of flowers;
2
10
5
Functions of the 
Board.
Constitution 
of National 
Floriculture 
Board. 15
25
30
35
40
45
20

(vi) recommend a minimum price per quintal for different types of ornamental 
flowers which shall be the base rate at which flowers shall be procured from the 
farmers undertake such other function as it deem fit, from time to time.
5. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums of money as that 
Government may consider necessary.
6. ( 1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the National Floricultural 
Board Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government; 
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificates granted under this Act; 
and 
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided 
upon by the Central Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other 
employees of the Board;
 (b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions;
(c) the welfare measures for families of those farmers engaged in floricultural 
activities throughout the country; and
(d) expenses on objects and for purposes authorized by this Act. 
7. The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time each financial year, as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and 
expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government. 
8. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may 
be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
9. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner as may, 
in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed and the 
Board shall furnish to the Central Government before such date, as may be prescribed, its 
audited copy of accounts together with the auditors’ report thereon.
10. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor’s report to be laid, 
as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the number of members of the Board under sub-section (4) of section 3;
(b) the term of office and other conditions of service of the members of the Board;
(c) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (6) of section 3;
(d) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairperson under sub-section (7) of 
section 3; 
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, presented or in respect of which 
provisions is to be, or may be made by rules.
12. The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules 
generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.
10
5
Grants and loans 
by the Central 
Government.
National 
Floriculture 
Board Fund.
Annual report.
Accounts and 
audit.
Annual report 
and auditors’ 
report to be 
laid before 
Parliament.
Power to make 
rules.
Power to make 
regulations.
Budget of the 
Board.
3
15
25
30
35
40
45
20

13. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation 
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
    
Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament.
4
5

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
“Floriculture” means a branch of horticulture that deals with the cultivation, processing 
and marketing of ornamental plants vis-à-vis landscaping of small or large areas and 
maintenance of gardens so that the surroundings may appear aesthetically pleasant and 
shall include annual (seasonal), biennial and perennial ornamentals, such as cacti and 
other succulents, bromeliads, trees, shrubs, climbers, bulbous plants, lawn and ornamental 
grasses, bamboos, orchids, palms, cycads, foliage, bedding, pot and house plants, cut and 
loose flowers, fillers, ferns, seed and bulb production of ornamentals, dried flowers or plant 
parts, and other value-added products such as extraction of essential oils, edible pigments, 
and their marketing vis-à-vis making and maintenance of gardens. 
The Government of India has identified floriculture as a sunrise industry and accorded 
it 100 per cent. export-oriented status. Owing to the steady increase in demand for flowers, 
floriculture has become one of the important Commercial trades in Agriculture. Hence 
commercial floriculture has emerged as a hi-tech activity-taking place under controlled 
climatic conditions inside a greenhouse. Floriculture in India is being viewed as a high 
growth Industry. Commercial floriculture is becoming important from the export angle. 
The country has exported 19677.89 MT of floriculture products to the world for the 
worth of Rs. 717.83 crores/86.63 USD Millions in 2023-24. U.S.A, Netherland, United Arab 
Emirates, U.K., Canada and Malaysia were major importing countries of Indian floriculture 
during the same period.
There is also a growth in flowers in the preparation of fragrance and other essence 
which itself has grown to be a large industry. Floriculture can also be started as a hobby for 
households who shall be able to derive additional income out of it. Thus a need is being felt 
for promoting floriculture across the country. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for constitution of a National Floriculture Board 
for the development of export horticulture products in the country.
Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                             K. SUDHAKAR  
November 6,  2024
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Floriculture Board. It 
also provides for the appointment of chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members to 
the Board. Clause 5 provides for the grants and loans by the Central Government. Clause 
6 provides for National Floriculture Board Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees one thousand five hundred crore per annum would be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
 
  
                               
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 13 empowers the Board to make regulation consisted 
with the Act and rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. As the rules and 
regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of floriculture in India  
and for the promotion of floriculture farming across the country and  
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. K. Sudhakar, M.P.)