1
THE OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT MEETINGS AND FUNCTIONS
(PROHIBITION ON SERVING NON-VEGETARIAN FOOD)
BILL, 2018
By
SHRI PARVESH SAHIB SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
 to prohibit non-vegetarian food from being served at official meetings and functions of
Government of India for the purpose of animal conservation and
impact on climate change.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Official Government Meetings and Functions
(Prohibition on Serving Non-vegetarian Food) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) It shall apply to the Ministries and Departments of the Central Government and all
offices, organisations and establishments under the control of the Central Government.
Short title,
commencement
and application.
Bill No.  215 of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. The serving of non-vegetarian food in any official meeting, function or event
organised by or on behalf of the Central Government is hereby banned.
3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any
difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, each House of the State Legislature,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, Parliament or, as the case may
be, the State Legislature agrees in making any modification in the rule or agrees that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Ban on
serving of
non-
vegetarian
food in any
official
Government
meetings.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Consuption of non-vegetarian foods not only causes rampant abuse and killings of
animals but also has devastating environmental impacts. For the purpose of human
consumption, billions of living animals are made to go through gruesome treatment involving
genetic manipulations, drug regimens, mutilations and much more every year. This goes
vehemently against the laws and ethics of animal protection and conservation.
Apart from this, there are scientific studies and findings regarding the negative impacts
that it has on environment and climate change. A United Nations Environment Programme's
(UNEP) report by International Panel of Sustainable Report Management has said that lesser.
Consumption of animal products is necessary to save the world from worst impacts of
climate change. Another report by United Nations Food and Agriculture Organizations has
highlighted how livestock sector puts tremendous pressure on water resources, land use
and greenhouse gas emissions. To have an idea, it generates eighteen per cent more carbon
dioxide than transport sector. It emits sixty-five per cent of the human related nitrous oxide
which has 296 times the Global Warming Potential (GWP) than carbon dioxide. It accounts
for thirty seven per cent of all human induced Methane which is as twenty-three times as
warming as carbon dioxide. Regarding land use, livestock covers thirty per cent of the entire
land surface. Livestock sector is hugely responsible for water pollution and thus leading to
eutrophication and the degeneration of coral reefs.
The need is to put forth an initiative whereby the Government can make an effort
towards environment friendly practice. Citing the devastating impacts that meat industry
has on environment and climate change, it is of urgent importance at least for the Government
to take necessary steps and make its own contribution. The Bill, therefore, seeks for the
Government to abandon non-vegetarian food in all the official meetings, functions and
events organized by Government of India. This shall be an effort from the side of the
Government to claim a positive stake in environment conservation and prevention of climate
change.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRAVESH SAHIB SINGH
November 27, 2016

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit  non-vegetarian food from being served at official meetings and functions of
Government of India for the purpose of animal conservation and
impact on climate change.
————
(Shri Pravesh Sahib Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2230LS—18.12.2018.