AmeDd-
ment of 
sectioD S. 
2 
(2) Each Leader or the O'pposition shall abo be ciltitled .*0 re-
ceive a l'ODStltueDC)' allowance at the ume ute a. :is fol' tile tiJU 
ba, spM:ftcd WIder seetioa 8 of the said Ad with JWPeCt to 
members o[ Parliament. 
(3) There shall lie paid tn each Leader of the Opposition a sum- 5 
ptuary allowance of one t-bousand rupees per measem." 
3. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-Mction 
(1) thereof, and after sub-seetion (1) as so renumbered, tbe followiDg 
sUb-section shall be inserted, namely:-
'(2) A l.eader of tht" Opposition and anyone member of his 10 
family aec:ompall),ing him shall be entitled to travelUoc aIlowaaces 
in Nlpect of nut more than six return journeys performed, d~ 
eaeh year, within India at the same rates at which travelliq al-
lowunres are payable to HUch Leader under clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) in respect of tours referred to in that dause. 
Explanat;oll.--li'or t.he purposes of this sub-section, "return 
journey" means a journey from one place to another place and the 
return journey from such other place to the first mentioned place.'. 
15 
JDaertion of 4. In the principal Act, after section 9, the following section sball he 
new section inserted, namely:- t!o 
~A. 
ExemptioD 
from liabi-
lity to pay 
iw:.ome-tall 
Oa certain 
perquiUtes 
re.:eivect by 
a leader 
of the Op-
position. 
'9A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 
1961, the value of rent free furnished residence (inclUding main. 43 of IN" 
tenance thereof) provided, to a Leader of the OppOSition under sub· 
section (1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computation of 
his income chargeable under the beading "Salaries" under section ,15' 85 
the Income-tax Act, 1961.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND BBASONS 
This Bill is complementary to the Salary, AUowanc:es 8D.d PeDBloD of 
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Btll, 1986 and the Salaries aDd 
Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Bill, ~. 
2. The Blll seeks-
(4) to provide that a Leader of the Opposition shall be entit1ecl 
to a salary t daily allowance and constituency alloW8llce at the same 
rates as a member of Parliament; 
(b) to provide for the payment of a sumptuary allowance to 
each Leader of the Opposition and to exempt from income-tax the 
value of the official residence provided to such Leader; and 
(c) to extend the facUity ,of free travel ill respect of six retum 
journeys per 'year within India to one member of the family of a 
Leader of the Opposition accompanying him on such journeys. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objeets. 
NEW DI:uu; II. K. L. BHAGAT. 
The 19th December, 1985. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
Clause 20f the Bill seeks to substitute section 3 of the Salary and 
Allow.ances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977, to provide. 
for salary, daily allowance and constituency allowance at the 
same rates as admissible to members of Parliament. It also seeks to 
provide to n Leader of Opposition, a sumptuary allowance of Rs. 1,000 
l.>er mensem . 
. ' 2. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section in section 5 of 
the Act to provide for a facility to Leaders of Opposition by way of six 
return journeys in a year within India to a member of his family. 
3. The abwe pl'O'risions would involve expenditure from the Conso-
lidated Fund 'Of India to the tune of Rs. 1.14 lakhs. 
4. "nte prO"rislons of the Bill will not involve any other expenditure 
either recurring or non-recurring. 
, 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE SALARY AND ALLOWANCI:S 01' LMmats OF OPPosntOK 
IN PARLI.uo:NT Ar:r, 19'17 
(33 01' 19'1'1) 
• • • • • 
3. There shall be paid to each Leader of the Opposition a salary of Salary of 
two thousand, two hundred and fifty rupees per menseDl. Leaders of 
Opposition. 
• • • • • 
5. Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Centra! Govemment, 
a Leader of the Opposition shall be entitled to-
(a) travelling allowances for himself and the members of his 
family and for transport of his and his family's effects-
(i) in respect of the journey to Delhi from his usual piece of 
resldence outside Delhi for assuming ofBce; and 
(ii) in respect of the journey from Delhi to his usual place 
of residence outside Delhi on relinquishing o1Bce; and 
(b) travelling and daily allowances in respect of tours under-
taken by him in the discharge of his duties as Leader of the Opposi-
tion, whether by sea, land or air. 
• • • • • 
,. I 
, . 1 
1'rawlling 
ud daily 
allowlIDceI 
to Leaden 
of 0ppo-
sition. 

.. 
LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
fur~ kI amend the Salary and A.1lQwances of Leaders of Opposition in 
Parliament Act, 1977. 
(Sh. H. K. L. Bhagat, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs 4ndTouriam.) 