Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 216  of  2022
THE SCULPTORS, ARTISTS AND ARTISANS OF
RURAL AREAS UPLIFTMENT COUNCIL 
  BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Sඁඋංඋൺඇ඀ Aඉඉൺ Bൺඋඇൾ,  M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in rural areas and 
for matters connected therewith.  
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—     
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas 
Upliftment Council  Act, 2022.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
  (3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, extent and commencement.

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
    ( a) “artisan” means any person engaged in making useful, decorative or artistic 
items manually from leaves or weeds or bamboo or any other material by traditional 
means in rural areas for earning his livelihood;   
    ( b)  “artist” means any person who earns his livelihood by performing arts including 
music, dance, drama, play, singing to entertain public or displaying of his paintings or artistic 
skills to public in rural areas;     
   ( c) “Council” means the National Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas 
upliftment Council constituted under  section 4;   
   ( d) “Fund” means the National Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas 
Welfare Fund constituted under section 3;       
   ( e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and  
   ( f) “sculptor” means any person engaged in carving of statues or making of 
decorative pieces or any other useful items from clay, cement, stone or any other material in 
rural areas for earning his livelihood.    
    3 . (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the National 
Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas Upliftment Fund.
      ( 2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the 
Fund in such proportion, as may be prescribed.    
    4.  (1) The Central Government shall establish a Council to be known as the 
National Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas Upliftment Council. 
   ( 2)  The Council shall consist of following members, namely:—
    ( a) Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government;
    ( b) Joint Secretary of Ministry of Textiles, Vice-Chairperson, ex-officio; 
 ( c) A representative of the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
conversant with problems of small enterprises of sculptors, artists and artisans in 
rural areas of country;    
(d) five members representing Non-Governmental Organisations working 
for the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in rural areas, to be appointed 
by the Central Government; 
 ( e) five members representing the sculptors, artists and artisans in rural 
areas, to be appointed by the Central Government; and
 ( f) A representative each of such other Ministries and Departments of the 
Government of India as may be decided by the Central   Government.
   ( 3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions 
of service of the Chairperson and members of the Council shall be such, as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.
    5 . (1) The Council shall administer the Fund for the welfare of sculptors, artists and 
artisans of rural areas.  
   ( 2)  Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Fund shall 
also be used for,— 
 ( a) payment of compensation to the next of kin of the sculptors, artists and 
artisans in the event of death during work;
Deﬁnitions.

 ( b) payment of premium for life insurance;
 ( c) payment of old age pension;
 ( d) payment of disability allowance;
 ( e) provision of free health care facility to sculptors, artists and artisans and 
their family members;
 ( f) housing facility at subsidised rate to sculptors, artists and artisans; 
 ( g) financial assistance to sculptors, artists and artisans for production and 
marketing of their products and organization and advertisement of events; 
 ( h) preservation, promotion, development and dissemination of art, culture, 
education and social welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans;
 ( i) empower unemployed sculptors, artists and artisans by providing them 
tools, techniques and financial assistance for self-employment and upliftment;
 ( j) imparting skill development training to the sculptors, artists and artisans;
 ( k) granting fellowship and scholarship for carrying out research in the rural 
areas particularly in the sculptures; and
 ( l) awarding the well known sculptors, artists and artisans having social impact 
in the society.
    6 .  The Council shall submit every year a report, in such form and manner, as may be 
prescribed, of its activities to the Central Government. 
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.     
      ( 2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
   
Annual Report.
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Though various government and non-government projects, research studies, training 
programmes and financial/marketing assistance schemes are available to protect the 
interest of artisans involved in preserving such heritage of India in the form of handicrafts, 
the result is yet not satisfactory. It is general perception that Indian handicrafts are famous 
worldwide since centuries, but the fact is that apart from some artists the majority of rural 
sculptors, artists and artisans are starving and struggling to meet basic needs.
 Due to various reasons, this great cultural heritage is being threatened by forces both 
from within and outside. Hence, majority of such sculptors, artists and artisans now are at 
saturated position and do not wish their children to continue with such occupation.
 In view of the miserable condition of these sculptors, artists and artisans, it is the duty 
of the Government to provide social security and other financial assistance to them by 
formulating and implementing appropriate policies for their upliftment. Thus, it is our duty 
to work towards making our current and future generations more aware about our culture 
and tradition and help and empower the people from rural areas earning their livelihood as 
sculptors, artists and artisans.
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                          SHRIRANG APPA BARNE      
21 November,  2022.

 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Fund for the welfare of sculptors, 
artists and artisans of rural areas. Clause 4 provides for establishment of a Council to 
administer the Fund for the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in the rural areas.  The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may be 
involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
 A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crore may also involve 
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
                               

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide  for the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in rural areas and 
for matters connected therewith.  
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .)