Short title and
commencement.
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, after Chapter III, the following Chapter
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IIIA
CLINICAL TRIALS OF DRUGS
15A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to be known as the Clinical Trials Accreditation Authority
consisting of the following members, namely:—
   Bill No. 216 of  2015
Insertion of new
Chapter IIIA.
Constitution of
Accreditation
Authority.
23 of 1940.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(a) Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Department of Health and Family Welfare—Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) Directors of all All-India Institutes of Medical Sciences—members,
ex officio;
(c) Director-General of Health Services, Directorate General of Health
Services, New Delhi—members, ex officio;
(d) Director, Post Graduate institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh—member, ex officio;
(e) Director, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
New Delhi—member, ex officio; and
(f) Director, Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and
Research, Puducherry—member, ex officio;
(2) The Accreditation Authority shall accredit investigators and trial sites for
conduct of clinical trial of drugs.
(3) The Accreditation Authority shall appoint a Registrar to maintain a registry
of clinical trials and their outcomes.
(4) The Accreditation Authority shall constitute a Committee of Experts to
examine applications for conduct of clinical trials by accredited investigators.
(5) The Accreditation Authority shall appoint such officers and staff as are
necessary for discharge of its functions under this Act.
15B. (1) A clinical trial shall be conducted only by an accredited investigator
entity at an accredited trial site.
(2) An accredited investigator shall apply to the Committee of Experts for
permission to conduct clinical trials.
(3) Each such application shall be examined by the Committee of Experts, with
special reference to, but without prejudice to examination of any other aspect that
may be relevant, the possibility of serious adverse consequences for human subjects,
existence of free and informed consent of human subjects and the provisions for
adequate compensation in the case of any injury or adverse effect on such subjects
due to the clinical trial.
(4) The Committee of Experts shall give its decision on an application for clinical
trial within sixty days:
Provided that the Accreditation Authority may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, reverse the decision of the Committee of Experts within a period of ten days
from the date of decision of the Committee of Experts.
15C. Every human subject participating in a clinical trial shall be informed
about the entire procedure of clinical trial and the possible adverse effects of such
trial on his health:
Provided that unless an application for clinical trial is accompanied by a
declaration of free and informed consent made by such human subject, no permission
for clinical trial shall be granted.
15D. Every human subject participating in a clinical trial or his legal heirs, as
the case may be, shall be paid adequate monetary compensation in the case of any
adverse effect on his health during the course of a clinical trial or as an after-effect of
the trial:
Provided that in the case of death of the human subject or a serious adverse
effect on his health causing permanent disability, the compensation shall not be less
than five lakh rupees.
Conduct of
clinical trials.
Informed
consent.
Compensation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
15E. (1) Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts
clinical trial of drugs without obtaining permission under section 15B, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than twenty lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts clinical
trial without obtaining permission and such trial causes grievous hurt or death of trial
participant, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than five years but which may extend to eight years and shall also be liable to fine
which shall not be less than thirty lakh rupees.
(3) The fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the trial participant or,
as the case may be, his legal heirs.
15F. Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 15E is again
convicted under that section, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than fifty lakh rupees.
15G . Whoever, responsible to provide compensation for clinical trial related
injury or death under this Chapter fails to do so, shall be punished with imprisonment
which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than twice the
amount of the compensation.
15H. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company, for the conduct of business of the company, as well as
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to
the proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section —
(i) "Company" means any body corporate and include a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.".
Penalty for
conducting
clinical trial
without
permission.
Penalty for
repeat offence.
Penalty for
failure to provide
compensation.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has been a major target for investigators seeking human subjects for
clinical trials of drugs. While most trials are being conducted by multi-national
corporations, Indian pharmaceutical companies are also not far behind. The high
mortality rates and serious adverse effects on the health of human subjects have
often been considered indicative of the fact that human subjects in clinical trials are
being treated as guinea pigs in India. What makes the situation even worse is the fact
that in many cases no compensation is paid and, even where it is paid, it is not
sufficient relative to the injury suffered by the human participant due to the clinical
trial.
In view of the above, the Bill seeks to make the following amendments in the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940—
(i) providing for establishment of an Accreditation Authority for granting
accreditation to investigators (who will conduct trials) and trials sites (which
can be a hospital or other place where the trial will be conducted);
(ii) constitution of a Committee of Experts to examine applications for
clinical trials;
(iii) appointment of a Registrar for keeping registry of clinical trials and
their outcomes;
(iv) providing for mandatory free and informed consent from human
subjects participating in clinical trials and provision of adequate compensation
for injuries or death due to such trials; and
(v) providing for punishment for conduct of clinical trials without
permission and for failure to provide compensation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB
July 06, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of an Accreditation Authority, a
Committee of Experts, and appointment of a Registrar and other officers and staff of
the Accreditation Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involved expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
about rupees five crores will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crores is also likely to be
involved.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1550LS(S3)—24.07.2015.