As चार्ज (का) iy Lok Sania

3६६8 20

Bill No. 216 of 2000.

‘THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suki HANNAN MOLLAH
A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Act, 1956.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be cailed the National Highways (Amendment) Act, 2000,

2. Section 5 of the National Highways Act, 1956, shall be re-numbered as sub-
5 section (/) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2) Subject to any other arrangement made by the Central Government
3 under the authority of this Act for development, maintenance of whole or any
part of a national highway, where a railway line or railway track crossing a
10 national highway, it shall be the responsibility of the administration of that
railway to construct and maintain in proper repair, three hundred metres of

such national highway on either side of the railway line or track:

Provided that if such a crossing falls within the jurisdiction of a Municipal
Committee, Corporation, Cantonment Board or any other statutory authority,
15 the length of such approach roads which shall be maintained by the railway

Short title,

‘Amendment of
Section 5


2

udministration shall be determined by mutual agreement between the railway
administration and such Municipal Committee, Corporation, Cantonment Board
or statutory authority but the railway administration shall not be absolved of
their responsibility for the proper maintenance of such approach roads,

(3) It shall also be the responsibility of the railway administration to

construct and m: over-bridges or under-bridges, as the case may be, at
such railway crossing.

(4) Nowwithstanding anything contained in section 2 or in any other law for
the time being in force, the portion or the national highways referred to in sub-

section (2) shall, for the purposes of this section, vest in the railway administration
concerned.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is the common experience of the travelling public on the highways that traffic is
unduly held up at railway level crossings, particularly at those located within the local
limits of cities and towns, This causes considerable loss of time and money to the users of
national highways besides causing traffic jams dislocating movement of other related
traffic, air-pollution and wastage of precious fuel, The Railway level crossings are also
Prone to cause serious accidents and health hazard and remain a threat to life and property
of the road users. Railways may therefore be made responsible for construction and
maintenance of over-bridges/under-bridges at such railway level crossings instead of leaving
this work to State Governments or local administration who do not always have adequate
funds.

Hence this Bill.

‘New DeLit; HANNAN MOLLAH
October 10, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the railway administration shall construct and
maintain three hundred metres of such national highway on either side of the railway line
or track which crosses a national highway and shall also construct and maintain over-
bridges or under-bridges at such railway crossings. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees two crore per annum,

_ It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees
fifty lakh.


ANNEXURE
Extract from the National Highways Act, 1956
[48 of 1956)

* * * * * * *

5. It shall be the responsibility of the Central Government to develop and maintain
in proper repair all national highways; but the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, direct that any function in relation to the development or mainte-
nance of any national highway shall, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be speci-
fied in the notification, also be exercisable by the Government of the State within which
the national highway is situated or by any officer or authority subordinate to the Central
Government or to the State Government.

* * * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Act, 1956,

(Shri Hannan Mollah, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5430LS—12-12-2000.