1
THE  JUTE  GROWERS  (REMUNERATIVE  PRICE  AND
WELFARE)  BILL,  2017
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative price for raw jute to the jute growers, insurance
of jute crop free of cost and for overall welfare of jute growers and for matters
connected therewith.
BE  it enacted  by Parliament in the Sixty- eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jute Growers (Remunerative Price and Welfare) Act,
2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Fund" means the Jute Growers Welfare Fund constituted under section 5;
Bill No. 216 of  2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "jute grower" means any person who cultivates jute and obtains fibre
therefrom; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall procure the entire jute crop fibre from jute
growers through such agency as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall fix remunerative price of raw jute every year after
taking into consideration—
(a) increase in the price of jute seeds, pesticides, fertilizers and other inputs;
(b) total investment made by the jute growers; and
(c) such other factors, as may be prescribed.
4. The entire jute produced by the jute growers shall be compulsorily insured free of
cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the yield of jute, fall in
the price of jute and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government, shall,  by notification in the Official Gazette constitute
the Jute Growers and Workers Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act with initial
corpus of rupees one thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government by due
appropriation made by Parliament, by law in this behalf and thereafter the Central and
concerned State Government shall contribute to the Fund to such extent and in such manner,
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Fund may also a receive moneys from corporate houses, financial institutions,
individuals and bodies in the form of contributions or donations.
6. The Fund shall be utilized,—
(a) to provide financial assistance to jute growers for purchasing jute seeds,
pesticides and fertilizers and in cases of low yields of jute or loss of their crops due to
rains, storms, floods, hailstorms or drought;
(b) to pay compensation to the next of kin of jute growers in the event of their
death;
(c) to provide free health facilities to jute growers and their families;
(d) to provide assistance to the jute growers in the event of disability; and
(e) for such other purposes as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Procurement
of raw jute and
fixation of its
remunerative
price.
Insurance.
Constitution
of Jute
Growers
Welfare Fund.
Utilization of
the Fund.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Jute fibre, also known as golden fibre, used to hold a glorious position in our country.
Jute is one of the main commercial crops of our country. Jute fibre as an industrial product is
used to prepare bio-degradable, eco-friendly cheap bags. But of late, jute growers in the
country are facing problems as they are not getting remunerative price for their produce. Jute
cultivation is turning out to be a non-profitable venture for the farmers due to increase in the
prices of jute seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and other inputs. Due to high investment involved
in the cultivation of jute, farmers have to go for loans and on account of being unable to
repay the loans, they are living under great distress. Being a cash crop, insurance facility is
also not available to the jute farmers. Growing use of synthetic fibre is adding to the woes of
jute growers.
The condition of jute growers in the leading jute producing States of West Bengal and
Bihar is pitiable. Farmers of these States are getting into debt trap and in many cases, their
financial condition is compelling them to take the extreme step of committing suicide.
Therefore, it is the responsibility of the Central Government to fix the remunerative
price of jute; provide for free and compulsory insurance of jute crops and constitute a Jute
Growers Welfare Fund to meet various needs of jute growers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH  RANJAN
November 29, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for procurement of entire jute produced in the country and
also fixation of remunerative price of jute by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides for
compulsory insurance of jute crop free of cost by the Central Government against natural
calamities, fall in the yield of jute and such other eventualities. Clause 5 provides for the
constitution of a Jute Growers Welfare Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees three thousand crore may be involved per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—2650LS(S3)—12.12.2017.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative price for raw jute to the jute growers, insurance of
jute crop free of cost and for overall welfare of jute growers and for matters connected
therewith.
—————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)