1
THE FLUORIDE CONTAMINATION (PREVENTION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI CH. MALLA REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for effective regulation of the level of fluoride in groundwater and identification
of the risk areas of fluoride contamination, formulation of a national policy for
mitigating and preventing fluoride contamination in food and drinking
water in the country for the overall welfare, care and protection of the
citizens and for matters  connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Flouride Contamination (Prevention) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 217 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "fluoride" means a compound containing fluorine and another element or
radical which is a natural mineral found throughout the earth's crust and widely
distributed in nature;
(b) "Authority" means the National Fluoride Contamination Prevention
Authority established under section 4;
(c) "groundwater" means naturally occurring water found below the surface in
the saturated zone which can be extracted by digging wells and bores; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall as soon as may be after the commencement of the Act and in
consultation with the Government of the States, formulate a national policy for mitigating
and preventing fluoride contamination in food and groundwater in the country for the
overall welfare, care and protection of the citizens.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish and Authority to be called the National Fluoride Contamination
Prevention Authority for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the Authority may
establish offices at other places in the States and Union territories as it may deem necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert scientist having adequate knowledge
and professional experience in the prevention of fluoride pollution, to be appointed
by the Central Government;
(b) one Deputy Chairperson with such qualifications as may be prescribed, to
be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of the two
Houses;
(d) five members, one each to represent the Union ministries of Drinking
Water and Sanitation, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Health and Family
Welfare, Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and Panchayati Raj, respectively, to be
appointed by the Central Government;
(e) four members to represent the non-Governmental Organisations working
for prevention of fluoride pollution in food and ground water, to be appointed by the
Central Government; and
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(4) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(5) The Salary and allowances payable to Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and
Members, terms of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such number of officers and staff as
may be prescribed.
National
policy for
prevention of
fluoride
contamination.
Establishment
of National
Fluoride
Contamination
Prevention
Authority.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(7) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close coordination
with concerned Ministries and Departments of the Central and the State Governments to
eliminate fluoride contamination and to afford the fluoride free drinking water and food to
everyone throughout the country as it may deem necessary and expedient under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to be generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall—
(a) conduct survey at risk areas to determine the location, scale and causes of
fluoride contamination;
(b) conduct survey of irrigation wells to assess the risk of overuse and
exploitation of ground water on agriculture and human health;
(c) develop awareness at all levels of society about the potential danger of
fluoride in food and water;
(d) assess the availability of low fluoride water resources for human
consumption;
(e) help farmers to adapt by maximizing rain fed production where alternative
water source for irrigation are insufficient;
(f) prioritise water supply and treatment intervention in worst affected areas;
(g) establish local and affordable capability to test water supplies where fluoride
surveys have been completed;
(h) coordinate and monitor time bound fluoride mitigation plants to eliminate
fluoride exposure;
(i) identify alternative soft water sources and assess their sustainability;
(j) assess the effect of contaminated water to fluoride exposure specially on
human health;
(k) assess the likely impact of climate change on the increased demand for and
reduced availability of groundwater;
(l) assess the health effects of excessive exposure to fluoride and provide
preventive medical assistance; and
(m) such other activities as may be assigned from time to time.
6. The Central Government shall after due appropriation, made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, pay to the authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this
Act.
7. The Authority shall prepare once every year, in such form and at such time as may
be prescribed, an annual report giving summary of its activities during the previous year
and submit it to the Central Government, which show cause the same to be laid before both
the Houses of Parliament.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
Annual report.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have affect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Fluorosis, a public health problem is caused by excess intake of fluoride through
drinking water, food products and industrial pollutants over a long period. High concentrations
of fluoride in groundwater are common in some of the semi-arid areas of Rajasthan, southern
Punjab, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and southern Haryana. Several
areas of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh have high concentrations of fluoride in ground
water (exceeding 5 mg/l). There are a number of cases of dental and skeletal fluorosis in these
areas. In several parts of the country, fluoride concentrations of groundwater are more than
the permissible level of 1.5mg/l in 11309 rural habitations in 230 districts of 20 States with an
affected population of about 1.12 crore.
The Nalgonda fluorosis problem in the State of Telangana is a stigma that has stuck for
generations, severely disabling skeletal fluorosis affects lakhs of people in just one district
of the country. As per official estimates, there are 6.5 lakh fluorosis affected patients, out of
which there are around 75,000 severely skeletal fluorosis affected people. The extreme water
stress and water scarcity situation in this region has resulted into around 5.5 lakh deep
borewells in just one single district. The fluoride problem has just increased over the past
80 years, after it first got reported in the 1937.
The United Nations General Assembly's Human Right to Water and Sanitation resolution
64/292 passed in 28 July 2010 recognised the right to safe and clean drinking water and
sanitation as a human right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights.
According to the Constitution of India, every citizen has a Right to clean water under the
ambit of article 21 pertaining to Right to Life.
Therefore, given the magnitude of the problem there is a need to provide safe drinking
water to cover all water quality affected habitations with piped water supply schemes and an
effective law to regulate the level of fluoride in groundwater and identification of risk areas
for mitigating and preventing fluoride in food and groundwater.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CH. MALLA  REDDY
November 27, 2017.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Nation Fluoride Contamination
Prevention Authority. Clause 6 makes it obligatory on the Central Government to provide
necessary funds for the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty
five thousand crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees six thousand crore will also be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for effective regulation of the level of fluoride in groundwater and identification
of the risk areas of fluoride contamination, formulation of a national policy for mitigating
and preventing fluoride contamination in food and drinking water in the country
for the overall welfare, care and protection of the citizens and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ch. Malla Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2672LS(S3)—12-12-2017.