1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF VEDIC EDUCATION IN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2019
By
DR. SATYA PAL SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Vedic education in educational institutions and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of V edic Education in Educational
Institutions Act, 2019.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, and
commencement.
Bill No. 217 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Council" means the Vedic Educational Council established under section 5;
(c) "educational institution" means an institution imparting primary, middle,
secondary or higher secondary level education to children, by whatever name such
institution is called, but does not include a minority educational institution;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "Vedic education" includes knowledge of non-religious character, derived
mainly from Vedic literature, Vedic philosophy and Vedic life.
3. From such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify, the V edic education shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational
institutions in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government on the
recommendation of the Council.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue direction for compulsory teaching of Vedic education in all educational
institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Council to be known as the Vedic Educational Council.
(2) The Council shall consist of a chairperson and such number of  members, having
special knowledge or experience in the fields of history, education or Vedic studies, as the
Central Government may deem fit.
6. The Council shall—
(i) recommend the class from which onwards the Vedic education shall be taught
in educational institutions;
(ii) recommend the syllabus of Vedic education for each class upto senior
secondary level;
(iii) recommend the class or category of students or educational institutions
which shall be exempt from the provisions of the Act; and
(iv) prescribe the principles and standards to be observed for granting
accreditation to institutions imparting training to teachers of Vedic education.
7. The appropriate Government shall, on the recommendation of the Council,
derecognise an educational institution or impose such fine as may be prescribed, for failure
to comply with the provisions of section 4:
Provided that no educational institution shall be so derecognised or a fine be
imposed thereon unless a reasonable opportunity of being heard has been provided to
such institution.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
Vedic
education in
educational
institutions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
direction for
compulsory
teaching of
Vedic
education in
educational
institutions.
Constitution
of Vedic
Education
Council.
Functions of
the Vedic
Education
Council.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
section 3.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Removal of
difficulties.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The V edic period is considered among the most glorious periods in the Indian history.
The period witnessed rise of the Vedic civilization which flourished socially, culturally and
educationally. The richness of V edic culture is so clearly evident in V edic literature—the
V edas being the most prominent among them. It is not surprising that V edic philosophy
enshrined in Vedic literature pervaded all walks of life. A grave misconception that has
subsisted over centuries is that Vedic literature is predominantly religious in character. Rather,
the V edas are eternal and their appeal is universal since they transcend all religions. In fact,
the essence or core of all religions, where they all agree, is the true Vedic religion.
Vedas talk about equality, universal brotherhood, harmonious development of life and
a rational thinking. The essence of Vedic knowledge, therefore, lies in those philosophical
aspects that teach people to lead a life to its perfection. This is exactly what was sought to be
achieved by imparting education in gurukuls.
Unlike the modern education, which is largely academic in nature, Vedic education was
more comprehensive in nature. It was not intended just to ensure employability of the pupils.
Rather, it aimed at formation of individual character and inculcation of a sense of
righteousness, self-control and discipline. Towards this end, vedic education touched all
aspects of human life—from physical development to sublimation of instincts, commitment
to motherland and indebtedness to mother earth.
Thus, the basic idea underlying V edic education was to create a responsible citizenry,
which is relevant to the present times too. For instance, the elimination of ill-gotten wealth is
on top of  the Government agenda these days. Such ill-gotten wealth was decried in Atharva
Veda as follows:
"Keep away from me that wealth which brings about my fall, and results in my defame,
which entangles me from all sides, and withers me like a parasitic plant, that withers
away the supporting tree: so bless me with that wealth which gives peace and joy."
"Wealth obtained by unfair means must be banished from every place. Such wealth
should bear indelible markings like being branded by hot iron in order that it is identified
and shunned by everybody."
Considering the relevance of the objectives enshrined in the V edas in the present age
and the contribution the V edic education can make towards the objective of creating a
responsible citizenry, the Bill seeks to provide for compulsory teaching of Vedic education in
educational institutions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SATYA PAL SINGH
July  18, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Vedic Education Council consisting
of such number of members as may be prescribed. Clause 8 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune
of rupees fifteen crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of V edic education in educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Dr. Satya P al Singh , M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2830LS(S3)—23-10-2019.