1
Short title and
commencement.
THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
(Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  217 of  2018
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 3 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "one hundred days", the words "two hundred
days" shall be substituted; and
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) Every person who has done the work given to him shall be entitled to
receive wages at the rate of rupees eight hundred or at the wage rate for each
day of work, whichever is higher.".
3. In the principal Act, in Schedule II, after paragraph 35, the following paragraphs
shall be inserted, namely: —
"36. Every registered person under the Scheme shall be entitled to the benefit of
Employees' State Insurance Scheme formulated under Employees State Insurance
Act, 1948.
37. It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to register all registered persons
after making such enquiry as it deems fit and to comply all the procedure formalities to
issue Employees' State Insurance Scheme card containing such details of members of
the household affixing their photographs for extending the benefit of Employees' State
Insurance Scheme as may be prescribed by the State Government.".
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of Schedule II.
5
10
15
42 of 2005
34 of 1948

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 is a social
security legislation that provides employment for rural population and ensuring minimum
number of employment days.
Keeping in view the changing needs of the society, it is essential to amend the law for
providing more working days, high wages and health amenities to the registered persons
under the Act. The present number of days of employment wages are very less and the
registered persons are not able to find out their primary needs depending on the employment
and salary as per the scheme formulated under the parent Act. The social security welfare
measures provided to the workers are also less. It is highly necessary to increase the number
of working days and wages. Moreover, providing health protection to the registered persons
under Employees' State Insurance Scheme is also inevitable.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005 with a view to—
(a) increase the maximum number of days of employment to the registered persons
from hundred days to two hundred days;
(b) increase the wages per day to a minimum of rupees eight hundred; and
(c) extend the benefit of Employees' State Insurance Scheme to all the registered
persons under the Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
November 19, 2018.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the number of days of employment of the
registered persons from one hundred days to two hundred days under the Act. It also
provides for ensuring minimum wage of registered persons to rupees eight hundred for each
day of work. Clause 3 provides for extending the benefit of Employees' State Insurance
Scheme to all the registered persons under the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten lakh crore per annum is likely to be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause3 of the Bill vide proposed paragraph 37 empowers the State Government to
prescribed rules for ensuring Employees' State Insurance Scheme benefits to the registered
persons.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers
is of a normal character.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT, 2005
(42 OF 2005)
* * * *
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural area in the
State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose rural
adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of
such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act.
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be
entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work.
* * * *
SCHEDULE II
35. Every worker shall have an opportunity of being heard and register any grievance
either orally or in writing, at all implementation levels for disposal as per the provisions of the
Grievance Redressal Mechanism under the Scheme.
* * * *
Guarantee of
rural
employment
to household.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2078LS(S3)—18-12-2018.