1
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI DUSHYANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment)  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as  Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After section 136 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“136A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where a police officer
responsible for control of traffic, intercepts any motor vehicle in anticipation of any
offence under this Act, he shall—
(a) record the post-interception procedure by audio-video electronic
means;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 217  of  2015
Insertion of
new section
136A.
Duty of Police
officer for
recording
procedure.
59 of 1988.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) inform the owner, driver or person in-charge of the motor vehicle that
the procedure is being recorded; and
(c) submit the post-interception procedure to the Police headquarters for
evidentiary purposes.”.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With a view to substantially increase the transparency in the control of traffic and to
check malpractices by the police officers, it is necessary that the certain duty be imposed on
the police personnel responsible for the control of traffic.
The recording of post-interception procedure by the police personnel would go a long
way in controlling corruption and bribery in the police personnel deputed for control of
traffic. Recent incidents of misbehaviour by traffic police personnel with drivers or vehicle
owners while managing traffic on roads require certain urgent steps to be taken to fix the
problem.
The need of the hour is that certain duty be imposed on the police officer responsible
for control of traffic.
The present Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 with a view to
make it a duty of the police officer responsible for control the traffic to record the
post interception by audio-video electronic means, inform the driver or person in-charge
of the vehicle about the same and submit post-interception procedure to the police
Headquarters for evidentiary purposes.
N
EW DELHI;
July 3, 2015. DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that a police officer shall record the post-interception
procedure by audio-video electronic means while controlling the traffic. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of rupees six crore per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty crore will also  be involved.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1492L(S3)—24.07.2015.