1
THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Protection of Human Rights (Amendment)
Act, 2017.
2.  In section 2 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1), clause (a) shall be omitted.
3. Section 19 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Short title.
Bill No. 218 of  2017
10 of 1994. Amendment
of section 2.
Omission of
section 19.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
4. For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"30. For the purpose of providing speedy trial of offences arising out of violation
of human rights, the State Government shall, with the concurrence of the Chief
Justice of the High Court, by notification, set up for each district a special court to
be a Human Rights Court to try the said offences.".
Substitution
of new section
for section
30.
Human Rights
Courts.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, is a landmark legislation in the field of
human rights. The Act, no doubt, meets the demand of the present times and takes care of
all kinds of violations of human rights. However, there are two serious shortcomings in this
Act which may render it less effective than what it was intended to be. The first shortcoming
is the special procedure to be followed by the Commission in dealing with complaints of
human rights violations by members of the armed forces under section 19 of the Act. The
Commission, as such, has no authority to investigate or try the offences committed by the
members of the armed forces. Since the members of the armed forces are likely to become
target of malicious attack by vested interests and since the special procedure prescribed for
members of armed forces is, in essence, against the spirit of this legislation, it would be
proper that armed forces are also brought under the jurisdiction of the Commission and the
special procedure with respect to armed forces be dispensed with.
The second shortcoming is that of the discretionary provision of setting up of special
courts for trying the offences under this law. Since these offences are being treated on a
special footing, the instrumentality of ordinary courts will be ineffective and time-consuming
and hence would defeat the very object of the law. Therefore, it has been proposed in the
Bill to make it obligatory on the part of the State Governments to set up special courts for
each district for speedy trial of offences arising out of violations of human rights.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT  RAJ
November 28, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that every State Government shall, with the concurrence
of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification, set up special courts in each district
for speedy trial of offences arising out of violation of human rights. The setting up of
special Courts in Union Territories will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. As far as States are concerned, the expenditure involved for setting up of special
Courts shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the
Central Government may have to assist the State Governments in setting up of special Courts.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five lakh
per annum.
It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh from
the Consolidated Fund of India.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE PROTECTION  OF HUMAN RIGHTS  ACT, 1993
(10 OF 1994)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "armed forces" means the naval, military and air forces and includes any
other armed forces of the Union;
* * * * *
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, while dealing with complaints
of violation of human rights by members of the armed forces, the Commission shall adopt
the following procedure, namely:—
(a) it may, either on its own motion or on receipt of a petition, seek a report from
the Central Government;
(b) after the receipt of the report, it may, either not proceed with the complaint
or, as the case may be, make its recommendations to that Government.
(2) The Central Government shall inform the Commission of the action taken on the
recommendations within three months or such further time as the Commission may allow.
(3) The Commission shall publish its report together with its recommendations made
to the Central Government and the action taken by that Government on such
recommendations.
(4)   The Commission shall provide a copy of the report published under sub-section
(3) to the petitioner or his representative.
* * * * *
CHAPTER  VI
HUMAN  RIGHTS  COURTS
30. For the purpose of providing speedy trial of offences arising out of violation of
human rights, the State Government may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the
High Court, by notification, specify for each district a Court of Session to be a Human
Rights Court to try the said offences:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply if—
(a) a Court of Session is already specified as a special court; or
(b) a special court is already constituted, for such offences under any other law for
the time being in force.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Procedure
with respect
to armed
forces.
Human Rights
Courts.

GMGIPMRND—2645LS(S3)—12-12-2017.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.
—————
(Dr. Udit  Raj, M.P.)