Bill No. 218 of 2024
THE BHAGWAN BIRSA MUNDA BIRTH PLACE ULIHATU 
NATIONAL MEMORIAL BILL, 2024 
By
Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato,  M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for the construction and management of a National Memorial in 
commemoration of  Birsa Munda, also known as ‘Dharti Aaba’ a great  
freedom fighter born on 15 November, 1875 at Ulihatu in Khunti  
District in the State of Jharkhand.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Bhagwan Birsa Munda Birth Place Ulihatu National 
Memorial Act, 2024.  
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Memorial " means the national Memorial  to perpetuate the memory of the 
Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
5
Definitions.

Bhagwan Birsa Munda born on 15 November, 1875 at Ulihatu in Khunti District in the 
State of Jharkhand.
(b) "Trust" means the Bhagwan Birsa Munda, Ulihatu National Memorial Trust for 
the construction and management of the Memorial.
(c) “Trustee” means the Trustee of the Bhagwan Birsa Munda Birth place, Ulihatu 
National Memorial.
 3. The objects of the Trust shall be— 
(a)  to construct and maintain suitable buildings, structures and parks at  
the site or in the surrounding area  in order to perpetuate the memory of  
Bhagwan Birsa Munda who was born on 15 November, 1875 at Ulihatu in Khunti 
District in the State of Jharkhand and also to highlight that place on the map of 
our country;
(b) to acquire land, buildings and other properties for the trust; and
(c) to raise and receive funds for the purposes of the Memorial.
 4.  (1) The trustees of the memorial shall be following, namely:—
(a) the Prime Minister-Chairperson,
(b) the Union Minister-in-charge of Culture;
(c) the Leader recognized as leader of opposition in the House of the People or 
where there is no leader of opposition, then leader of the largest party in opposition 
in the house;
(d) the Governor of the State of Jharkhand;
(e) the Chief Minister  of the  State of Jharkhand; and
(f) three eminent persons nominated by the Central Government.
 ( 2) The trustees shall be body corporate by the name of "Trustee of Bhagwan Birsa 
Munda Ulihatu National Memorial" for the purposes of this Act shall have perpetual 
succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued and shall be 
entitled to contract for the acquisition and holding of property.
 5.  The trustees nominated under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 4 shall continue 
to be trustees for a period of five years and shall be eligible for re-nomination.  
 6. All funds and property, whether movable or immovable, which may go to it, 
bequeathed or otherwise be transferred for the purpose of the Memorial or shall be acquired 
for the said purpose, shall vest with the Trust.
 7. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, grant to the Trust such sums of money as the Central Government 
may think fit for the purposes of this Act.  
 8.  (1) For the purposes of managing the affairs of the Trust, the Trustees may, by a 
resolution passed in the meeting, appoint a Management Committee and assign to it such 
powers, duties and functions subject to such directions and limitations as may be defined in 
such resolution.  
 ( 2) The trustees may appoint any persons, whether such persons are trustees or not, as 
members of the management committee and may, from time to time, vary or rescind any 
resolution passed by it under this section.  
 9. The Trust shall meet at least once in a year for approving the audited accounts of the 
Trust and shall transact such other business as may be deemed necessary.
2
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Objects of the 
Trust.
5
Trustees of the 
Memorial.
Power to approve 
audited accounts.
Power of trustees 
to appoint 
management 
committee.
Property vested 
with the trustees.
Term of office 
of nominated 
trustees.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.

 10. No act of the trustees shall be deemed to be invalid by reason of any vacancy in the 
body of the trustees or any defect in its constitution.  
 11.  (1) The accounts of the trust shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and the expenses in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the trust to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.  
 ( 2)The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him under this 
act in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Trust shall have generally the usual 
rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General has in case of audit of the Government accounts and shall have rights in particular 
for demanding the presentation of books, accounts, related vouchers and other documents 
and to inspect any of the offices of the trust.
 ( 3) The audit report and account report of the trust as certified by The Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or by any other person appointed by him in this matter shall be forwarded 
to Central Government every year and the Central Government shall lay the reports as soon 
as possible on the table of both houses of the parliament. 
 12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
 ( 2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules shall have power to make rules for— 
(a) the manner in which the funds of the Memorial shall be kept, deposited or 
invested; 
(b) the manner of authentication of orders for the payment of money by the 
Trustees; 
(c) the form in which accounts shall be maintained by the trustees and the audit of 
such accounts and their publication;
(d) the layout, construction, improvement, preservation and management  of the 
monument; 
(e) the conditions on which the public shall have access to the monument 
or particular parts thereof and the regulation of the conduct of persons entering the 
monument; and 
(f) the preservation of any property vested in the Trustee, and the prevention of 
damage to, or interference with, that property and restriction of persons trespassing on 
any particular part of the monument.  
 ( 3) A rule made under this section may provide that a breach of any rule made under 
clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.
 13. The Trustees may make such regulations as may be relevant to this Act for all  or 
any of the following purposes: 
(a) the manner in which meetings of the Trustees shall be called, the quorum for 
the transaction of business at such meetings and the procedure to be followed at such 
meetings;  
(b) the manner in which the decision of the majority of the Trustees, the matter in 
respect of which the decision shall be obtained by circulation to the required Trustees, 
the power of the Trustees to make regulations.
(c) the term of office of the members of the management committee, their powers 
and duties and the circumstances in which, and the conditions subject to which, such 
powers and duties may be exercised; 
3
10
5
Accounts and 
Audit.
Power to make 
rules.
Power to 
trustees to make 
regulations.
15
20
25
30
Validity of the acts 
of trustees not to 
be questioned due 
to vacancy etc.
40
35
45

(d) the appointment of such officers and servants as may be deemed necessary for 
the purposes of the trust, and the terms and conditions of their service.
 14.  Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule 
or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Laying of rules 
and regulations 
before 
Parliament.
10
5
4

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Birsa Munda, a great leader of the tribals, was born to a tribal couple Sugana and Karmi 
on 15 November, 1875 in Jharkhand. Birsa Munda was a great hero in Indian history who 
pioneered a new social and political era by transforming the condition and orientation of 
the tribal society with his revolutionary thinking in second half of the nineteenth century in 
Jharkhand, India. Birsa Munda scripted a saga of chivalry through his brave endeavours.
 Between 1897 and 1900, there were wars between the Mundas and the British soldiers, 
and Birsa and his supporters had given a befitting retaliation to the British. In August 1897, 
Birsa and his four hundred soldiers, armed with arrows and bows, raided the Khunti police 
station. In 1898, the Mundas clashed with the British forces on the banks of the Tanga river, 
in which the British army was defeated.
 In January 1900, another clash took place on the Dombadi hill, in which many women 
and children were killed while Birsa was addressing a public meeting at that place. Later on, 
some of Birsa's disciples were also arrested. Finally, on 3rd February 1900, Birsa was also 
arrested in Chakradharpur. Birsa breathed his last on 9 June 1900 in Ranchi Jail. Even today, 
Birsa Munda is worshiped as a God in tribal areas of Bihar, Odisha, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh 
and West Bengal.
 Therefore, there is a need to construct a National Memorial in his honour and promote 
the birth place of Bhagwan Birsa Munda as a tourist center on the map of the country.
 Hence this Bill.
   New Delhi;                                                         BIDYUT BARAN MAHATO 
November 7, 2024.   
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the construction and maintenance of suitable buildings, 
structures and gardens around the Bhagwan Birsa Munda birth place National Memorial 
Ulihatu by the trust and acquisition of land, buildings and other properties for the purpose of 
the trust and raising and receiving funds for the purpose of the memorial. Clause 7 provides 
for grants to be given to the Trust by the Central Government after due appropriation done 
by Parliament by law in this behalf for the purposes of the Act.
Therefore, on enactment of this Bill, both recurring and non-recurring expenditure 
are likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.  However, it is difficult  
to estimate the amount required for this purpose as it will depend on the decisions of  
the Trust.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill.  Clause 13 provides for power of trustees to make such regulations 
as may be relevant to this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative powers is of normal character.
 
 

LOK  SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for the construction and management of a National Memorial in 
commemoration of  Birsa Munda, also known as ‘Dharti Aaba’ a great  
freedom fighter born on 15 November, 1875 at Ulihatu in Khunti  
District in the State of Jharkhand.
(Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato, M.P .)