As InTRobuCED 18 Lok Sanita

t
493 /६॥ 20;

i

Bill No. 218 of 2000.
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR CHILDREN BILL, 2000
By
Dr. V. 5५0०७, M.P.
A
BILL

10 constitute a National Commission for Children and to provide for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:—

CHAPTER I
PReLimanany
1. (0 This Act may be called the National Commission for Children Act, 2000, Short title,
(2) Itextends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, om
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
| in the Official Gazette, appoint,
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise Tequires,— Definitions.

(a) "Commission" means the National Commission for Children constituted
10 under section 3;

(b) "Member" means a Member of the Commission and includes the Member-
Secretary;

(0 “prescribed means prescribed by rules made under this Act.


Constitution of
the National
Commission
for Children.

Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and Members.

Officers and
other employ-
es of the Com-
mission.

Salaries and
allowances to
be defrayed out
of the Consoli-
dated Fund of
India.

2
CHAPTER II
‘THE NATIONAL Commission FOR CHILDREN

3. (2) The Central Government shall constitute a body to be known as the National
=
functions assigned to it under this Act.

(2) The Commission shall coiisist of —

(6) a Chairperson to be nominated by the Central Government from a
panel of eminent persons committed the cause of children prepared in such
manner as may be prescribed;

(6) five Members, to be nominated by the Central Government from
amongst the persons of ability, integrity and standing who have had professional
experience in—

@ law or legislation (including Legal bodies);
(i) administration or economic development;
(iii) health, education or social welfare;

(©) one Member-Secretary who shall be—

( an expert in the fleld of management, organisational structure or
sociological movement, or

(i) an officer who is a member of a civil service of the Union or of an
all-India service or holds a civil Post under the Union with appropriate
experience.

4, (1) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for such period not
exceeding three years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), the Central Government
may terminate the term of office of the Chairperson. or a Member at any time before the
expiry of the term specified under sub-section (7) by giving to the Chairperson or the
Member, notice of not less than three months in writing or three months, salary and
allowances in lieu of such notice; and the Chairperson or the Member may relinquish the
office at any time before the expiry of the term specified under sub-section (/) by giving,
to the Central Government, notice of not less than three months in writing. :

(3) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh
nomination. |

(4) The salaries and allowances Payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed,

5. (1) The Central Government shall Provide the Commission with such officers and
employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the
Commission under this Act.

(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.

6. The salaries and allowances Payable to the Chairperson and Members and the
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and Pension payable to, or in
respect of, the officers and other employees of the Commission, shall be defrayed out
of the Consolidated Fund of India. —


£

7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid on Vacancies etc.,
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the Constitution of the — not to invali-

Commission. date proceed
ings of the
‘Commission.
8. (1) The Commission may appoint such committees as may be necessary for dealing Committees of
with such special issues as may be taken up by the Commission from time to time. the Commis-
sion.

(2) The Commission shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee
appointed under sub-section (/) such number of persons, who are not members of the
Commission, as it may think fit and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend the
meetings of the committee and take part in its proceedings but shall not have the right to
0 vote.

9. (1) The Commission or a committee thereof shall meet as and when necessary Procedure to
and shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit. है 3८ आम by
r is

(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the “™
Committees thereof.

(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the
Member -Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorised by the Member-

Secretary in this behalf.
CHAPTER गा
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION
10. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:— Functions of
(@ study, investigate and review all matters relating tothe safeguards provided ys,"

for children under the Constitution and other laws and make recommendations as to
the steps that should be taken by the Government for the effective implementation of
the safeguards so provided so as to improve the conditions of children;

(b) review, from time to time, the existing provisions of the Constitution and
other laws affecting children and recommend amendments thereto so as to suggest
remedial legislative measure to meet any lacunae, inadequacies or shortcomings in
such legislations;

(०) take up the cases of violation of the provisions of the Constitution and of
other laws relating to children with the appropriate authorities;

(d) look into complaints and take suo moto notice of matters relating to—
(0) deprivation of children’s rights;
+ (i) non-implementation of laws enacted to provide protection to children;
and
(ii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed
at mitigating hardships and ensuring welfare and providing relief to children
and take up the issues arising out of such matters with appropriate authorities;
(© call for special studies or investigations into specific problems or situations
arising out of discrimination and atrocities against children and. ‘identify the constraints
80 as to recommend strategies for their removal;

(f) review educational policy so as to cater to the needs of technological
advancement;

(g) inspect or cause to be inspected a jail, remand home, institution or other
place of custody where children are kept as prisoners or otherwise, and take up with
the concerned authorities for remedial action, if found necessary;



Grants by
the Central
‘Government,

Accounts and
audit,

Annual report,

Annual report
and audit report
tobe laid before
Parliament,

Chairperson,
‘Members and
staff of the
‘Commission
to be public
servants.

Directions by
the Central
Government.

4

(A) fund litigation involving issues affecting a large body of children;

(®) make periodical reports to the Government on any matter pertaining to
children and in particular various difficulties under which children

(0) any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central Government.
»
CHAPTER IV
FINANCE ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

11. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums
of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes
of this Act.

(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the
functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of
the grants referred to in sub-section (1).

12. (1) The Commission shall maintain Proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India,

(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General.

(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the
same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Camptroller
and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and Papers and to inspect any of the offices of
the Commission.

(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Commission,

13, The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each financial
Year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during
the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.

14. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in so far as they
relate to the Central Government and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports
are received, before each House of Parliament.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS

15. The Chairperson, the Members, Officers and other employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public seryants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.

16. The Commission shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time
to time by the Central Government for proper and efficient functioning of the Commission,



5

17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
les for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
uch rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the manner of preparation of the panel of eminent persons under sub-
section (2) of section 3;

(b) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (4) of section 4 and of
officers and other employees under sub-section (2) of section 5;

(co) allowances for attending the meetings of the Committee by the co-opted
persons under sub-section (3) of section 8;

(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained
under sub-section (1) of section 12;

(e) the form in and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared
under section 13;

(0) any other matter which is required to be or may be, prescribed,

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under
that rule.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Children are the future of the country. They are exploited in many ways. Majority of
the children do not go to schools for the simple reason that their parents are not in a
Position to send them to schools due to poor financial conditions or they are greedy to such
an extent that they send their children for employment to supplement the income of the
family. As a result, majority of the children remain illiterate, Children are employed as
full time domestic servants in many households and they do not get paid for the work they
Perform. The children toil for long hours for very meagre wages. The conditions at the work
Place are inhuman and not worth mentioning, The employers do not care for health. Safety
and other amenities which are necessarily to be provided to the Children under the law.
‘Though the Constitution of India explicitly prohibits the employment of children in
hazardous industries, millions of children are employed in many factories which could pose
danger to their health.

Children are also sexually exploited, They are sold to rich men in foreign countries.
(Cases of sexual abuse of children are reported almost everyday.

‘The education policy of the country is such that it often requires review so as to cater
to the needs of modern times and technological advancement in various spheres. The
education policy is out-dated and requires ‘thorough change.

Even after 53 years of independence, the children never received their due attention,
Tt would be in the fitness of things, if their problems are addressed by the nation urgently
and with a positive approach. It would be appropriate if we set up a National Commission
for Children to address the problems of the children and to take remedial action.

‘The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Deu; V. SAROJA
November 22, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Commission for Children.
Clause 6 provides for salaries and allowances to be paid to the Chairman, Members, Officers
and other staff of the Commission. Clauses 1000), 11 and 12(2) provide for expenses to be
met by the Commission on various items referred to in those clauses from out of the sums of
grants paid to the Commission under clause 11(1).

2. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
At present, it is not possible to give the exact which will be incurred out of the Consolidated
Fund of India to carry out the provisions of the Bill, However, a recurring expenditure of the
amount of rupees one hundred crore per annum is likely to be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out
the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for matters, such as—

(a) the manner of preparation of the panel of eminent persons under sub-section
(2) of section 3;

(b) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (4) of section 4 and officers
and other employees under sub-section (2) of section 5;

(०) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained
under sub-section (1) of section 12;

(d) the form in, and the time at, which the annual teport shall be prepared under
section 13;

(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedural and

administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them under the Bill itself.
delegation of the legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

oe

A
BILL

to constitute a National Commission for Children and to provide for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Dr. V. Saroja, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—S5552LS—13-12-2000.