1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. For article 340 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
"340. (1) There shall be a Commission for the Other Backward Classes to be
known as the National Commission for the Other Backward Classes.
Short title.
Bill No. 218 of  2015
Substitution
of new article
for article
340.
National
Commission
for Other
Backward
Classes.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other
Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by
rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission
shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission:—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for the Other Backward Classes under this Constitution or under any
other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to
evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of
rights and safeguards of the Other Backward Classes;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic
development of the Other Backward Classes and to evaluate the progress of
their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that
should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of
those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and
socio-economic development of the Other Backward Classes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare
and development and advancement of the Other Backward Classes as the
President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule
specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of
Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be
taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the
non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which
any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the
Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any,
of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-
clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5),
have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit  and in particular in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part
of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof  from any court or
office;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all
major policy matters affecting Other Backward Classes.".

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are ample schemes and special provisions for the welfare of the Other Backward
Classes in the country. However, there has not been any paradigm shift in their socio-
economic conditions. In such a situation, need is being felt for a better and strong institutional
system to put an end to their exploitation and ensure their overall development. There are
provisions for the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and the National
Commission for the Scheduled Tribes in the Constitution. Similarly, there is a need to
constitute a National Commission for the Other Backward Classes on the lines of the
Commissions for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Under article 338(10) of
the Constitution, the National Commission for Scheduled Castes is empowered to address
grievances not only of Scheduled Castes but also of Other Backward Classes. However, due
to excess workload and inadequate staff, National Commission for Scheduled Castes is not
in a position to cater to the work related to Other Backward Classes. The Parliamentary
Committee on the Welfare of the Other Backward Classes in its first report (2012-2013) had
also recommended for giving constitutional status to the National Commission for Other
Backward Classes. Though, under article 340 of the Constitution, the President is empowered
to appoint a Commission for the Other Backward Classes from time to time, but it is not
effective to address the grievances of the Other Backward Classes.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide constitutional
status to the National Commission for Other Backward Classes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
July 3, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Commission for Other Backward
Classes. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of
the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees five hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
340. (1) The President may by order appoint a Commission consisting of such persons
as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes
within the territory of India and the difficulties under which they labour and to make
recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove
such difficulties and to improve their condition and as to the grants that should be made for
the purpose by the Union or any State and the conditions subject to which such grants
should be made, and the order appointing such Commission shall define the procedure to be
followed by the Commission.
(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to them and
present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them and making such
recommendations as they think proper.
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together with a
memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.
* * * * * *
6
Appointment
of a
Commission
to investigate
the conditions
of backward
classes.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1570LS(S3)—24-07-2015.