1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words "sixty-five years", the
words "seventy years" shall be substituted.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No.  219 of  2015
Amendment
of article
124.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Article 124 (2) of the Constitution provides that a Judge of the Supreme Court shall
hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years. The age of retirement of the
Supreme Court Judges, which was fixed at sixty-two years in the beginning, was enhanced to
sixty-five years by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Since then, no revision
has taken place in this regard.
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, in its 39th Report dated the 29th April, 2010, has recommended
for raising the retirement age of the Judges of the High Courts from sixty-two years to
sixty-five years. Hence, in view of this, it is expedient that the age of retirement of a Judge of
the Supreme Court should also be raised from sixty-five to seventy years. Further, most of
the reasons adduced by the Fifth Central Pay Commission in support of its recommendation
for increasing the age of retirement of the Central Government employees, such as global
practices, increase in life expectancy, improved health standards, need for utilization of
experience and wisdom of senior employees, etc. would also apply to the Judges. Besides,
the Judges after their retirement are being appointed by the Government in various Tribunals,
Commissions and such other bodies which is antithesis and not in consonance with the
provisions as well as spirit of the Constitution. The increase in age of retirement of Judges
will altogether stop their re-employment after retirement.
In view of the present state of vacancies of Judges and heavy pendency of cases in
the Supreme Court, it is imperative to increase the age of retirement of a Judge of the
Supreme Court by five more years which would restrict occurrence of new vacancies on
account of superannuation of existing Judges for the next five years during which time the
existing backlog in vacancies could be cleared. This could also have a clear impact on
reduction of pendency of cases in the Supreme Court.
It is, therefore, proposed to increase the age of retirement of Judges of the
Supreme Court from sixty-five years to seventy years.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY
July 6, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
124. (1) * * * *
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and
of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixtyfive years:
* * * * * * *
Establishment
and
Constitution
of Supreme
Court.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P.P. Chaudhary, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1506LS(S3)—28-07-2015.