1
THE PLASTIC PACKAGING (REGULATION) BILL, 2018
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to impose a ban on the manufacture, storage, usage, sale, import, transport and
distribution of plastic packaging and single use plastic items and to constitute
a body to govern measures to treat plastic waste and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Plastic Packaging (Regulation) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India, except to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
Bill No. 219 of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Authority" means the Plastic Packaging Regulation Authority constituted
under section 6;
(b) "commodity" means any items which are subject to sale and includes all
marketable goods and wares;
(c) "Extended Producer Responsibility" means the responsibility of a producer
to treat the product at the end of its life;
(d) "multi layered packaging" means any material used or to be used for packaging
and having at least one layer of plastic as the main ingredients in combination with one
or more layers of materials such as paper, paper board, polymeric materials, metalized
layers or aluminium foil, either in the form of a laminate or co-extruded structure;
(e) "plastic" means any material which contains as an essential ingredient a high
polymer such as polyethylene terephthalate(PET), high density polyethylene, vinyl,
low density polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene resins, multi-materials like
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, polyphenylene oxide, polycarbonate, polybutylene
terephthalate;
(f) "plastic packaging" includes multi layered plastic packaging;
(g) "plastic waste" means the waste created by plastic discarded after its intended
use;
(h) "plastic sheet" means sheet made out of plastic but shall not include plastic
film or sheet used for agricultural or irrigation purposes;
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) "producer" means any person engaged in the manufacture or import of plastic
packaging, plastic sheets, plastic items including the items stated in Schedule or who
uses plastic sheet or plastic packaging for packaging of any commodity and includes
a brand owner;
(k) "recycling" means the treatment of plastic waste to convert it into another
product or a raw material for the new product;
(l) "single use plastic" means plastic which may be used only and has to be
disposed off after use;
(m) "waste pickers" means any individual or association of persons who are
engaged in collection of plastic waste for recycling and treatment purposes; and
(n) "waste to energy plant" means a plant where plastic waste undergoes
treatment and is converted into liquid or gaseous energy;
3. (1) This Act shall apply to—
(a) every person, body of person, company, partnership, institution, Government
and non-Government organization, body corporate, producer, retailer, e-retailer,
transporter, importer, wholesaler, hawkers, consumers, shopkeepers; and
(b) any public place, State and Central Government offices, ports and harbours,
cinema halls, clubs, restaurants, shops, industrial units, commercial units, sports
complex, religious institutions, tourist places, forest and reserved forest areas,
educational institutions, marriage/celebration halls, or any such other place which the
Central Government or the State Government as the case may be, notify.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall apply to—
(a) hospitals, maternity home, nursing home, dispensary, scientific research
Application of
the Act.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
laboratory, forensic science laboratory and educational institution imparting medical
courses; and
(b) to any plastic packaging manufactured exclusively for export purpose against
any export orders in Special Economic Zones.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION AND RESTRICTION OF PLASTIC PACKAGING
4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the manufacture, usage, import, sale whether
retail or wholesale, transport, distribution or storage of plastic packaging, single use plastic
items shall be prohibited from such time as notified in the Official Gazette but not before
expiry of two years from the date coming into force of this Act.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this section, the word 'single use plastic' items
includes the items as mentioned in the Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
amend Schedule by way of addition or deletion of the entries thereto.
(2) The manufacture, usage, import, sale, distribution or storage of polybutylene
terephthalate (PET) and PETE bottles having capacity of not less than 0.5 liters made of food
grade material shall be allowed provided that the producer of the same has an approved
Extended Producer Responsibility Plan.
5. The producer shall, immediately after coming into force of this Act, undertake
measures to phase out plastic packaging and replace it with a bio-degradable alternative
which complies with the minimum standards as prescribed or any other bio-degradable
alternative as notified by the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 7.
6. (1) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers with such
designation as it deems fit for the purpose of this Act and may entrust to them such powers
and functions under this Act.
(2) Any person who is appointed as an officer under sub-section (1) and is empowered
by the Central Government in this behalf, if he has reason to believe that plastic packaging or
plastic items as stated under section 4 are being manufactured, stored, transported or
distributed in any premises contrary to section 4, may enter into and search such place,
premise or vehicle.
(3) Where, as a result of the search made under sub-section (2), any plastic packaging
items in contravention of section 4 are found, the authorized officer may seize such item and
any other item which he may consider necessary under the provisions of the Act.
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches and
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this section.
CHAPTER III
E
XTENDED PRODUCER RESPONSIBILITY
7. (1) The producer shall draft an Extended Producer Responsibility Plan within six
months of the Act coming into force which shall lay down the mechanism by which the
producer shall ensure the safe treatment of their product at the end of its life.
(2) The Extended Producer Responsibility Plan shall, without prejudice to the foregoing,
include the following, namely:—
(i) a take back system to collect discarded plastic packaging either by way of a
deposit refund system or a voucher system or in any other manner deemed fit;
Prohibition
on use of
plastic
packaging and
single use
items.
Measures to
phase out
plastic
packaging.
Appointment
of officers and
the power of
search and
seizure.
Extended
Producer
Responsibility
Plan.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(ii) setting up of a collection and recycle centre, either by the producer themselves
or on a contractual basis with a third party; and
(iii) engaging with waste pickers to streamline the waste into recycling or other
treatment plants.
(3) The Extended Producer Responsibility Plan shall be sent to the Central Pollution
Control Board for approval.
(4) If a producer fails to submit an Extended Producer Responsibility Plan within six
months of this Act coming into force, them action shall be taken against such producer under
Section 8 of the Act.
(5) The provisions of sub-section ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall also apply to Government
owned or funded entities.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be called the Extended Producer Responsibility Fund for improving the plastic
waste treatment system and there shall be credited thereto.
(a) any grants and loans made by the Central Government or any State
Government;
(b) any voluntary donations or contributions, whether or not for any specific
purpose as may be decided upon by the Central Government;
(c) any fine recovered for the commission of an offence punishable under this
Act;
(d) portion of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) fund of the producer
company as notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette; and
(e) any other sums as may be received.
(2) The Extended Producer Responsibility Fund shall be utilized under this Act by the
Central Government for—
(i) funding of any national or state level research study or project for development
of innovative and efficient methods of treatment of plastic waste;
(ii) raising awareness regarding the impact of plastic waste and the benefits of
recycling plastic waste and its substitution with bio-degradable alternatives;
(iii) funding of small scale recycling or waste to energy plants on a district
level; and
(iv) any other activity that may be required for effective implementation of this
Act.
CHAPTER IV
P
LASTIC PACKAGING REGULATION AUTHORITY
9. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an authority to be called the Plastic Packaging Regulation Authority, by notification for
enforcing the provisions of section 4 and carrying out such other functions as laid down in
the Act.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The Authority may establish its offices at such other place in India as may be
prescribed.
(4) The Authority shall have a Chairperson and five other members to be appointed by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
Extended
Producer
Responsibility
Fund.
Constitution
of Plastic
Packaging
Regulation
Authority
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(5) The Salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
and qualifications of the Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Chairperson and members shall hold the office for a period of five years or up
to the age of sixty- five whichever is earlier.
(7) The Authority shall have the power to disburse the funds under the Extended
Producer Responsibility Fund for any purpose as it deems fit for effective implement the
provisions of this Act.
10. The Authority shall,—
(i) develop guidelines for the enforcement of the sections 4 and 5;
(ii) notify the type and kind of compostable or bio-degradable material to be
used as alternative to the plastic packaging after consultation with Central Pollution
Control Board;
(iii) seek report from the manufacturer and producer on the gradual phasing out
of plastic packaging immediately after the Act comes into force until expiry of two
years from such date;
(iv) draft a model Extended Producer Responsibility Plan after consultation with
Central Pollution Control Board laying down the responsibilities of the manufacturer,
producer and recycling units; and
(v) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
P
ENALTIES
11. Whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, or
the rules, orders, directions made or issued thereunder, shall for each of such failure or
contravention be punished with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees and
may extend up to two lakh rupees and with additional fine which may extend up to five
thousand rupees for everyday during which such failure or contravention continues after
conviction.
12. (1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company,  every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be Proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,—
(a) "company" means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals;
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Functions of
the Authority.
Penalties.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
13.(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any department of
appropriate Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercise all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a Department of appropriate Government and it is proved
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to
any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head of the Department, such officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
14. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or any State Government or any officer or other employee of the Central
Government or any State Government or any authority constituted under this Act or any
member, officer or other employee of such authority in respect of anything which is done or
intended to be done in good faith in pursuance of this Act or the rules made or orders or
directions issued thereunder.
15. (1) If the Cental Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to
do in the public interest, it \may, by order published in the Official Gazette, exempt any person
or class of person from the operation of section 4.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
from or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order.
 16. The Cental Government shall, after due appropriation  made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
17. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity or anything previously
done under that rule.
Offence by
Government
Department.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
exempt.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

THE  SCHEDULE
[Section 4]
The term single use plastic items shall include the following items which are made of
plastic:
1. Cutlery which includes but is not limited to spoon, fork, plate, bowl, cups, straws;
2. Flag;
3. Banner;
4. Sheet;
5. Packet;
6. Container;
7. Wrapper;
8. Film.
7

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 2017, 60 major cities in India were estimated to have produced 25,940 tonnes of
plastic waste per day. Plastic, because of its structural qualities and ease of handling, has
become an ubiquitous component of almost every market and industry. Plastic has paved the
way for brands and products to cater to mass consumerism. But this commodity with its
omnipresence has its own cost. Plastic, for all its qualities, is difficult to dispose off because
unlike organic matters, it is not capable of decomposition. Because of its growing negative
impact on the environment and especially the marine life, it is inevitable that plastic
consumption patterns will have to undergo momentous change to ensure protection of the
environment. One of the most efficient ways of doing that is to bring about a change in the
way a commodity is presented to the customer. Plastic packaging, especially in the food
industry, electronic industry, cosmetics etc. is consumed in massive numbers but has a very
short shelf life and is not capable of bio-degradation. Although plastic can be recycled into
other products or raw material, the system of waste collection in the country is not efficient
since a large part of  it is governed by the informal sector which leads to the plastic ending up
in landfills and water bodies.
In order to tackle the nuisance of growing waste, several rules were notified under the
umbrella of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The Solid Waste Management Rules,
2016 and the Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 lay down the broader framework for
efficient collection, segregation and treatment of the waste. This framework has to be
supplemented and further strengthened by way of statutory mechanism which will enforce
change in consumption patterns by reducing plastic at the source. Such statutory mechanism
will ensure that the industry and market alike will substitute plastic with bio-degradable,
sustainable alternatives. Similarly, with efficient treatment of the existing waste, the menace
of solid waste can be tackled in a timely manner.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI LEKHI
January 24, 2018.
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for appointment of Officers with the power of search and
seizure. Clasue 8 provides for constitution of an Extended Producer Responsibility Fund.
Clause 9 provides for Plastic Packaging Regulation Authority. Clause 16 provides for
Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees on hundred
crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to give effect to
the provisions of this Bill. As matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and therefore, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.
10

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to impose a ban on the manufacture, storage, usage, sale, import, transport and
distribution of plastic packaging and single use plastic items and to constitute
a body to govern measures to treat plastic waste and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2466LS(S3)—19-12-2018.