1
THE REMOVAL OF HOMELESSNESS BILL, 2017
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to remove homelessness in the country by providing for framing of a housing scheme
aimed at providing dwelling units with all basic facilities at an affordable cost to every
homeless family
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Removal of Homelessness Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “family” means an adult citizen, his spouse and dependent children; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No. 219 of  2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide a dwelling unit with all basic facilities
at an affordable cost to every homeless family.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, in consultation
with the State Governments, frame a time-bound national housing scheme to remove
homelessness in the country.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2), the housing scheme shall provide
for dwelling unit free of cost or at concessional rate to senior citizens, physically challenged
citizens, citizens belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Classes, citizens staying and sleeping on public roads or in parks, shelters and
other public places and such other categories of citizens, as the appropriate Government
may deem fit.
4. The appropriate Government shall implement the national housing scheme with
such targets and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law,
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force in respect of any of the matters provided under this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Provision of
dwelling units
with basic
facilities by
the
appropriate
Government.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
housing
scheme.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
in force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Housing is one of the basic needs of every human being. Everyone wants to own a
house for himself and his family, but there is a huge gap between supply and demand of
housing and as a result the homelessness is increasing day by day. Lakhs of people are
forced to live under the sky and face the vagaries of weather, be it scorching heat of the
summer, torrential rains of the monsoon or chilling cold of the winter. In the cities, particularly
in big and metropolitan cities, people live on footpaths, parks, bus stand sheds and other
open spaces. A large number of people are also living in jhuggis, jhopris, kucha and
semi-pucca hutments in inhuman conditions of filth and garbage without any of the basic
amenities.
There are Housing Boards and Authorities in every State to address the housing
problem of the citizens. But these Boards and Authorities have  failed to meet the demand of
housing by the citizens.
The right to safe and appropriate housing has been recognised and reaffirmed in all
international and regional covenants and our country has ratified such covenants and,
therefore, it is the foremost duty of the State to provide adequate housing to the needy and
homeless citizens. Our Supreme Court too has recognized this right as an integral part of the
right to life enshrined in article 21 of the Constitution. But in the absence of an effective law
it is not possible to address the problem of housing and remove homelessness among
citizens of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT  RAJ
November 28, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide a dwelling
unit with basic facilities at affordable cost or free of cost, as the case may be, to every
homeless family. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall implement housing
scheme. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate  funds to the
State Governments for implementing the provisions of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
one thousand five hundred crore per annum will be involved as recurring expenditure.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore will also be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only as the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—2628LS(S3)—12.12.2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to remove homelessness in the country by providing for framing of a housing scheme
aimed at providing dwelling units with all basic facilities at an affordable cost to every
homeless family.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P.)