As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

; 10 AUG 29991

Bill No. 219 of 2000.

| WOMEN AND GIRLS (PROTECTION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS) BILL, 2000
By
Surmari Renuka CHowpuury, M.P.
है A
BILL

to protect the property rights of women and girls and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— हु

1. (7) This Act may be called the Women and Girls (Protection of Property Rights)
Act, 2000.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

(a) “appropriate Government” means the Central or the State Government

under whose employment the deceased husband of the widow was, at the time of his
10 death;

(0) “girl” means an unmarried woman;

(०) ‘property’ means movable and immovable property and includes all rights
pertaining to property by way of lease, licence, inheritance, etc.;

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Shon title,
extent and

commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Rights ofa girl.

Rights of a
married
‘woman

Rights of a
married
woman
referring
maintenance.

Rights of a
widow.

2

3. A girl shall have the following rights namely:—

(a) she shall have the right to live in the house of her parents, in relation to
the dwelling unit of the parents, but shall have no right to seek partition or disposal
thereof,

(b) she shall have an equal right in any Property other than the residential
house or dwelling unit referred to in clause (a) as a coparcener to such property,
whether self acquired, joint-family property, or premises held on lease or license or
under any other arrangement by the parents and shall have the right to claim partition
thereof, if she decides to remain unmarried after attaining the marriageable age
under any law for the time being in force;

(०) she shall have an equal right with other coparceners in the gains of the
family business of her parents; and

(d) she shall have a right to any property as a coparcener in the family which
is acquired by way of exchange or sale or transfer by any other party to the family
and to any property acquired by her parents or family members by way of accretion
or succession to a family property or otherwise.

4. A married woman shall, in addition to the rights for the enjoyment of her wages

and earnings ete. as provided in the Married Women’ s Property Act, 1874 have the following
rights by virtue of her marriage, in the property of her husband namely:—

(a) she shall have the right to live in the house of her husband whether owned or
occupied by him, as a member of the family or joint-family, or as a lessee or licensee,
solely or jointly, like any other member of the family of her husband:

Provided that such right shal! not terminate in the event of judicial separation,
divorce or death of the husband;

(b) she shall have the right to live in the residential house of her parents as
referred to in clause (a) of section 3 in case she is deserted or divorced by her husband
but shall have no right to claim partition or disposal of the whole or any part thereof;

(c) she shall have an equal share as a coparcener in the property of her husband,
including the joint family property of the husband, from the date of marriage and like
any other coparcener shall also have a right to claim partition in respect thereof and
for disposal of a part or the whole of such share:

Provided that in the event of disposal of such share or part thereof, the other
coparceners shall have a right of pre-emption.

5. A married woman shall have the right to claim maintenance under the law if

deserted or divorced and have the first option to have the custody of the children as a
guardian; and to claim maintenance under the law besides hereself and for the children
from her husband, which shall include the expenses to be incurred on the education and
training and up-bringing of the children consistent with the status of the family of the
husband:

Provided that if in the interest of the education, training or up-bringing of the children,

it is considered necessary or expedient to leave the childen under the guardianship of the
husband or any one else, she shall have free excess to children born to her, irrespective of
estrangement, desertion or divorce or death of the husband.

6. A widow shall have the following rights, namely:—

(a) in case the husband dies in harness, she shall be entitled to suitable
employment subject to eligibility, as may be prescribed, in an unorganisation under
the appropriate Government or public or private enterprise, as the case may be, in
which her deceased husband was employed at the time of his death:


3

Provided that if she is not eligible for any such employment, she shall be
entitled to full pension at the same rate as her deceased hushand would have been
* entitled, had he been alive:

Provided further that if the death of the husband occurs while on duty, and is attributable
to the vagaries of the job, she shall be entitled to full wages as pensionary benefits till the
superannuation date of the husband had he been alive, and to pension of usual rates
thereafter, as may be payable to the husband during his life time.

(b) she shall have the ‘first claim and absolute right to the property of her
deceased husband, including that in a joint family property or as a coparcener:

(c) she shall be entitled to participate in the family business of the de
husband on the same footing as her husband would have been.

ed

7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thercunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
heing in force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.

8. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act and shall cause them to be laid before each House
of Parliament.

Overnding
effect of the
Act and rules.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In India, with a male-dominated society, women constitute the most exploited and
weaker sections of the community. In the patriarchal set up as is in India, women have
traditionally little, rather negligible, by way of property rights. They have, so to say, no
status of their own. In their childhood they are wholly dependent on their parents or
guardians, in their married life they depend on the sweet will, nay whims and fancies, of
their husbands, in their widowhood they are just destitutes.

Even after 53 years of independence, the status of women is practically no better.
Amongst the minorities, the tribals and rural masses, it is comparatively worse. Since status
goes with property-rights, an effort needs to be made to confer property rights on the
women folk, right from birth, and childhood.

The present legislation secks to codify and confer specific property rights on |
al various stages of their lives, namely, childhood, unmarried and married life and desertion
or destitution so as to accord them a status and confer on them rights equal to their male
counterparts, in true spirit of the "Right to equality before the law” as enshrined in the
Constitution of India,

New Deva; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
November 10, 2000


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out

purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
। power is of a normal character.

the delegation of


LOK SABHA

~:

A
BILL

to protect the property rights of women and girls and for matters connected therewith.

(Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—S349LS—13.12.2000.