1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SADASHIV LOKHANDE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. In article 370 of the Constitution, after clause ( 3), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(4) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), the provisions of this article, unless
made inoperative sooner by the President, shall cease to have effect on the
commencement of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.".
.
Bill No. 219 of  2016
Short title.
Amendment
of article 370..
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 370 was incorporated in the Constitution as a temporary provision to define the
political and constitutional structure of the State of Jammu and Kashmir keeping in view the
special circumstances prevailing in the State at the time of its accession. The status of this
State differs from the other States in many respects due to the existence of the provisions of
article 370 even though sixty-six years have passed since the Constitution came into force.
This has happened in spite of the fact that the said provisions are clearly termed in the
Constitution itself as temporary in nature. The situation which existed at the time of
incorporation of the special provisions in the Constitution does not exist today. The people
of Kashmir have been participating regularly in elections to the Parliament and State Legislature,
which has proved that Jammu and Kashmir is at par with other States of the country. Article
370 has, therefore, lost its relevance today. Moreover, the application of a temporary provision
for almost sixty-six years without any raitonale does not make any sense. In fact, due to this
article, the economy of the State has lagged behind as private sector refrain from investing in
the State on account of its unique status. The arrangements under this article have led to
step-motherly treatment to the people of the State. What is more serious is that this provision
gives countries which are not friendly to us, an opportunity to raise the Kashmir issue in
various international fora.
Therefore, in the interest of the people of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, this article
should cease to operate so that the State could enjoy the fruits of progress of the country in
all fields, as enjoyed by the people of other States and would also develop a feeling of
brotherhood with the rest of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SADASHIV  LOKHANDE
August 11, 2016.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
370. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) the provisions of article 238 shall not apply in relation to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir;
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws for the said State shall be limited to—
(i) those matters in the Union List and the Concurrent List which, in
consultation with the Government of the State, are declared by the President to
correspond to matters specified in the Instrument of Accession governing the
accession of the State to the Dominion of India as the matters with respect to
which the Dominion Legislature may make laws for that State; and
(ii) such other matters in the said Lists as, with the concurrence of the
Government of the State, the President may by order specify.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the Government of the
State means the person for the time being recognised by the President as the
Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers
for the time being in office under the Maharaja's Proclamation dated the fifth day
of March, 1948.
(c) the provisions of article 1 and of this article shall apply in  relation to that
State;
(d) such of the other provisions of this Constitution shall apply in relation to that
State subject to such exceptions and modifications as the President may by order 1
specify:
Provided that no such order which relates to the matters specified in the
Instrument of Accession of the State referred to in paragraph (i) of sub-clause (b) shall
be issued except in consultation with the Government of the State:
Provided further that no such order which relates to matters other than those
referred to in the last preceding proviso shall be issued except with the concurrence of
that Government.
(2) If the concurrence of the Government of the State referred to in paragraph (ii) of
sub-clause (b) of  clause (1) or in the second proviso to sub-clause (d) of that clause be given
before the Constituent Assembly for the purpose of framing the Constitution of the State is
convened, it shall be placed before such Assembly for such decision as it may take thereon.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this article, the President
may, by public notification, declare that this article shall cease to be operative or shall be
operative only with such exceptions and modifications and from such date as he may specify:
Provided that the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State referred
to in clause (2) shall be necessary before the President issues such a notification.
* * * * * *
3
Temporary
provisions
with respect
to the State
of Jammu and
Kashmir.

GMGIPMRND—2600LS(S3)—28-09-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Sadashiv Lokhande, M.P .)