, 
, 
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1961 
• 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOIC SABHA 
ON 28m MARCH, 1961) 
.'''''\.' 

Bill No. ZI of It!l 
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, IC)61 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
• • I • 
BILL 
further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the' Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
'1\ 
1. This Act may be called the Essential Commodities (Amend- Shon title. 
ment) Act, 1961. 
2. In the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, in section 3, in sub- ~m.c~:z: 
section (2) ,- . 
• 
(a) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
• "(to for the grant or issue of licences, pennits ·or other 
documents, the charging of fees therefor, the deposit of sueh 
sum, if any, as may be specified in the order as security for 
the due performance of the conditions of any such licence, 
permit or other dOQlment, the forfeiture of the sum so 
deposited or any part thereof for contravention of any sueh 
conditions, and the adjudication of such forfeiture by such 
authority as may be specified in the order;"; 
~b) in clause m ,-
(i) after the word "aircraft", the word "and" shall be 
inserted; and 
(ii) the words "the grant or issue of licences, permits or 
other documents, and the charging of fees therefor" shall be 
omitted . 
• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
At present there is no power on the part of the Government to 
include in an order made under section 3 of the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955 any provision ~equiring the holder of any licence, permit or 
other document to furnish security deposit for the due performance 
of the conditions thereof and for the forfeiture of the whole or any 
part of the security deposit for the contravention of any such condi-
tions, although such forfeiture would appear to be quite sufficient in 
cases of contravention of a minor or technical nature instead of dras-
tIc"remedies by way of prosecution of the person concerned, or sus-
pension or cancellation of his licence, permit, etc. The Bill seeks to 
amend section 3 of the Act in order to take power for the Government 
in this behalf. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th March, 1961 
2 
S. K. PATIL. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Under' seCtion 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 as proposed 
to be amended by this Bill, the Government will have the power to 
include in an order made under that section additional matters relat-
ing to security deposit, forfeiture thereof in cases of contravention of 
conditions of any licence, .permit, etc., and adjudication of such forfei-
tures. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character . 
• 
• 
3 

The provision propoaed in the Bill contemplates- adjudieatiab of 
forfeiture of security depgloit by authexttiEB, apedfled. by- GoYemmeat 
in this behalf. OnliDarily. it ia.expeoted-that,lUCh;adjudicatiae will 
be made-by the esistiDl authorities of tbe-CeDhl, Govtl'DDl8llt aDd.. 
the. &ate. Got.remm._ witlDlt inwl_ •. -.wltiolUd'OOItt In'spaaial, 
cases. however. it. may be Jleoea&aq ~_appotDt-_sptIOial_horitielt'fDr 
this purpose. but even in those special cases the expenditure involved 
will not be appreciable. and it is not possible to give any estimate of 
such expenditure at this stage. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE EssENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT, 1955 (10 OF 1955) 
• • • • • Powers to 
3. (1). ~l. 
p1'OCl UctiOD, 
• • • • • aupply, diBtribution, 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred:C' ~ 1 
by sub-section (1), an order made thereunder may provide- ~OI. 
• • • • • 
W for any incidental and supplementarY matters, includ:ng 
in particular the entering and search of premises, vehicles, vessels 
and aircraft, the seizure by a person authorised to make such 
search of any articles in respect,ot:which such person has reason 
to believe that a contravention of the order has been, is being, or 
is about to be committed, the' grant 'or i~e' bf li.cenees, permits or 
other documents. and the charging of fees therefor. 
• • • • • 
, .~ 
.... ; 'j, 
, , ,I, 
• 
',' ,': Ii 
, . 
.. ' ;.' 
• 
I 

LOK SABHA 
A 
RILL 
fUlthec to aQJ.ellQ the Essent~l Commodities Act, 1955. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, t:,ecommended to Lok 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shn S. K. Palll, 
M"inisler of Food and Agriculture.) 