As INTRODUCED IN LaK SABRA ON 
. , 
r. 5 ~ ,il q ~y' I 
t. ..) f ' .' 
BiD No. 21 of 1185 
THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS BILL, 1985 
ARRANGEMENT OF' CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Pal!!LIMINAKY 
, 1. Short title, extent and eommencement. 
2. Act not to IlPply to certain persons. 
3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
. ESTABLl"SHMENT OF TRIBUNALS AND BENCHES THEREOF 
4. Establishment of Administrative Tribunals. 
'5. Composition of Tribunals and Benches thereof. 
6. Qualifications for appointment as Chairman, Vice-Chairman or 
other Member. . 
7. Vice-Chairman to act as Chairman or to discharge his func-
tions in certain circumstances. 
8. Term of office. 
9. Resignation and removal. 
10. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of 
s~rvice of CI~airm.an, Vice.Chairman and other Members. 
11. Provision REi to the holding of offices by Chairman, etc., OD 
ceasing to be such Chairman, etc. 
12. FinanciaJ and administrative ·powers ot the Chairman. 
13. Staff of the Tribunal. 
CHAPTER III 
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF "TRIBUNALS 
'14. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administra-
tive Tribunal. 
15. Jurisdiction, powt"rs and authority of State Administrative 
Tribunals. 
16. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of a Joint Adm:llistratfve 
Tribunal. . 
17. Power to punish for contell'Jpt. • 
18. Distribution of business amongst the Tribunals and its Benchel. 

CLAtJSIS 
(li) 
CHAPTER IV 
PBOCED11RE 
19. Applications to Tribunals. 
20. Applications not to be adniitted unless other remedies exhausted. 
21 .. Limitation. 
22. Procedure and powers of Tribunals. 
23. Right of applicant to take assistance ef legal practlt.ioner and 
of Government, etc., to appoint presenting omcera. 
24. Conditions as to making of interim orders. 
25. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one 15ench to 
another. 
26. Decision to be by majority. 
27. Execution of orders of a Tribunal. 
~HAPTER V 
MISCELLANBOUS 
28. Exclusion of jurisdiction of courts except the SIlpreme Court 
under article 136 of the Constitution. 
29. Transfer of pendin~ CASes. 
30. Proceedings before a Tribunal to be judicial proceedings. 
31. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants. 
32. Protection of action takeri in good faith. 
33. Act to have overriding effect. 
34. Power to remove difficulties. 
3&. Power of the Central Government to make rules. 
38. Pewer of the appropriate qovernment to make rules. 
1'1. Laying of rules. 

Bill No. 21 oJ 1_ 
THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS BILL, 1985 
A' 
BILL 
" 
to provide for the adjudication or tf'ial by Administrative Tribut\411 
01 ciisputes and complaints 'lA.'ith respect to recruitment and conc:li-
tions of sef'vice of persons appoilnted to pUblic service. and posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Union or 01 'any State or of any 
Zocal or other authority within the territory of India or under the 
control of the Government of India or of a.ny corporation owned or 
controLled by the Got,ernment and for matters connected therewith 
or incid.er~taZ thereto.' 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the, Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as fellowB:-
CHAPTER I 
PRBLIMINARY 
5 1.(1) This Act may be called the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. Short 
title, 
(2) It extends,- extent 
(4) in so fr.r as. it relates to the Central Administrative :!men-
Tribunal, to the whole of India; cement. 
(b) i.n so far as it relates to Adminis~rative Tribunals for States, 
to to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kaslunir. 

Ad DOt to 
apply to 
certain 
PCl'lOlJl, 
D&6Ditiooa. 
2 
(3) The provisions of this Act, in so far as they relat~ to the Central 
Administrative Tribunal, shall come into force on such date as the 
Central GQvernment may, by notification, appoint. 
(4) The provisions of this Act, in so far as they relate to an Adminis-
trative Tribunal for a State, shall come into force in a State on such 5 
dat~ as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint. 
2. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to-
(a) any member of the naval, military or air forc~s or of any 
other armed forces of thelJnion; 
(b) any perr;on governed by the provisions of the Industrial 10 
Disputes Act, 1947, in regard to such matters in respect of which he 14ofl947. 
is so governedj i 
(e) any officer or servant of the Supreme Court or of any High 
Court; . . 
I 
(d) any person appointed to the secretarial staff of either 15 
House Qf Parliament 'or to the secretarial staft of any State Legis-
lature or a House thereof or, in the case of a Union territory having 
a Legislature, of that Legislature. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Administrati~e Tribunal", in relation to a State, means 20 
the Administrative Tribunal for the State or, as the case may be, 
the Joint Administrative Tribunal for that State and any other State 
or States; 
(b) "application" means an application made under section 19; 
(e) "appointed day"; in4'elation to a Tribunal, means the date 25 
with effect from which it is established, by notification, under 
section 4j 
(d) "approprinte Government" means-
(i) in relation to the Central Administrative Tribunal .or a 
Joint Administrative TribUnal, the Central Government; 30 
(ti) in relation to a State Administrative Tribunal, the State 
Government; . 
(e) "Bench" means a Bench of a Tribunal; 
(I) "Central Administrative Tribunal" means the Administra-
tive Tribunal established under sUb-seetion (1) of section 4; 35 
. (g) "Chairman" means the Chairman of a Tribunal; 
(h) "Joint Administrative Tribunal" means an Administrative 
Tribunal for two or more States established under sub-section (3) 
of section 4; 
(t) "Member" means a Member of a Tribunal; 
m "notification" means a notification published 
Gazette; 
40 
in the Official 
(k) 
(l) 
Act; 
"post" means a post Within or outside India; 
"prescribed" means' prescribed by rules made under this 
45 

" ' 
(m) "Presldr~nt" means the PlIesident of India; 
(n)"principal Bench" ,m~a~s the principal Bench of a Tribunal; 
(0) "rule~" means rules made under this Act; 
(p) "service" means service within or outside India; 
5 (q) "service matters", in relation to a person, means all matters 
relatinp' to the conditions of his .ervice in connection with the 
atfairs of the Union or of any state or of any local or other authority 
within the territory of India or under the control of the Govemm~,t 
of India, or, as the case may be, of any corporation owned or con-
10 trolled by the Government, as respects-
15 
.. 
(i) remuneration (including allowances), pension and other 
retirement benefits; • 
(if) tenure including confirmation, seniority, promotion, re-
version, premature retirement and superannuation; 
. (iii) leave 'of any kind; 
(iv) disciplinary matters; or 
(v) any other matter whatsoever; 
(r) "service rules as to redressal of grievances", in relation to 
any matter, means the rules, regulations, orders or other instruments 
20 or arrangements as in force for the time being with respect to 
redressal, otherwise than under this Act, of any grievances in 
relation to such matters; 
(8) "Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of India; 
(t) "Tribunal" means the Central Administrative Tribunal or 
25 a State Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tribunal; 
(u) "Vice-Chairman" means the Vice-Chairman of a Tribunal. 
Explanation.-In the case of a Tribunal having two or more 
Vice-Chairmen, references to the Vice-Chairman in this Act shall 
b,e construed as a refereJilce to each of those Vice-Chairmen. 
CHAPTER II 
E5TABLISHMENT OF TRll'ItrNALS AND BENCHES THEREOF 
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an 
Administrative Tribunal, to be known as the Central Administrative 
35 Tribunal, to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and 3~thority conferred r,n 
the Central Administrative Tribunal by or under thIS Act. 
(2) The Central Government may, on receipt of a request in this 
behalf from any State Government, establish, by notification, an Ad-
ministrative 'rribullP} for the State to be known as the ........ (name of 
o the State) Mministrative Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, powers 
4 and authorit)' conferred on the Administrative Tribunal for the State 
by or under this Act. 
(3) Two or more States may, notwithstanding anything contained in 
<lub-section (2) and notwithstanding that any or all of those States has 
or have Tribunals established undet that sub-section, enter into an 
45 agreement that the same Administrative Tribunal shall be the Adminis-
trative Tribunal for each of the States participating in the agreement, 
and if the agreement is approved by the Central Government and 
\ 
Establish-
ment of 
Adminis-
trative 
TribunaJ •• 

cempotl-
tlonof 
Tribunals 
u4 
Benches 
tbereot. 
published in tbe Gazette of India and the Official Gazette of 
each of those States, the Central Government may, by notifl.cation, 
estabHsh a Joint Administrative Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority conferred on the Administrative Tribunals for 
those States by, or under this Act. 5 
('4) An agreement under sub-section (3) shall contain pro-
visions as to the name of the Joint Administrative Tribunal, 
the manner in which the participating States may be associated 
in the selection of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other 
Members of the Joint Administrative Tribunal, the places at which the 10 
Bench or Benches of the Tribunal shall sit, the apportionment amonl 
the participating States of the expenditure in connection with the Joint 
Administrative Tribunal and may also contain such other supplemental, 
incidental and consequential provisions not inconsistent with this Act 
as may be deemed necessary or expedient for giving ded to ~he agree- 15 
ll)ent. 
5. (1) Eacb TrI...... ....... eoasIIt 01 a CW....... aBtl suda DU •• 
of Vlee-Chainnen and other Members as the appropriate Government 
may deem .. ...,.8IIIIfed to die other ,..,visIons Of .. II Act, the jurlsdidlOJl. 
Powers aDd authority of the Tribanal may be exercised by Benches thereof. 120 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall . be 
presided over by the Chairman or a Vice-Chairman and shall consist of 
at least two other Members. 
(3) The Bench for which the Chairman is appointed as the Presid-
ing Ofticer shall be the principal Bench an.d the other Benches shall be 25 
known as the additional Benches. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (3), the Chairman,-
(a) may also act as the Chairman of any additional Benebt 
(b) may transfer the ·Vice-Chairman or other Member from one 'gO 
Bench to another Bench; 
(c) may authorise the Vice-Chairman or other Member appointed 
to one Bench to discharge also the fUDctions of the Vice-Chairman 
or, as the case may be, other Mem~r of another Bench; and 
(d) may, for the purpose of securing that any case or cases 35 
which, having regard to the nature of the questions tnvolved, rc;a-
quires or requirE, in his opinion or under the rules· made by the 
Central Government in this behalf, to be decided by a Bench com-
posed of more than three Members, issue such general or special 
orders, as he may deem fit. 40 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (3) and 311bject. to any rules that may be made in this behalf, 
when one of the persons constituting a Bench (whether such person be 
the Presiding Officer or other Member of the Bench) is unable to dis-
charge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause or in 45 
the event of the occurrence of any vacancy either in the office of the 
Prpsiding Officer or in the office of one or the other Members of the' 
Bench, the remaining two persons may function as the Bench and if the 
Presiding Officer of the Bench is not one of the remaiD.ing two persons, 
the senior among the remaining persons shall act as the Presiding Ofticer 50 
of the Bench. 

& 
. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the f01l!going provisions 
of this section, it shall be competent for the Chairman Or any other 
Member authorised by the Chairman in this behalf to function as an 
-additional Bench consisting of a single Member and exercise-the jurisdic~ 
5 tion, powers and authority of the Tribunal in respect of such classes of 
cases or such matters pertaining to such classes of cases as the Chair-
man may by general or special order specify: 
Provided that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or 
matter it appears to the Chairman or ·such Member that the case or 
10 matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consist-
ing of three Members, the case or matter may be transferred by the" 
Chairman or, as th~ case may be, referred to him for transfer to, such 
Bench as the Chairman may deem flt. 
(7) S':1bject to the other provisions of this Act, the places at whicb 
15 the principal Bench and other Benches shall ordinarily sit shall be such 
as the appropri~te Government may, by noti6.cation, specify. 
6. (1) A person shall.not be qualified for a!lPointment as the Chair-
man unless he-
(0) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or 
20 (b) has, for at least two years, held the office of Vice-Chairman; 
or 
(t) has, for at least two years, held the post of a Secretary to 
the Government of India or any other post under the Central or a 
State Government carrying a-scale of pay which is not less than that 
25 of a ~cretary to the Government of India. 
(2) A person ghaIl not be qualified fOJ: appointment as the Vice-
Chairman unless he-
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or 
(b) has, for at least two years, held the post of a Secretary to 
30 the Government of India or any bther post under the Central or a 
State Government carrying a scale of pay wiUch. 1& not less than 
that of a Secretary to the Government of India; or 
(e) has, for a period of not less than three years, held office as 
a Member. 
35 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member unless 
he-
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judget of a High Court; 
or 
(b) has, lor at least two years, held the post of an Additional 
40 Secretary to the Government of India or any other post under the 
Central or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which is 
not less than that of an Additional Secretary to the Government of 
India; or 
(e) has, for at least !hree years, held the post of a Joint Secre-
45 tary to the Government of India or any other post under the Cen-
tral or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not 
less than that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of Iruiia. 
Quail. 
ficatioftl 
forap-
point. 
menta 
c:bair-
man. 
VIce-
Chair. 
man 
or other 
Member 

Vice. 
Olaiman 
to Kt u 
0lairta&D 
or to dia-
charae 
bia fuIII=-
tiona in 
certain 
ciroum-
1ItaDcee. 
Term of 
. o1Bee. 
ResllJla •• 
tt.nand 
remev&). 
a 
(4) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and every other Member of the 
Central AdmiJ\istrative Tribunal shall be appointed by the President. 
(Ii) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and every other Member of an 
Administrative !l-ibunal for a State shall be appointed by the President 
after conliultation with the Governor of the concerned State. 5 
(6) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and every other Member of a JoUst 
. Administrative Tribun~ shall, subject to the terms of the 81greemen. 
between the pa.rticipating State Governments published under sub-section 
(3) of section 4, be appointed by the President after consultation with the 
Governors of the concerned States. 10 
Explanlltion.-In computing, for the purposes of this section, the 
period during which a person has held any post under the Central or a 
State Government, there· shall be included tile period during which he 
has held any other past under the Central or a State Government (includ-
ing an ('ffice under this Act) carrying the same scale of pay as that of 15 
the first mentioned post or a higher scale of pay. 
1. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of 
the Chainnan by reason of his death, resignation o-r otherwise. 
the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-
Chairmen as the appropriate Government may, by notification, authorise 20 
in this behalf, shall aet as the ChaiJ:lman until the date on which a new 
Chainnan, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill 
such vacancy enters upon his office. 
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions 
owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-Chairman 25 
or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-Chairmen as the appropriate 
Governmentmay, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge 
the functions of the ChaiDman until the date on which the Chairman 
resumes his duties. 
8. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall. hold office 30 
as such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon 
his office or until he attains.-
(a) in the case of the Chairman or Vice-Chairman, the age of 
sixty-five years, and 
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-two years, 35 
whichever is earlier. 
9. (1) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member may, by 
notice in writing under his hand addressed. to the President, resign his 
office: . 
Provided that the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall, 
unless he is permitted by the President to relinquish his office sooner, 40 
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor 
enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever 
is the earnst. - 4-
(2) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or any other Member shall 5 
not be removed from his office except by an order made by tbe 
President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an 
inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman or other Member had been informed of· the charges against 50 
him and given a reasonable· oppo.rtunity of being heard in respect of 
thOle charget. 

,. 
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure 
for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman, Vice-
Chairman or other Member referred to in 8ub-section (2). 
10. The salaries and allowances payable tOt and the other terms and 
5 eODditiODI of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement 
beDeftts) of, the chairlQn, Vice-Chai~man and other Members shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Central Govermnent: 
Provided that neither the· salary and allowanees Jlor the other teJ!1D8 
and cODclitions of service of the Chairmaa, Vice-CbairmaD or other 
10 M __ shall he varied to his cUsadvantqe after his appcNnpneat. 
110 
35 
11. On ceasing to hold ofBce,-
(4) the Chairman of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall 
be ineligible for further employment either under the Government of· 
India or under the Government of a State; 
(b) the Chairman of a State Administrative Tribunal or a ,Toint 
Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of this 
Act, be eligible.for appointment as the Chairman Or Vice-Chairman 
or any other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal or as 
the Chairman of any other State Administrative Tribunal or Joint 
Administrative Tribunal, but not for any other employment. efther 
under the Government of India or unde~ the Government of a State; 
(c) the Vice-Chairman of the Central Administrative Tribunal 
shall, subject to the other provision'S of this Act, be eligible for 
appointment as the Chairman of that Tribunal or as the Chairman 
or Vice-Chairman of any State Administrative Tribunal or Joint 
Administrative Tribunal, but not for any other employment either 
UDder the Government of India or under the Government of a State; 
(d) the Vice-Chairman of a Stat~ Administrative Tribunal or a 
Joint Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions 
of this Act, be .eligible for appointment as the Chairman of that 
Tribunal or as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of the Central 
Administrative Tribunal or of any other State Administrative 
Tribunal or Joint Administr~tive Tribunal. but not for any other 
emplymt'nt either under the Government of India or under the Gov-
ernment of a State; 
(e) a Member (other than the Chairman or Vice-Chairman) of 
any Tribunal shall, lIlubject to the other provisioJlS of this Act, be 
eligible for appointment as the Chairman or -Vice-Chairman of such 
Tribunal or as the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member of any 
other Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under the 
Government of India or under the Government of a State; 
<f> the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other .Member shall not 
appear, act or plead before any Tribunal of which he was the Chair .. 
man, Vice-Chairman or other Member. . 
Salaries 
and al-
lowances 
and 
other 
terma 
and 
condi-
tions o! 
service of 
Chairman, 
Vice-
Chairman 
and 
other 
Members. 
Provision 
as totbe 
holding 
of offices 
by Chair-
man, etc., 
on ceas-
ingto be 
such 
ChaIr-
man, 
etc. 

Finan_ 
cial and 
admins-
trative 
powers 
of the 
Chairman. 
Staff 
of the 
TribUDal. 
JUl"l!.-
diction, 
powers 
and 
authority 
of die 
Central 
Adminis-
trative 
Tribunal. 
8 
Expl~-For the purposes of this section, employment under the 
Government of India or under the Govemment of a State includ. 
employment under any local or other authority within the ter.ritory of 
India or under the control of the Government of India or under lU)y cor-
poration owned or ~ontrolled by the Government. .) 
12. The Chairman shall exercise such financial and administrative 
powers over the principal Bench and each of the additional Benches as 
may be vested in him under the rules made by the appropriate Govern-
ment: 
Provided that the Chairman shall have authority to delegate such of 10 
his financial and administrative powers as he may think fit to the Vice-
Chairman, subject to the condition that the Vice-Chairman shall, while 
exercising such delegated powers. continue to act under the direction, 
control and supervision of! the Chairman. 
13. (1) TIae appropriate Govel'lUllUt shall detenaine the aature and J 5 
catepries of the otBcers and ·other employees required to assist a Tribunal 
in the diRharp of its functions aDd provide the Tribunal with such 
ofti~ and other employees as it may th~ fit. .. 
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers 
aDd othel' employees of a Tribunal shall be such as may be speei&.ed by 20 
rules made by the appropriate Government. 
CHAPTER III 
.TURISDIr.TION, POWERS .'ND AUTHORITY OF TRIBUNALS 
14. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, ·the Central 
Administrative Tripunal shall exercise. on and from the appointed day, 25 
all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before 
that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court under article 136 
.of the Constitution) in .relation to-
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any All-
India Service or to any civil service of the Union or a civil post :11.1 
under the Union or to a post connected with defence i or in the 
defence services, being, in either case, a post filled by a civilian; 
(b) all service matters concerning-
(i) a member of any All-India Service; or 
(ii) a person [not being a member of an All-India Service or 35 
a person referred to in clause (c)] appointed to any civil service 
of the Union oz;,.1lny civil post under the Union; or 
(iii) a civilian [not being a member of an All-India Service 
or a person referred to in clause (c)] appointed to any defen-ce 
services or a post connected with defence, 40 
and peMaining ~o the service of. such membrr, person or civilian. in 
connection with the .affairs of the Union or of any State or of any 
local or otherauthhrit y within the territory or India or under the 
control of the Government of India or of any corporation owned or 
cQntrolled by the Government; 45 • 

• 
(e) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with 
the aftairs of the Union concerning a person appointed to any service 
or post referred to in sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) of clause (b). 
being a person wbose services have been placed by a State Govern-
5 ment or any local or' other authority or any corporation Or other 
body. at the disposal of the Central Government for such appointment. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notiftcation, apply with effect 
from such date as may be specifted in the notification the pro-
vis}ons of sub-section (3) to local or other authorities within the territory 
IO of India ~ under the control of the Government of India and to corpora-
tions owned or, controlled by Government, not being a local or other 
authority or corporation controlled or owned by a State Government: 
Provided that if the Central Government considers it expedient so to 
do for the purpose of facilitating transition to the scheme as envisaged 
15 by this Act, different dates may be, so specified under this sub-sectlon in 
,respect of different cl~sses of, Or different categories under any class of, 
local or other authorities or corporations. . 
(3) Save as otherwise expressly, provided in this Act, the Central 
Administrative Tribunal shall also exercise, on anti from the date with 
20 effect from which the provisions of this sub-section apply to any local 
or other authority or corporation, all the jurisdiction, powers and 
authority exercisable immediately before that date by all courts 
(except the Supreme Court under article 136 of the Con.stitution) 
in relation to-
25 (a) recruitment, and'matters concerning recruitment, to any 
service or post in connection with the affairs of such local or o-ther 
authority or corporation; and 
(b) all service matters concerning a person [other than a person 
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1)] appointed 
to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such local 
or other authority or corporation and pertaining to the service of 
such person in connection with such' affairs. 
15. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provIded in this Act, the Ad-
ministrative Tribunal for a State shall exercise, on and from the appointed 
35 day, all the jurisdlct~on, powers and authority exercisable immediately 
before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court under article 
136 of the Constitution) in relation t~ 
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitm~nt, to any 
civil ser\rtce of the State or to any dvil post under the State: 
(b) all ~rvice matteJ's concerning a person [not being a person 
referred to in clause (e) of this sub-section or a member, person or 
civilian referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) o( section 1'] 
appointed to any ctvil service of the State or any ctvil post under the 
State and pertaining to the service of such penon in connection with 
Jurisdic-
~OD, 
powers 
and 
authQrlty 
of State 
Adminil-
trative 
Tribu-
nail. 
• 

10 
the aftairs of the State or of any local or other authority under the 
control of the State Government or of any corporation owned or 
controlled by the State Government; . 
(c) all servke matters pertaining to service in connection with 
the affairs of thtl State concerning a person appoInted to any service 5 
or post referred to in clause (b), be1l1g a person whose services hHve 
been placed by any such local Qr other authority or corpOJ'ation or 
other body as is controlled or owned by the State Govemment~ at the 
disposalef the State Government for such appointment. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification, apply with effect 10 
from such date as may bespecifted in the notification the provisions 
()f sUb-section (3) to loeal o.r other authorities -and corpoPatiens contro'lled 
or owned by the State Government: 
Provided that if the State Government considers it expedient so to do 
for the p1npOSe of facilitating tranllition to the scheme as envisaged by 15 . 
this Act,dUfereDt dates may be so specified under this sub-.sec.Uoll .in 
l'8IfPeOt of -difteNntalaases' of, or diBerent .categories under any class .of, 
loeal Ol" other authorities or' corporations. 
(3) Save .as otherwise expressly provided in this Act. the Adminis-
trative Tribunal for 2 State shall also exercise, on and from the date 110., 
with -effect from which the provisions of this SUb-section apply to 
any local or other authority or corporation, all the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority exercisable immediately before that date by 
all courts (except thp Supreme Courtuvder article 136 of the Consti-
tution) in relation to- 25. 
(a) recrllitment, and m~ters concerning recruitment to any 
service or p.ost .in cormection' with the affairs of such local or other 
authority or corporation;. aui. 
(b) all service matt8l'scoJU:erning a person (other than a per-
son referred to ·in clause (b.) of sub-section (l) of this section or a 30 
member, perlOnor civilian referred to in clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) ~f section 14] appointed to ..any service or .post in conneotion with 
the affairs of such 10CRI ot' other authority or corporation and per-
taininll to the service of such person in connection with such affairs. • 
(4) For the removal of doubta, it is b8l:eby declared that the jurisdtc- 35 
tion, powenand authority of the Administrative TribtlBal lor a State 
.hall not extend to, or be exereisab1e in relation to, any lJIatter in relation 
to -which ·the jurisdiction. ,power. and authority of the .Central AdmiDi .. 
1r"tfn' \r1\lunal .extende er II enr.clIable. 
• 

10 of 1971. 
11 
II. A Joint Administrative Tribunal for two or more States shall 
ex-erciaeall the jurisdiction, powers end authonty exerduble by the 
Administrative Tribunals for such States. 
17. A Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction, powers 
5 and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and 
may exercise and, for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of 
Courts Act, 1971, shall have effect subject to the modJftcatlons'thgt-
(a) the references therein to. High Court shall be construed as 
includin~ a referenee to such Tribunal; 
10 (b) the references to the Advocate-General in section 15 of the 
said Act shall be construed,- ' ' 
15 
(i) in relation .to the Central Administrative Tribunal, as a 
reference to' the Attorney-General or the Solicitor-General or 
the Additional Solicitor-General; and 
(ii) in relation to an ,Administrative Tribuaal for a State or 
a Joint Administrative Tribunal for two or mOte States, asa 
reference to the Advocate-General of the State or any of the 
States for which such Tribunal has beep established. 
18. (1) Where any additional Bench or Benches of a Tribunal is or 
20 are constituted, the appropriate Government may, from time to time, by 
notiftcation, make prOVisions as to the distribution of the business of the 
Tribunal amongst the principal Bench and the additional Bench or addi-
tional Benches and specify the matters which may be 'deillt 'with by eacb 
Bench. ' 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the 
25 purview of the business allocated to a Bench of a Tribunal, the decision 
of the Chairman thereon shall· be final. 
Ezplaftation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby .declared that 
the expression "matters" includes applications under section 19. 
CHAPTER IV 
PRocmtTRE 
19. (1) Subject to the other pl'OvisioD'S ot this Act, a pea-son aggrieved 
by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribu-
nal may make an application to the Tribunal for the redressal of his 
35 grievance. 
Explaft(1tioft,-For the purposes of this sub-section, "order" means an 
order made;-
(0) by the Govemment or a local or other authority within the 
territory of India or UDder the control at the Goftl'llUlenf of buUa or 
40 by any corporation owned or controlled by the Gove~t; or 
Juris-
diclion, 
powcn 
and 
-authority 
of a Joint 
Adminis_ 
trative 
TribuuaJ. 
Power to 
punish 
for con-
tempt. 
Distribu-
tionol 
buaineu 
amonpt 
theTrl-
bunals 
and it. 
Benches. 
Appliea-
tiona to 
Tribunal&. 

Applica. 
tioDBnot 
to be 
admitted 
~s 
other 
remediel 
exbauat-
eel. 
Limita. 
tion. 
12 
(b) by an officer, committee Or other body or agency of the 
Government or a local or other authority .or corporation referred to in 
clause (0). 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and 
be accompanied by such documents or other evidence and by such fee 5 
(if any, not exceeding one hundred rupees) as ~ay be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Tribun 11 
may, if satisfied after such inquiry as it may deem fit, that the require-
ments under this Act are complied with in relation to such application, 10 
admit such application; but where the Tribunal is not so satisfied, it may 
reject the application summarily. 
(4) Where an application has been admitted. by a Tribunal under sub-
section (3), every proceeding under the relevant service rules as to 
redressal of grievances in relation to the ~ubject-matter of such appli- 15 
cation pending immediately before such admission shall abate and save 
as otherwise directed by the Tribunal, no appeal or representation in 
relation tb such matter shall thereafter be entertained under such rules. 
20. (1) A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless 
It is .. tided that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available :lO 
to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances. 
(2) For the purpo8eil of sub-section (1). a person shall be deemed to 
have availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant 
eervice rules as to redressal of grievances,-
(a) if a final order has been made by the Government or other :lS 
authority' or ofBcer or other person competent to pass such order 
umier such rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation 
made by such person in connection with the grievance; or 
(b) where no final order has been made by the Government or 
other authority or oftlcer or other person competent to pass such 30 
order with regard to the ·appeal preferred or representation made 
by such person, if a period of six months from the date on which 
such appeal was preferred or representation was made has expired. 
(3) For the purpose's of sub-sections (1) and (2), any remedy avail-
able to an applicant by way of submission of a memorial to the President 35 
.. to the Governor of a state or to any other functionary shall not be 
deemed. to be one of the remedies which are available unless the appl{.. 
cant had elected to submit such memorial. 
21. (1) A Tribunal shall not admit an application.-
(a) in· a case where a final order such as is mentioned in clause 40 
(a) of sub-seetion (2) of section 20 has been made in connection with 
the grievance unless the application is made wftt1in one year from 
the date on which such final order has been made; 
(b) in a cue where aD appeal or representation such as is men-
tioned iB claUIe (b) of sub-section (2) of section 20 haa been inade 45 

• 
S of 1908. 
5 
10 
at'ld a period of six months bad expired thereafter without such 
. final order having been made, within one year from the date of ex-
piry of the said period of siX months. 
.(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where-
(a) the grievance in respect of which an application is made had 
arisen by reason of any order made at any time during the period 
of three years immediately preceding the date on which the 
jW'isdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal becomes exercis~ 
able under this Act in respect of the matter to which such order 
relates; and . 
(b) no proceedings for the redressal . of such grievance had been 
commenced before the said date before any High Court, 
the application shall be entertained by the Tlfibunal if it is made within 
the period referred to in clause (a), or, as the case may be, clause (b) 
15 of sub-section (1) or within a period of six months from the said date, 
whichever period expires later . • 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub~ 
section (2), an application may be admitted after the period of one year 
specified in clause (a.) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) or, as the case 
20 may be, the period of six months specified in sub-section (2); if the appli-
cant satisfies the Tribunal that he had suffiCient cause for not making the 
applicatioQ, within such period. 
22. (1) A Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; but shall be guided b~ the principles 
25 of natural justice and subje~t to the other provisions of this Act and of 
any rules made by the Central Government, the Tribunal shall have 
power to regulate its own procedure including die fixing of places and 
times of its inquiry and deciding whether to sit in public or in private. 
(2) A Tribunal shall decide every application made to it as expedi-
30 tiously as possible and ordinarily every application shall be decided on 
a perusal of documents and written representations and after hearing 
df oral arguments. it any, allowed by the Tribunal in the circumstances 
of the case. 
(3) A Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of holding any inquiry, 
35 the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
5 of 1908. Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
namely:-
1 of 1872. 
45 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath:; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) subject to the proviSions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public ,record or document or 
copy of such record or document from any office; . 
; (e) issuin.g commissions for the examination of witnesses or. 
doeuments; 
(f) reviewing its decisions; 
" 
Procc_ 
dure and 
powers 
of TrIi'lu_ 
nals. 

Riaht 
of appb~ 
cant to 
take 
assist. 
aDeeo! 
leaal 
practi_ 
tioner 
and of 
Govern· 
ment, 
etc., tOA 
appoint 
present-
ing offi. 
cers. 
Condi_ 
tions a5 
to mak • 
ing of 
interim 
orders. 
Power 
of Chair. 
manto 
transfer 
cases 
from 
one 
Bench to 
another. 
14 
(g) dismissing ,a representation for default or deciding it ex parte; 
(h) setting aside any .order of dismissal of any .representation 
for default or any order passed by it ex panej and 
(if any other matter' .which may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 5 
.23. (1) A person making an application to a Tribunal under this Act 
may either· appe&l in pel'SOU or take the IlS1istance of a legal practitioner 
of his choice to present his case before the Tribunal. 
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local or other 
authol'ity or cOlpQl'aUon.. to which the. p!-'Ovisions of sub .. sectioD. (3) of 10 
section 14 or sub-section (3) of section 15 apply, may appoint one or more 
persons (whether legal practitioners or not) to act as presenting officers 
and a persrJn Sll appointed, or any legal practitioner duly authorised in 
this behalf by it, may present its case with respect to any application 
before a Tribunal. 
at. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this 
Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order 
(whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall 
be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, an appli.cation unless-
15 
(a) copies of such application and of all documents in support 20 
of the plea for such interim order are furnished to the party ag8inst 
whom such application· is made or proposed to be made; and 
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter: 
Pro¥ided; that a Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of 
clauses (a) and (b) and make. an interim order as. an ex~ptional mea- :<15 
sure if it is satisfied., fo~ reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is neces-
sary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the applicant which 
cannot be adequately compensated in money but any such interim order 
shall, if it is not sooner vacated, cease to have effect on the expiry of a 
period of fourteen days from tIw dttte OQ which it is made unless' the said 30 
requirements have been complied with before the expiry of that ~riodl 
and the Tribunal has continued the operation of the interim order. 
25. On the application of any of the parties, and aftet notice to the 
parties, and after hearing such of theII} as he may desire to be heat'd, or 
on. his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may- 35 
(a) transfer any case pending before the principal Bench, for 
disposal, to any additional Bench, or 
(b) transfer any case pending before an additional Bench for 
disposal to any other additional Bench, or 
(t') wIthdraw to the principal Bench any case pending before 41'1 
any additional Bench, for disposal by the principal Bench., 

I~ 
26. The decision of a Bench on any point shall, where there is a majo-
rity, be according to the opinion of the majority, and where there is no 
majority and the ml"mbers are equally divided in their opinion, they shall 
draw up a statement of th~ ~ase setting forth th,~ pOint or points on which 
5 they differ, and make a reference to tl~e Chairman and on receipt of such 
reference the Chairman n~ay arrange ful' the hearing of such point 001' 
points by one or more of the other members (including, if he dld not 
preside over such Bench, himself) and such point or points shall be 
decided according to the opinion of the majority of the member, who 
10 have heard the ,case including those who had first heard it. 
27. Subject to the other provisions 'of this Act and the 'rules, the 
order of a Tribunal finally disposing of an a:pplic~tion shall be executed 
in the same manner in which any final order of the nature referred to 
in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of' section 20' (whether or not such 
15 final order had actually been made) in respect of the grievance to 
which ,the application relates would have been executed. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
28. On and from the date from which any jurisdiction, powers and 
20 authority becomes exercisable under this Act by a Tribunal in relation 
to recruitment and matters concerntng recruitment to any Serv'ce or 
post or service matters concerning members of any Service or persons 
appointed to any Service or post, no court (except tITe Supreme Court 
under article 136 of the, Constitution) shall have, or be entitled to exer-
25 cise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to such recruitment 
01' matters concerning such recruitment or such service matters. 
29. (1) EveJ:i" Suit or other proceedillg pending before any court or 
other authority immediately before the date of establishment of a Tri-
bunal under this Act, being a suit or proceeding the cause of action where-
30 on it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after such 
establishment, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal, shall stand trans-
ferred on that date to such Tribunal: ' 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any appeal 
pending as aforesaid before a High Court or the Supreme Court. 
35 (2) Every suit or other proceeding pending before a court or other 
authority immediately before the date with effect from which jurisdic-
tion is conferred on a Tribunal in relation to any local or other authority 
or corporation, being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whereon 
it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after the laid 
40 date, within the jurisdiction of such ,Tribunal, shall stand 'transferred 
on that date to such Tribunal: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any appeal 
pt!nding as aforesaid before l High Court or the Supreme Court. 
&planation.-For the purposes of this sab-section "date with effect 
4 from which jurisdiction is conferred un a Tribunal", in relation to any 
5 local or other authority or corporation, ,means the. dat,e ,with effect f~om 
whi'ch the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 14 or, as the case may 
be, sub-section (8) of section 15 are applied to such local or ~ autho-
rity or corporation. 
Deccil'OD 
toboby 
majority. 
Execution 
of ordm 
ot. 
Tribunal. 
Exclusion 
of jurisdic_ 
tion of 
courts 
except 
the 
Supreme 
Court 
Under' 
arricl. 
136 
of the 
Coustitu-
lion. 
TraDlfer of 
pencliD, 
CIMS. 

Procet4i.a. 
before a'· 
Tribunal 
to be 
judicial 
. proc~edinp; 
Members 
and 
ataff of 
Tritiunal 
to be 
public 
lervants. 
Protec. 
tion of 
aetran 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Act to 
bVc 
OVtlt-
riding 
effect. 
Power to 
remove 
tliftL. 
cultin. 
Ii) . 
(3) Where 'immediately before the date of establishment of a jOint 
Administrative T,ribunal anyone or mC)!'~ of the States for which it is 
('stJ,lbUshed, has or have it State Tribunal or .Stale Tribunals, all cases 
pending before such State Tribunal or S~.~tc Tribunals immediately be-
fore the said date together with the recol'ds thereof shall stand transfer- 5 
red on'that date to such Joint Administrative Tribunal. 
ExplQnDt;Qn.-For the purposes of this. sub~sectjon, "State Trib~nal" 
means a Tribunal established under sub-section (2) of section 4. 
(4) Where ~lny suit, appeal or other proceeding stands transferred 
from any court or other authority to a Tribunal under sub-section iO 
(1) or sub-section (2) ,-
(a) the court or other authority shall, as soon as may be after 
such transfer, forward the records (If such suit, appeal or .other 
prnceeding to the Tribunal; and 
(b) the Tribunal may, on rt'ceipt of such records, proceed to 15 
deal ,with such suit, appeal 01' othcr proceeding, so far as may be. in 
the atime manner as in the case of an' application under section 19 
from the stage which was reathed before such transfer or from any 
e3rlier stltee or de n01)O as the Tribunal may deem fit. 
(6) Where any case stands transferred. to a Joint Administrative ~o 
Tribunal under sub-section (3), the Joint Admiaistrative Tribunal may 
proceed to deal with such case, from the stage which was reached before. 
it stood SO transferred.' 
30. All proceedings ~efore a 
proceedings within the meaning 
Indian Penal Code. 
" 
Tt'ibunal shall be deemed to be judicial 
o'f t:ections 193. 219 and 228 of ttte 25 
31. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and. other Members and the oftl-
eers and other employees provided under seption 13 10 : Tribunal shall 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
450,1860. 
Indian Penal Code. 30 45 of 1860. 
3Z. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Centr.al Or . State' Governmcnt or again!';t the Chairman, Vice--01air-
man or other Member of any Central, 'or JOint or State, Administrative 
TribWlal, or uny other person authorised by such Chairman,· Vice-
Chair.manor other Member for anything which is in good faith done or 35 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or aliy rule or order made 
thereunder. 
33, The provisions of this Act shaH have effcct ndtwithstandingany-
thing inconsistent. therewith contnined in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any in~trument having effect by vjrtu~ or any law 40 
other than this Act. 
1 . 
34. (1) If any diftlculty arises in giving eft'ectto the provisions of 'this, 
Act, the Central Government 'may, by order published in the Ofticial 
Guctte, m~ke sllch prOVisions, notinconsistf'nt with the provisions of 
this Act as appear ,to it to be nt'Ccssary or ('xpedicnt.for removing the 45 
d~fttaulty. . .. • ' 
(2) Every order made under n,j, section shan, as soon as may be 
after it is made. be laid before each House· of Parliament. '. 

17 
35; (1) The Central Go~ernment may, subject to the provisions of section 
36, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. ., 
(2) Without prejudice 10 the· generality of UJe foregoing power, such rules 
may pro.vide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
5 . (a) the case Of Cilses which shall be decided by a Ben.ch composed 
of more than three Members under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of, seoOOn 
S; 
(b) the procedure under sub-section (3) of section 9 for the inves-
tigatiOn of misbehaviour of incapadty of Chairman, Vice-Cbainnan 011 
10 other Member; 
(c) the salaries and allow:mces payable to, and the olher terms and 
con~iljons of, the Chuirm:m, Vict··(113irman aud othet Members: 
(d) the form in whicl, til\, application mily he made under section 19, 
the documen,ts and other cvid..:nce by which such application shan ·be 
15 ae~ompanied and the fees payable in respect of such appJieation; 
(e) the rules suhject to which ~a Tribunal shall have power to-regulate 
its own procedure under, sub-:section {1) of section 22 and tl.e addi-
tional matters in respect of which a Tribunal may exercise the 
powers of a civil court under clause 0) of sub-section (3) ot that 
20 sectioa,;·and 
(I) any other -matter which may be prescribed or in respect 9.f which 
rules are required to be. Ol4idc hy the Central Go~ernment. 
Power of 
the 
Cenlral 
Govera-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
36. The aPl'roprialc Government may, by. notification, make rules to Power 
provide for all or any of thc following matters, namely:":"",... of the 
30 
(a) the financial and udministralive powers which the Chairman or 
a Tribunal may cxefcise ovcr the principal Bench and the additiOrntl 
Benches of the Tribunal under section 12; 
(6) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the 
officers and other employees: ora Tribunal undcr sub-section· (2) of section 
13; and 
.1 ,. 
(c) any other matter not heing a matter specified in section 3S iii 
respect of which rules are required to be mnde by the appropriate Govern-
ment. t I ··i; 
37. (1) Every rule made under thi~ Act by the Central Government shall 
35 be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before l'ach House of Parliament. 
while it is in session. for a t01al period of thirty days which moy be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sc~sions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately follOwjn~ the session or the sllcces.'1ive se!iSion'l 
aforesaid, both Hou8e~ a,rree in making any modification in the rule or both 
40 Houses agree that the rule should not be made. the rule ~hall thereafter have 
effect only )n such modified form or be of no effect. as the case may be, 
so, however, that any such modincation or nnnulment Ahall be without 
prejudice to' the validity of anythin'g previously rJone under that 'rule. 
(2) Every· rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be liad, 
45 II lOOIl ill may ~e after it is made, before the State Legislature. . 
·IlPPro· 
prillle 
Govera. 
mertt to 
make 
rules. 
Layio. 
1)1 rule •• 

STATEMENT OJ!" OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 323A of the Constitution stipUlates' that Parliament may, 
by law, provide for'the adjudication or trial by Administrative Tribunals 
of, disputes and complaints with respect ," to recru~ment and conditions 
of service of" perl:lons appointed to pubUc services and posts -in connec-
tion with the affairs of the Union Or of any State or of any local or 
other authority witbin the territo1'y of India or undt'r the control of the 
Government of India or "f any Corporatign owned or controlled by the 
Government. . 
2. The Bill seeks "to give effect- to the aforesaid const~tutional provi-
sion by providing for theest3.blishment of an Administrative Tribunal 
for the Union and a separate Administrative Tribunal for a State or a 
Joint Administrative Tribunal for two or more States. The Bill also 
provides lor- . 
(8) the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for 
contempt) and authority which may be -exercised by each Tribuna!; 
(b) the procedure (including provision as to limitation and 
l'ules of evIdence) to be foUowedby the State Tribunals; 
(c) exclUsion of the jurisdiction of all courts, except that of the 
Supreme Court under artiQe 136 of the Constitution l'elating to 
service matters; 
(d) the transfer to each AdminiRtrative Tribunal of any suit or 
other proceedingfl pending before any court or other authority 
immediately before the establishment of such Tribunal afI would 
have been within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal if the causes of 
action on which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen 
after such establishment. 
3. The establishment of Administrative Tribunal under the aforesaid 
provision p.f the Constitution bas become necessary since a large n,umber 
of cases relating 10 service "matters are pending before the various 
courts. It is expected that the Setting up of such Administrative Tri-
bunals to deal exclusiveJy with service matters would go a long way in 
not only reducing" the burden of the variOU8 courts and thereby giving 
them more time to deal with other cases expeditiously but would also 
provide to the persons covered by the Administrative Tribunals speedy 
relief in respect of their grievan(~es. 
NEW DEuu; K. P. SINGH DED. 
The 21st JanutI'Y. Ul85. 
18 

'. 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 2."'-This clause provides for exclusion of certain ca~gories of 
persons from the purview of the Act. .' 
, Clause 3.-This clause defines the various expressions occurring in 
the ·Act. 
Clause 4,- This clause' provides for the establishment of the Ce ntral 
Administrative Tribunal by the Central Government. and the establish-
ment of Administrative Tribunal for a State or two or more States· by 
the Central Government on a request received from the State Govern-
ment (8) it1- thi!l behalf. 
Clcruse 5.-This c~ause provides for the establishment of the Tribunal 
with a principal Bench lind such number of additional Benches as may 
be required and provides that €ach Bench shall c.:onsj~t of three members 
incll2ding the Presiding Officer. Provision has, however, been made for 
enabling' the Chairman or any other Member of the Administrative 
Tribunal authorised by the Chah'man if). this behalf to function a~ an 
additional l3ench consisting, of a single Member in respect of such 
classes of care!'l or !patters as the Chairman may, by order, specify. 
ClatlsC a.-This clause malees detailed provisions regarding the quali-
fications to be fulfilled f(lr appointment as Chai.rman, Vice .. Chairman or 
other Members of t.he Trihunal. 
Cl!luse ' 7 . -This clanse indicates the circumstances under which the 
Vi.ce-Chairman of the Tribun.':ll may act as Chairman or discharge the 
functions of the Chairman. 
Ch.use 8 ... -rhis clause fixes th~ tenuf':!of the Chairman, Vice-Chair-
man or other Mem?",rs of the Tribunal subject to a maximum age limit. 
Clrtuse S.-This clnuse det;Jil;:: the procedure for resignation or 
l'emoval of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Members oftbf! 
Tribunal. 
Clause lO.-'Ihi~ clause nrovides for the framing of rules by the 
Central GovE"l'nmcnt to regulate the salaries and allowances and other 
conditions of service of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members . 
. Claus'~ 11.-This dause prQvidet; for certain restrictions on the further 
employment of' the Chairman, Vice-Chairman 'and, other Members on 
their ceasing to hold such offic.e with a provision for further employ-
ment of a Member rlS Vice-Chairman/Chairman und the further em'· 
ploymentof a Vice-Chairman as Chairman. 
CLause 12.-This clause provides for fl·aming of rules by the Central 
Government or the State Government defining financial and adminis-
trative powers of the Chairman, with provision to enable the Chairman 
to delegatE' his powers to the Vice-Chairman. 
Cla.use 13.--Thi:; ~clause provides that the Ce.ntral Government or a 
State Government, as, the case may be, shall provide the staff for the 
functioning of the Tribunal. 
19 

20 
Clause 14.-This clause de~es the jurisdiction, powers and autho-
rity of the Central Administrative Tribunal in regard to service mat-
ters of various categories of persons specified therein. 
Clott:-:e I5.-This clau:.e defines the jurisdiction, powers and authority 
of the State Administrative Tribunal in regard to service matters of 
various categories of persons specifted therein. 
Cltntse 16.---This clause clarifies that a Joint Administrative Tribunal 
shall be functioning as the State AdminIstrative Tribunal for each of 
the constituent States. 
Claulle I7.-·Thit: clause vests the Tribun"ll with powers. to punish for 
contempt of itself as a High Court. 
Clause IS.-This clause, provides for appropriate prOvisions being 
!Dade by the Central Governmcnt or the State Government, 8S the case 
1ay be, for distribution of business amongst the Tr.ibunal and its 
Benches. . 
Claus~ 19.-This clause provides for making an application ttt the 
Tribunal by an as ~rieved person covered by this Ac.t 
ClaU$p. 20.-This dause provirl~s for admission of applications m~de 
by aggrieved persons only if other rl"medies available have been 
exhausted. ' 
Clause 21.-1.'his clause provides for limitation on admission of appli-
cations from the aggrieved persons by the Tribunal. 
Clause 22.-This clause provifies that the Tribunal shall have the 
power to regulate its own procedure subject to the other provisions of 
this Act or (If any rules made by the Central Government. It al90 
invests the Tribunal with varioU/; powers necessary for holding an 
inquiry 3S areyested jn " civil ccrurt. 
Clause 23.-This clause provides for the aggrieved persons taking the 
assistancc of a legal practitioner and the Governmerit presenting its case 
through one or more persons whether tegal practitioners or not. 
I. 
Clause 2-!.-·~This clause empower::; the Tribunal to make interim 
orders subje~t to certain ccnditions. 
Clatl8e 25.-'fhe clause defines the powers of the Chamnan to trans-
fer cases between the principal Bench and the· additional Benches and 
to withdraw l! case from an additional Bench to the principal Bench. 
Clause 2f.i.·-This clause provides for decision by the majority at the 
Tribunal and also prescrif'tes the procedure to be followed when there 
is no majority. 
Clause 27.-This clause indicates the manner in which orders of 
r"ibunals may he ex.ecuted. 
Claust! 28.-This clause provides for the exclusion with re~ard to the 
matters mentioned therein of jurisdiction Of all courts except that of the 
Supreme Court under artiC'le 136 of the Constitution. 
Clause 29.-This clause provides for the transfer to the Tribunal of 
. all cases relating to service matters pending before courts ex&;ept appeal 
cases. ' ',' 

i1 
Clause aO.--This clause make!!: it clear that all proceedings before 
a Tl'ibwUll shaH be ueemed to be judicial proceedinqs. 
Clause 31.-This clause makes it clear that Members and staff of the 
Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants. 
Cta'use S2.-This clause prmrides for protection of the Central or 
State Government or the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Members 
of any Central or .Joint or State Administrative Tribunal in respect of 
anything done in . gnod faith in pursuance of this Act. 
Clause 33.--This dause is for giving over-ttding effect to the provi-
sions of the legisla lion. 
Clause 34.-This clause empowers the Central Government to make 
S\litableprovisjons for removing any difficulty in giving effect to the 
provisions of the legislation . . 
Cla'u.se 35.-This clause empowers the Central Government ,to make 
rules for' various matters relating to procedure of the Trihunal, condI-
tions of c;ervicp. of Chairman, Vice;;Chairman and other Members and 
similar other If.atters for" the proper functioning of the Tribunal. 
'. Clause 3.6.-This clause provides for the making of rules by the 
CentrtU Government or a State Government, as the case may be, with 
regard to the various matters specified therein. 
Clause 37.-'1'his clause provides for the laying of rules. 

f'INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Administrative Tribunals Bill, 1985 provj.des for the adjudication 
of trial by the Administrative Tribunals of disputes Qlldcomplaints with 
.respect to ret!ruitment· and conditions of service of persons 
appoiJ)ted to public servkes ond posts in c~nne'_~tion with the affairs of 
the Union or of any State crof any local or _ other authority within the· 
territory of India cr ·..:.nder the control of tlie Government of India or of 
any Corporation owned or controll~d by Government and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. ' 
2. According to clause 5 of the. Bill, the Tribunal shall con'sist of a 
Chairman and sucn number at Vice-Chairman and other Members as-
." may be considered necessary. The Bench of the Tri~unal, shall be 
,presided over by the Chairman or by the Vice-Chairman and shall consist 
of at least two.other Members. 'Ilte Bench presided over by the Chairman 
will be known as the principal Bench and the other Benches will be 
known as additional Bem:hea of the Tribunal. Clause 10 provides that 
the salary and allowances payabie to,·and the other terms and conditions 
of service· of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members shall be 
suell as may be prescribed by 'the Central Government. Clause 13 
provides that Government shall determine the natur~ and categories of! 
the officers and other employees required to assist a Tribunal in the dis-
Qharge of its functions and provides the Tribunal wit!} such officers and 
othe,r employees as it may deem fit. The salaries ana allowances and 
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal 
shall be prescribed by the rules made by the Government. These are 
the provisions in the Bill which will have financial implications once it 
is enacted. ' 
3. When the Central Administrative Tribunal is in full operation it will -. , "-
have a principal Bench at Delhi and additional Benches equal in number, 
to the nUinber of High Courts, located at places where the seats of. the 
High Courts are now located., This is because once the Tribunal is 'Set 
up and it starts to deal with service matters of persons within its juris-
diction, the jurisdiction of the High Courts and of the Supreme Court 
(except under article 136 of the Constitution) over service matte,n, of 
such persons will be exclUded. However, to start with,. it is proposed to 
set up the p'rincipal Bench and 7 additional Benches to be located at 
Delhi, Al1ahabad, Bombay, Calcutta, Gauhat!, N&gpur, Madras· and 
• Bangalore to cover the Northern Western, Easte,rn, Central and Southern 
regions of the country. On this 'basis, the iminediate requirements Of the 
posts of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members for the proposed Ad-
ministrative Tribunal will be as indicated below:-
S. No. Name of the post. Num~rlof Pay 
posta 
1. Chai.rman 1 B.s. 4000. fixed 
2. . Vice-Chairman 8 Rs. 3500 fixed 
3. Member 17 Rs. 3000 fixed 

23 
As and when it becomes necessary to establish at least one additionsl 
Bench at ",very place where Higb Courts are 10~lct .. d now; the require-
ment of posts of Chainnan. Vice-Chairman and Members will be as 
under:-.-
S. No. Name of the post Number cf Pay 
posts 
1. Chai.rman 1 Rs. 4000 fixed 
2. Vice-Chairman 16 Its. 3500 fixed 
3. Member 33 Rs. 3000 fixed 
4. For their efficient functioning, the principal Bench and the addi-
tional Benches of the ~ibunal will 8;lso require adequate supporting 
staff. It i's not possible to indicate precisely at this stage the exact 
number and the categories of staff requi.red for the differtmt Benches of 
the Tribunal. This will require to be worked out separately at an appro-
priate stage before the Benches of the Tribunal ar~ actually set up. In 
-addition to the e~peHditure on thE' supporth!g st~ff, E'xpenditure will q}s·) 
have to be incurred on rent for hired accommodation, acquisition of 
furnitu,re and fitting~, office .. equipment like typewriters, almirahs, filing 
cabinets, duplicating machines. etc. Expenditure will al'so have to be 
incurred on rurning (If the offices under heads such as office stationery, 
petrol, oil u.nd lubrictmts, etc. On a rough eBtim.at~, the recurring ex-
.. penditure for the eight Benches of the Tribunal including the Pl'incipal 
Bench is expected to b~ of the order of about Rs. 100 lakhs per annum. 
The capital expenditure .that will have to be incurred for setting up of 
the eight Benches is expected to be of ' the order of Rs. 80 lakhs parti-
cularly since the expenditure on furnitul'e is likely to. be heavy on 
account of the need for providing special rUrniture in the, court rooms: 
As and when additional Benches are established at places where High 
Courts ara now. ~.ocated, the add~tional annual recurring expenditu.re is 
expected to be of the order of Rs. 100 lakhs per annum, while the addi-
tional non-re311rring expenditure will be about Rs. 80lakhs . 
. 5. The Department of Personl)el and Administrative Reforms which 
will be se,rvicing the Administrative Tribunals and attending to varioUS 
matters relating to the establishment of the Tribunals will also require 
to be strengthened to cope with the additional work. It is estimated that, 
to start with, a recurring annual expenditure of around Rs. 5 lakhs will 
have to be jncurrcd on this account 
" 
6. It may be stated that though the setting up of the Administrative 
T.ribunal involves additional expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India, the Tribunal is expected to go a long way in reducing the 
burden on the courts and providing spee-:Jy disposal of grievances relating 
to service mntters . 
. 7. The provisions of ,the Bill do not involve any other expenditure ot 
a recurring or non-recurring nature, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING D~.EGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 34 of the Bill empowers .. the Central Government to issue 
orders for the rE;moval of any difficulty which ms)' ariSt" in giving effe~t 
to any provisior. of the Bill and further provides that every' order so 
made shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
sUb-clauo,e (1) of clause 35, and' clause 36,of tbe Bill, empower the 
Central Government to make, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, 
rules to Ca::,ry out the provisions or the Bill.' The matters in relation to 
which such rules are to be made have been specified in sub-clause (2) 
of clause 35 lmd sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause 36. Such matters 
include the specification of classes of cases which t;hall be decided by a 
Bench (~omposed of more than thre~ Members; sEllRrieb and allowances . 
payable to, and other terms and conditions. of service, of the Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman and otner Members of a Tribunal; the manner in which 
the procedurp. of a Tribunal shall be regulated; additional matters in 
relation to which the Tribuna] may exercJse the powers of a civU court. 
Clause 36 empowers the bppropriate Government to make rules pro-
viding for the financial and administrative powers whicK the Chairman 
of a Tribw181 may exercise; and salaries and allowances and other con-
ditions of senrice of ofticers and other employees of the Tribunal. . 
By sub-clause (c) of clause 36, the appropriate Government has been . 
empowered. to make the rules relating to matters other than thole 
specified in clause 35. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 37 01 the Bill provides for the laying of the 
rules made by the Central Gov~rnment before each House of Parlia-
ment and fo'Ub-clause (2) ot clause 3'1 provides for the laying of the rules 
made by the State Government before the ~tate Legislature. 
'The matters in respect of which such orders .and rules may be made 
are matters of detail and procedure .. The delegation of the legislative 
poweriB, tberefore, of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
,,' 
to provide for the adjudication or trial by Administrative Tribunals of 
disputes and complaints with' respect to recruitment and conditions 
" of 'S\'!rvice of persons appointed to public services and posts in connec-
tion with the aftairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or 
other authority within the territory of India or under the control of 
the Government of India or of any corporation owned or controlled 
by the Government and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. ' 
(Sh'J'i k. p. Singh Deo, 
Department of Ad~t,.atit~ 
Reforms mul Cultu.re.) 