LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE STATE BANK OF INDIABILL,19b5 
1. In page 7, line 9,-
for "apporoted " read "appointed'; 
2. In page 7, line 19,-
for Iland are not by the thisll ~r! 
"and are not by this" 
3. In page 15, line 31,-
for "goods which. or the documents" ~ 
"goods which, or the documents" 
4. In page 1(;, line 24,-
for "prope~;ry" ~ "property" 
5. In page 26, line 11,-
for "state Banks" read_. "state Bank" 
NEW DEIII, 
. The 20th April, 1955. 

DIU No. 21 of 1'55 
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA BILL, 1955 
lAs INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA] 
A 
BILL 
to constitute a State Bank for India, to transfer to it the undertaking 
Df the Imperial Bank of India and to provide for other "ITtatters 
cmmected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS for the extension of banking facilities on a large scale, 
more particularly in the rural and semi-urban areas, and for divers 
other public purposes it is exPedient to constitute a State Bank fOT 
India, and to transfer to it the undertaking of the Imperial Bank 
of India .nd to provide for other matters connected therewith or 
inciciental1hereto; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
1. (l) This Act may be called the State Bank of India Act, 1955. 
-,2) It shall come into force on such ,d81te :88 the Central Govern-
ment may, .by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
10 
(u) "appointed day" -means the date on which this Act comes 3.:5 
into force; 
(b) "Central Board" means the Central Board of Directors 
.m-the State Bank; 
Short title, 
and com- ( 
lDeDc:cment. I 
Deftnltionl. I 
~. 
I ) 
;1 

Eatablilh-
ment of the 
State Bank. 
Authoriaed 
CllpitaJ. 
ISNed capi~ 
.at. 
(c) "goods" includes bullion, wares and merchandise; 
(d) "Imperial Bank" means the Imperial Bank of India con- :kLVII of 
stituted under the Imperial Bank of India Act, 1920; 1920. 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made 
S under this Act; 
(f) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India con-
stituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; II of 19304. 
(g) "State Bank" means the State Bank of India constituted 
under this Act. 
CHAPTERn 
'INcORPORATION AND SHARE cAPITAL OF STATE" 'BANK 
3. (1) A Bank to be called the State Bank of India shall be con-
stituted to carry on the business &f banking and other business ir. 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and for the purpose of 
1 S taking over the undertaking of the, Imperial Bank. 
(2) The Reserve Bank, together with such other persons as may 
from time to time become shareholders in the State Bank in accord-
ance with the provisions of this Act, shall, so long as they are share-
holders in the State Bank, constitute a body corporate with perpetual 
aD succession and a common seal under the name of the State Bank of 
India, an~ shall sue and be sued in that name. 
(8) The State Bank shall have power to acquire and hold property, 
whether movable or immovable, for the purposes for which it is· 
constituted and to dispose of the same. 
JIf 4. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorised capital of 
the State Bank shall be twenty crores of rupees divided into twenty 
lakhs of fully paid up shares of one hundred rupees each: 
Provided that the Central Government may increase or reduce 
the authorised capital as it thinks fit so however that the shares in 
3D aU ciaSes tihall be fully paid up shares of one hundred rupe~s each. 
,. 50 (1)' The issued capital of the State Bank shall, on the appointed 
day, be five erores, sixty two lakhs and fifty thousand rupees divided 
into five l~. sixty two thousand and five hundred shares, all· of 
which shall, on the appointed day, stand allotted to the Reserve Bank 
,s in lieu of the shares of the Imperial ~ank transferred to it by para-
graph 2 of the First Schedule. 
(2) TIte Central Board may from time to time increase the issued 
capital but no increase in the issued capital shall be made in such a 

minner that the Reserve Bank holds at any time less thm "fifty' flv{ 
percent. of the issued capital of the State Bank. 
(3) No increase in the issued capital beyond twelve crores and 
fifty lakhs of rupees shall be made under sub-section (2) :without the 
previous sanction of the Central Government. 
CHAPTER III 
TRANSFER OF 'UNDERTAKING OF THE IMPERIAL BANK TO STATE BANK 
6. (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, as 
from the appointed day, 
, 
(a) all shares in the capital of the Imperial Bank shall be 
transferred to, and shall .vest in, the Reserve Bank, free of all 
trusts, liabilities and encumbrances, and 
Transfer of 
assets and 
lis bilities of 
the Imperial 
10 Bank to the 
State Bank. 
(b) the undertaking of the Imperial Bank shall be transfer-
red to, and shall vest in, the State Bank. 
(2) The undertaking of the Imperial Bank shall be deemed to IS 
include all rights, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, 
movable and immovable, including cash balances, reserve funds, in-
vestments and all other interests' and rights in, or arising out of, such 
property as may be in the possession of that Bank immediately before 
the appointed day, and all books. accounts, and documents relating 20 
thereto, and shall also be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and 
obligations of whatever kind then existing of that Bank. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 7, 
all contracts and other instruments of whatever nature, subsisting or 
having effect immediately before the appointed day and to which the 25 
Imperial Bank is a party, shall be of as full force and effect against 
or in favour of the State Bank, as the case may be, and may be en-
forced as fully and effectually as if instead of the Imperial Bank ihe 
State Bank had been a party thereto. 
(4) If on the appointed day any suit, appeal or other legal pro- 30 
ceeding of whatever nature, is pending by or against the Imperial 
Bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the State Bank 
of the undertaking of the Imperial Bank or of anything contained in 
this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding·may be continued, 
prosecuted and enforced by or against the State Bank. 
7. (1) Every officer or other employee of the Imperial Bank (ex-
cepting the managing qirector, the deputy managing director and 
other directors) in the employment of the Imperial Bank immediately 
before the 19th day of December, 1954, and continuing in such em-
ployment on the appointed day shall, as from the appointed day, 
become an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the State 
Transfer of 
service of 
ex i sting om-
cera and em-
40 ployees of 
the Imperial 
Bank to the 
. State Bank. 

II 
4 
BaRlt,. and. sI1~ hold. his, oftlce or service therehl, by the~ same tenurl. 
at the same remuneration and upon the same terms. and CQnditiona 
and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and 
other matters as he would have held the same immediately' before 
S the appointed day if its 'undertaking had not' vested· in the'State 
Bank, and shall continue· to do so unleB8 and until hi. emplayment 
in the State Bank is terminated or until, his remuneration, terms or 
conditions are duly altered by the State Bank, 
(2) Any person who, on the appointed day, is entitled' to or 
to is: in recei»t of, a pension or other superannuation or compassionate 
allowance or benefit from the Imperial Bank shall be entitled to be, 
paid by, and to receive from, the State Bank the same pension, 
allowance or benefit so long as he observes the conditions on which 
the pension, allowance or benefit was granted, and if any question 
15 arises whether he has so observed such conditions, the question shall 
be determined by the Central Government and the decision of the 
Central Government thereon shall be final: 
Provided that no pension, allowance or benefit granted alter the 
19th day of December, 1954, and before the appointed day which 
would not ordinarily have been admissible under the, rules or autho-
20 l'isations of the Imperial Bank in force prior to the said 19th day of 
December, 1954, shall be payable by or claimable from the State Bank 
unless the Central Government has, by general or special order, 
directed the continued grant thereof. 
25 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the 
transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of the XlV 0(1941. 
Imperial Bank from that Bank to the State Bank shall not entitle 
such officer or other employee to any compensation under that Act 
30 or other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, 
tribunal or other· authority, 
(4) Any person holding office as managing director, deputy 
managing director, director or member of any Local Board of the 
Imperial Bank immediately before the appointed day shall'be deemed 
35 to have vacated his oftice as such on the appointed day, and not-
withstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law 
for the time being in force or in any agreement or contract, he shan 
not· be entitled to any compensation from the Imperial Bank or- the 
State Bank for the 1085 of office or for the premature termination' 
40 of any agreement or contract relating to his employment+ except 
such pension, compensation or other benefit which. the. State Bank· 
ma,y grant to him, having regard to what that person would; have 
received as an officer of the Imperial Bank if this Act had not beeft: 
passed and. if he had retired from his employment in. the ordinary, 
4S course. 

• 
II Of lab. 
1 
~i Wh~ ~; manacing director •. deputy. managing, director, 
director, officer or other employee of the Imperial Bank has,.lIiUer the 
19th day of December, 1954, and before the appointed day, been paid 
any sum by way of compensation or gratuity, the- State- Bank shall 
be efttitied to claim refund of any sum so· paid if the payment is not 5 
conftrmed by the Central Government by general or special order . 
1-. For tbe truatees or other officers in aharge of the provident, Existing pro-
peniiolUmcl otber funds COJUltituted for the. purposes of the Imperial vident and 
Bank or for the benefit of its officers or other employees and now ~}~~e I~~~ 
transferred to the State Bank, there shall be substituted as trustees 10 rial Bank. 
or other officers in charge of those funds such persons as the Central· 
Government may, by general or special order, specify. 
Compensa-
tion to be 
9. (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day 
is registered as a holder of shares in the Imperial Bank shall be 
entitled to compensation in accordance with the provisions contained 
in the First Schedule. 
IS ai'Ven to sha· 
reholders of 
Imperial 
BIDk. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub·section (1) shall affect the rights 
inter. .. between the holder of any share in the Imperial Bank and 
any. other pel'lQl1. who may hav~ an interest in such share, and such 
other p811101l &hall be entitled to enforce his interest against the 20 
compensation awarded to the holder of such share, but not against 
tire R-eserve Bank. 
CHAPTER IV 
SHARES 
10. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the shares 25 Transfcrsbi. 
of~ the State· Ban·Jt. shall be freely transferable. lity of shales 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall entitle the Reserve 
Bank to transfer any shares held by it in the State Bank if such trans-
fer will result in reducing the shares held by it to less than fifty five 
per cent. of the issued capital of the ~tate Bank. 30 
11. No person other than the Reserve Bank shall be registered as 
a shareholder in respect of any shares held by him, whether in his 
ownname·or jointly with any other person, in excess of five per cent. 
of the illued capital at· any time or be entitled to payment of any 
dividend on such shares or to exercise any of the rights of a share- 35 
holder in respect of such shares otherwise than for the purpose of 
sellini the shar81. 
Restrictions 
on individual 
holdings. 
l.I4 Notwithataadiftg anything contained in the Acts hereinafter Shares to be 
mentioned in this section, the shares of the State Bank shall be :g~;k~. 
deemed'tobe included among the securities enumerated in section 20 40 
of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be approved securities for 

Principal 
re,ister of 
lhareholden. 
the PUrposes of the Insurance Act, .1938, and the BankiJlg COmpanies IV of 193A. 
Act, 1941. . x of IP4p. 
13. The State Bank shall keep in one or more boo,ks a register of 
the shareholders (in this Act referred to as the principal register), 
5 and shall enter therein the folloWing particulars so far ~ they may 
10 
be available:-
(i) the names, addresses and occupations, if any, of the share-
holders and a statement of the shares held by each' shareholder, 
distinguishing each share by its denoting number;· -' 
(ii) the date on which each person is so entered as a share-
holder; 
(iii) the date on which any person ceases to be a shareholder; 
and 
(iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
Branch re,i- I, 14. (1) The State Bank shall cause to be kept at its local head 
Iterl. "ffices branch registers which shall be deemed to be part of the 
principal register, and in whjch shall be entered the particulars as 
in the principal register of shareholders whose registered addresses 
are within the areas prescribed with reference to each register. 
20 (2) Any shareholder may apply to have his name transferred 
... rom one branch register to another in respect of the whole, but not 
dny part, of the shares standing in his name, and the State Bank shall, 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed cause the registers 
to be amended accordingly. 
Trust. not 2, 15. No .notice of any trust, express, implied or constructive, shall 
to be entered be entered on the principal or any branch register or be receivable 
On the xcai. 
Iter. by the State Bank. 
OffiCCl, bra. 
nches and 
aaenciel. 
CHAPl'ER V 
MANAGEMENT 
30 16. (1) Unless otherwise provided by the Central Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, the central office of the State 
Bank shall be at Bombay. 
(2) The State Bank shall have local head oftic:!es in Bombay, 
Calcutta and Madras and at such other places in India a:s 'the Central 
3S Government, in consultation with the Central Board, may determine. 
, (3) The State Bank shall maintain as its branches or agencies all 
" branches or agencies of the Imperial Bank which were'in exi$tence 

'1 
immediately before the appointed day; and no such branch may be 
closed without the previous approval of the Reserve Bank. 
(If) The State Bank may establish branches or agencies at any 
place in or outside India in addition to the branches or agencies 
referred to in sub:.Bection (3). '5 
, (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), the 
State Bank shall establish not less than four hundred branches in 
addition to the branches referred to in sub-section (3) within five 
years of the apponited day or such extended period as the Central 
Government may specify in this behalf, and the places where such 10 
additional branches are to be established shall be determined in 
accordance with any such programme as may be drawn up by the 
Central Government from time to time in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank, and no branch so established shall be closed without 
the previous approval of the Reserve Bank. IS 
17. (1) The general superintendence and direction of the affairs MaDaaement 
and business of the State Bank shall be entrusted to the Central Board 
which may exercise all powers and do all such acts arid things as 
may be exercised or done by the State Bank and are not by the this 20 
Act ex.pressly directed or required to be done by the State Bank in 
general meeting. 
(2) The Central Board in discharging its functions shall act on 
business principles, regard being had to public interest. 
18. (1) In the discharge of its functions. the State Bank shall be ~n~a1 be 
guided by such directions in matters of policy involving public interest 25 iJe~ to b) 
as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Governor c:!.:ec:!J~ of 
of the Reserve Bank and the chairman of the State Bank, give to it. e~t. v-
(2) All directions" given by the Central Government shall be 
given through the Reserve Bank and, if any question arises whether a 
direction relates to a matter of policy involving public interest, the 30 ;"; ',J 
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
19. (1) The Central Board shall consist of the following Campoai-
namely: - tion of the " ,'Central 
(a) Ii chairman and a vice-chairman to be appointed by the Board. 
Central Government after consideration, except in the case of 35 
first appointments, of the recommendations made by the Central 
Board in that behalf; 
(lb) not more than two managing directors, if any, appointed 
by the Central Board with the approval of the Central Govern-
ment; 40 
(e) six directors to be elected in the prescribed manner by 
the shareholders, other than the Reserve Bank, whose names 
are entered in the various branch registers: 

rerm of 
office of 
chairman, 
managing 
director, etc. 
s 
10 
·a 
Provided that if the total amount of the holdings'of alIleuch 
shareholders on any branch register three months before the 
date fixed ·forelection isbelowflve ner cent.1>f the total issued 
capital, all the directors ,to be 'elected by .the ,ahareh~lders on 
that register shall be nominated by the Reserve Bank, and such 
directors shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be 
directors elected under this clause; , 
(d) eight directors to be nominated by the Central Govern-
ment in consultation with the Reserve 'Bank to represent, as far 
as possible, territorial and economic interests and in such manner 
that not less than two of them have experience of co-operation 
and rural economy and the others have experience in commerce, 
industry banking or finance; 
(e) one director to be nominated by the Central Govern-
ment;and 
(/) one director to be nominated by the Reserve Bank. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (b) and (e) 
of sub-section (1), on the first constitution of the Central Board all 
the directors referred to in the said clauses shall be appointed by the 
20 Central Government, and the directors so appointed shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to have been appointed or elected, 
as' the case may be, within 'the -meaning of the said clauses. 
(3) All directors of the Central Board first constituted,other than 
the chairman, vice-chainnan and managing directors, shall retire 
25 at the expiry of two years from the appointed day. 
20. (1) The chairman and the vice-chairman shall ho1d oftiee 
11' such tenn, not exceeding five years, as the Centril 'Gl:Jvemment 
may fix when appointing th~ and Shall be '~ligfble !or 1"ellPpdhn· 
ment. 
30 (2) A managjng director .shall hold office for such term, not 
exceeding five, years, as the Central Board or in the cue of the .first 
two appointments, the Central Government, roayfix when appoiriting 
;1im, and soan be eligible for reappointment. 
(3) Subject to the prOVisions contained in section 19 Imd in sub-
3S section' (5), a director elected under clause '(e) 'of sub-section ,(l) of 
s('ction 19 or nominated under clause (d) of that sub-sectitm -shall 
hold office for four years and thereafter until his successor shall have 
been duly elected ornomillated,.azid.shall he .. 1igibleJor!,~ction or 
renomination. 

9 
(4) A director nominated under clause (e) or clause (f) of sub-
section (1) of section 19 shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
authority nominating him. 
(5) The following provisions shall have effect in relation to 
directors elected or nominated to the Central Board after the expira- S 
tion of two years from the appointed day:-
(i) out of the six directors elected under ~lause (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 19, two shall retire at the end of one year, 
two at the end of two years and two at the end of three years 
from such expiration; 10 
(it) out of the eight directors nominated under clause (d) of 
sub-section (1) of section 19, two shall retire at the end of one 
year, two at the end of two years, two at the end of three years 
and two at the end of four years from such expiration; 
(iii) the directors to retire at the end of each year under IS 
clauses (i) and (ii) shall be determined by lot. 
21. (1) There shall be constituted at each place where the State 
Bank has a local head office, a Local Board which shall consist of 
the following members, namely:-
(a) all the directors elected or nominated to the Central 21 
Board under clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 
19 and ordinarily resident in the area served by the branch 
register of the local head office; and 
(b) such number not exceeding four to be elected by the 
shareholders whose names are entered on the branch register or 25 
nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank as may be prescribed; 
(2) A Local Committee may be constituted by the Central Board 
for any area consisting of such number of members as it may 
determine. 30 
(3) A Local Board and a Local Committee shall exercise such 
powers and perform such functions and duties as the Central Board 
may, by regUlations made by it, assign to the Local Board or Local 
Committee. 
22. (1) No person shalt be qualified to be a director of the Cen- 3S Disqualific!l-
tral Board or a member af a Local Board or of a Local Committee if- ~~=.~~ d~ 
(a) he holds the office of director, provisional director, 
promoter, agent or manager of any banking company already 
established or advertised as about to be established; or 
C,.enttal 
Board or 
membership 
of Local 
Boards or 
Committees. 

~1C.tioa,ol 
0fIi<:e of·dD-
Clor.,eu:. 
I • 10 
(b) he is a salaried officer of Government not specially 
authorised by the Central Government to be a director or mem-
ber; or 
(c) he holds any office of profit under the State Bank other 
S than the office of chairman, vice-chairman or mlmaging director; 
or 
(d) he is or at any time has been adjudicated an insolvent 
or has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with 
his creditors; or 
10 (e) he is declared lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; or 
IS 
20 
(I) he is or has been convicted of any offence involving 
moral turpitude; or 
(g) in the case of an elected director or an ~lected member, 
he is not registered as a holder in his own right of unencumbered 
shares in the State Bank of a nominal value of at least ten 
thousand rupees: 
Provided that in the case of a director or member deemed to 
have been elected to the Central Board or a Local Board, as tlie 
case may be, on its first constitution, the disqualification men-
tioned in clause (g) shall not operate for a period of six months 
from his becoming such director or member. 
(2) No two persons who are partners of the same finn or are 
directors of the same private company or one of whom is an agent of 
the other Qr holds a power of at!omey from a firm of which the other 
:ZS Is a partner may be directors of the Central Board or n1embers of 
!he same Local Board or Local Committee at the same time. 
(3) The appointment, nomination or election as director or mem-
l,er of a Local Board or of a Local Committee of any person who is 
a member of Parliament or the Legislature of any State shall be void 
30 'mless within two months of the date of his appointment, nomination 
or election he ceases to be a member of Parliament or the State 
Legislature, and if any director or member of a Local Board or of a 
Local Committee is elected or nominated as a member of Parliament 
or any State :Legislature. he shall cease to be a director or member 
35 of the Local Board or of the Local Committee as from the date of 
such election or nomination, as the case may be. 
U. If a director of the Central Board or a member of a LoCal 
Board or a Local Committee-
(al becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned 
in section 22; or 

II 
(b) resigns his office by giving notice in writing to the 
Central Board under his hand and the resignation is accepted; 
or 
(c) is absent without leave of the Central Board, the Local 
Board or the Local Committee of which he is a director or mem- S 
ber, as the case Dlay be, for more than ihree consecutive meet-
ings thereof; 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
U. (1) The Central Government may, after consulting the Reserve ~I 
Bank, remove from office the chairman or the vice-chairman. Ie" diredO:: :: 
(2) The Central Board may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, remove from office a managing director. 
(3) The Central Government, after consulting the Reserve Bank, 
may remove from office any director nominated under clause (d) of 
sub-section (1) of section 19 and nominate in his stead another per- IS 
son to fill the vacancy. 
(4) The shareholders, other than the Reserve Baak, may, by a 
resolution passed by majority of the votes of such. shareholders 
holding in the aggregate not less than one-half of the share capital 
held by all such shareholders, remove any director elected under 20 
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 19 and elect in his stead 
arlother person to fill the vacancy. 
(5) The shareholders whose names are entered on a branch 
register, other than the Reserve Bank, may, by a resolution passed 
by the votes of the shareholders holding in the aggregate not less 25 
than one-half of the share capital on the branch register held by 
such shareholders, remove any elected member of a Local Board and 
elect in his stead another person to fill the vacancy. 
(6) No person shall be removed from his office under subseetioa 
(1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) unless he has been given an 30 
opportunity of showing cause against his removal. 
25. (1) If the chairman, vice-chairman or a managing director CaaualvlC8ll-
is rendered incapable of discharging his duties by reason of infirmity clcl. 
or otherwise or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances not 
involving the vacation of his office, the Central Government may, 35 
m the case of the chairman or vice-chairman. after considering the 
recommendations of the Central Board made in this behalf, 'Uld the 
Central Board may, in the case of a managing director, with the 
approval of the Central Government, appoint another person to offi-
ciate in the vacancy. 40 
(2) Where any vacancy occurs before the expiry of the term of 
office of a 'director, other than the chairman, vice-chairman or a 
managing director, the vacancy shall be fUled-
(a) in the case of an elected director, by election; and 

Remuner-
ation of dire-
c:tOr1. 
r2 
(b) in the case of a director nominated under clause (d) of 
sub-section (1) of section 19, by nomination in consultation wlth 
the Reserve Bank: 
Provided that where the duration of the vacancy in the office 
of· an ::!lected dirctor is likely to be less than six months, the 
vacancy may be filled by the remaining directors by co· opting a 
person not disqualified under section 22. 
(3) A person elected or nominated or co-opted, as the case may 
be, under this section shall hold office for the unexpired porti(ln of 
lO the term of his predecessor. 
26. (1) Without prejudic(' to the provisions contained in sections 
27, 28 and 29, the directors shall be paid such fees and allowances 
for attending the meetings of the Central Board or of any of its Com-
mittees and for attending to any other work of the State Bank 8S may 
15 l>e prescribed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no 
~ees shall be payable to a managing director or any other director who 
is an officer of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank. 
Powers and 27. (1) The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Central 
~ra- 20 Board and, subject to such general or special directions as the Central 
chairman. Board may give, exercise all such powers and do all such acts and 
things as may be exercised or done by the State Bank. . 
(2) The Chairman shall receive such salary, fees, allowances and 
perquisites as may be determined by the Central Board with the 
2' approval of the Central Government: 
Provided that in respect of the first chairman, the Central Gov-
ernment may determine his salary, fees, allowances and perquisites. 
Powell and 21. (1) The vice-chairman shall preside at the meetings of the 
=U:;~~e- Central Board in the absence of the chairman and, subject to the 
c:haJrman. 30 general control of the chairman. exercise such powers and perform 
such duties as may be entrusted or delegated to him by the Central 
Board. 
(2) The vice-chairman shall receive such salary, fees, allowances 
and perquisites as may be determined by the Central Board with the 
J' approval of the Central Government: 
Provided that in respect of the. first vice-chairman, the Central 
Government may determine his salary, fees, allowances and per-
quisites. 

• 
5 
. t~ 
(3) The fact that the vice-chairman exercises any of the powers 
and does any act or thing for or on behalf of the State Bank shall be 
conclusive proof of hjs authority to do so. 
29. (1) A managing director- Powen and 
rcmuncra-
(a) shall be a whole-time officer of the State Bank; and tion of man 
. . II in, dircc-
(b) subject to the general control of the chaIrman and the tor. 
vice-chairman, shall exercise such powers and perform such 
duties as may be entrusted or delegated to him by the Central 
Board. 
10 (2) A managing director shall receive such salary and allowances 
as may be detennined by the Central BOaI'd with the approval of the 
Central Government: 
Provided that in respect of the first managing director or directors, 
the Central Government may determine the salary and allowances 
I, payable to him or them. 
30. The Central Board may constitute such and so many com- Executive 
, mittees, including an executive committee, of itself as it deems fit =mr~! 
to exercise such powers and perform such duties as may, subject to o(the <.entral 
such conditions, if any, as the Central Board may impose, be dele- Board. 
20gated to them by the Central Board. 
31. (1) The Central Board shall meet at such time and place and Mee~ of 
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of~. ntral 
business at its meetjngs as may be laid down by regulations made in 
this behalf. 
2$ (2) All questions at the meeting shall be decided by a majority of 
the votes of the directors present and in the case of equality of votes, 
the chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman shall have a 
second or casting vote. 
(3) A director who is directly or indirectly concerned or interest-
30 ed in any contract, loan, arrangement or l>roposal entered into or 
proposed to be entered into by or on behalf of the State Bank shall at 
the earliest possible opportunity disclose the nature of his interest 
to the Central Board and shall not be present at any meeting of the 
Central Board when any such contract, loan; arrangement or proposal 
35 is discussed unless his presence is required by the other directors 
for the purpose of elicJting infol'mation, and no director so required 
to be present shall vote on any such contract, loan, arrangement or 
proposal. 
(4) If for any reason neither the chairman nor the vice-chairman 
is able to be present at a meeting of the Board, any director, other 40 ' 

i4 
.than a managing director, authorised by the chairman in writing in 
this behalf, shall preside at the meeting and, in the event of equality 
of votes, shan have a second or casting vote. 
CHAPl'ER VI 
BUSINESS OF THE STATE BANK 5 
StatcBaalt to 32. (1) The State Bank .thall, if so required by the Reserve Bank, 
:t~ =-act as agent of the Reserve Bank at all places in India where it has 
ft Bank. a branch, and where there is no branch of the banking department 
of the Reserve Bank, for-
(a) paying receiving, collecting and remitting money, 10 
bullion and securities on behalf of any Government in India; 
and 
(b) undertaking and transacting any other business which 
the Reserve Bank may from time to time entrust to it. 
(2) The terms and conditions on which any such agency business IS 
shall be carried on by the State Bank on behalf of the Reserve Bank. 
shall be such as may be agreed upon. 
(3) If no agreement can be reached on any matter referred to in 
sub-section (2) or if a dispute arises between tke State Bank and 
the Reserve Bank as to the interpretation of any agreement between 20 
them, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government and 
the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
(4) The State Bank may transact any business or perform any 
functions entrusted to it under sub-section (1) either by itself or 
throug,h an agent approved by the Reserve Bank. 25 
Other basi· 33. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, the State 
:e"St::icb Bank may carry on and transact any of the following kinds at 
Bank may business, namely:-transact. 
(i) the advancing and lending of money and the opening 
of cash credits upon the security of- 30 
(a) stocks, funds and securities (other than immovable 
property) in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust 
money by any law for the time being in force in India or in 
any other country in which the State Bank has a branch; 
(b) debentures or other securities for money issued by 3S 
or on behalf of a district board, municipal board, committee 
or other local authority under the authority of any Central 
Act, Provincial Act or State Act or of any law for the time 
being in force in any other country in which the State Bank 
has a' branch; 40 
(c) subject to such directions as may be issued by the 
Central Board, debentures of companies with limited liabi-

s 
IS 
lity. registered either in India or in such other country as 
the Central Government may approve in this behalf; 
(d) subject to such directions as may be issued by the 
Central Board, shares and debentures of corporations estab-
lished under any law for the time being in force in India; 
(e) goods which, or the documents of title to which, 
are deposited with or assigned to the State Bank as security 
for such advances, loans or credits; 
<f) goods which are hypothecated to the State Bank as 
10 security for such advances, loans or credits, if so authorised 
by special directions of the Central Board; 
(g) accepted bills of exchange and promissory notes 
endorsed by payees, and joint and several promissory notes 
of two or more persons or firms unconnected with each 
J, other in general partnership; 
30 
35 
(h) immovable property or documents of title relating 
thereto as collateral security only where the original secu-
rity is one of those specified in sub-clauses (a) to (e) and, 
subject to such directions as may be issued by the Central 
Board, where the original security is one of the kinds speci-
fied in sub-clauses <I) and (g): 
Provided that where the Central Government or a State 
Government or any Government or authority outside India, 
which the Central Government may approve in this behalf, 
may accept from the State Bank any advances or loans under 
any law for the time being in force, the Central Board may, 
if it thinks fit, make such advances or loans without any specific 
security; 
(ii) the selling and realisation of the pr.oceeds of sale of any 
promissory notes, debentures. stock-receipts, bonds. annuities. 
stock, shares. securities or goods which. or the documents of 
title to which, have been deposited with, or pledged, hypothe-
cated, ~lSsigned or transferred to the State Bank as security for 
such advances, loans or credits or which are heJd by the State 
Bank or o.er which the State Bank is entitled to any lien or 
charge in respect of any loan, advance, credit or claim of the 
State Bank, and which have not been redeemed in due time in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of such deposit, 
pledge, hypothecation, assignment or transfer; 
(iii) the draWing, accepting, discounting, buying and selling 
of bills of exchange and other negotiable securities; 

16 
Civ) the investing of the funds of the State Bank upon any 
of the securities specified in sub-clauses (a) to (d) of clause (i) 
and the conversion of the same into money whenever required, 
and the alteration. conversion or transposition of any such in-
S vestment for or into any of the other investments above 
specified: 
(v) the issuing of demand drafts, telegraphic transfers and 
other kinds of remittances made payable at its own offices, 
branches or agencies, the purchasing of drafts, telegraphic trans-
10 fers and other remittances, and the making, issuing and circu-
lating of letters of credit to order or otherwise than to the bearer 
on demand; 
20 
2S 
II of I9IZ. 30 
(vi) the buying and selling of gold and silver. whether coin-
ed or uncoined; 
(vii) the receiving of deposits and keeping cash accounts on 
such terms as may be agreed upon: 
(viii) the receiving of all kinds of bonds, scrip, title deeds or 
valuables on deposit or for safe custody or otherwise on such 
tenns as may be agreed upon; 
(i.r) the selling and realising of all property, whether mov-
able or immovable, which may in any way come into the posses-
sion of the State Bank in satisfaction or part satisfaction of any 
of its claims, and the acquisition and holding of, and generally 
the dealing with, any right, title or interest in any pro petry, 
movable or immovable, which may be the State Bank's security 
for any loan or advance or may be connected with any such 
security; 
(x) the acting as agent of any co-operative bank which is 
registered or deemed to be registered under the Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1912 or any other law for the time being in force 
in any part of India relating to co-operative societies in the 
transaction of such business, and on such terms as may be agreed 
upon; 
(xi) the underwriting of the issues of any stocks, shares, 
35 debentures or other securities in which the State Bank is 
authorised to invest its funds under clause (iv); 
(xii) the transacting of. pecuniary agency business on com-
mission and the entering into of contracts of indemnity. surety-
ship or guarantee with specific security or otherwise; 

17 
(xiii) the administration of estates for any purpose, whether 
as executor, trustee. liquidator, or otherwise, the acting as liqui-
dator of a banking company or as an agent on commission in the 
transaction of the following kinds of business, namely:-
(4) the buying, selling, transferring and taking charge S 
of any securities or any shares in any public company; 
(b) the receiving of the proceeds (whether principal, 
interest or dividends) of any securities or shares; 
(c) the remittance of such proceeds by bills of exchange, 
payable either in India or :elsewhere; '.. 10 
(xiv) the drawing of bills of exchange and the granting of 
letters of credit payable out of India; 
(xv) the buying of bills of exchange payable out of India at 
any usance not exceeding nine months in the case of bills re-
lating to the financing of seasonal agricultural operations or IS 
SlX months in other cases; 
(xvi) the borrowing of money for the purposes of the busi-
ness of the State Bank. and the giving of security for money so 
borrowed by pledging assets or otherwise; 
(xvii) the advancing or lending of money to, or the opening 20 
of cash credit in favour of, any company having a share capital 
which is expressed in rupees in its memorandum of association 
or any society registered under the Co-operative Societies 
Act. 1912, or any other law for the time being in force in India II of 1912• 
relating to co-operative societies, for the purpose of averting the 25 
winding up of the company or society or. where any such com-
pany or society is being wound up, for the purpose of facilitat-
ing such winding up, for any period upon the security of all 
or any of the assets whatsoever of such company or society and 
such advance, loan or cash credit may be made by the State Bank 30 
either alone or conjointly with other' persons; 
(xviii) the advancing and lending of money to courts of 
wards upon the security of· estates in their charge or under their 
superintendence and the realisation of such advances or loans 
and any interest due thereon, provided that no such advance or 3S 
loan shall be made without the previous sanction of the State 
Government concerned, and that the period for which any such 
advance or loan is made shall not exceed nine months in the case 
of advances or loaJls relating to the financing of seasonal agri-
cultural operations and six months in other cases; 40 
(xix) with the approval of the Reserve Bank, the subscribing 
to, buying, acquiring or holding, and the selling of any shares 

BUIineu 
which the 
State BaDk 
IDay DOt 
tranl8ct. 
18 
in or the capital of any banking institution and the fonping or 
conducting of any such banking institution as a subsidiaJ:y of 
the State Bank or in any other manner; 
(xx) the subsidising from time to time of the pension funds 
5 referred to in section 8, if necessary; 
10, 
20 
~) the doing of any other kind of business which the 
Central Government, in consultation with t~ Reserve Bank 
and on the reco~mendation of the Central Boarel, may autho-
rise; 
(xxii) the performance of the functions entrusted to, or re-
quired of, the State Bank by this Act or by any other l~w for the 
time being in force; and 
(xxiii) generally, the doing of all such matters and things as 
may be incidental or subsidiary to the transacting of the various 
lQ,nda of business, including foreigB exchange business, herein 
specitied. ' 
St. (1) The State Bank shall not make a loan or advance-
(a) for a longer period than six months except as other-
wise provided in this Act; or 
(b) upon the security of stock or shares of the State 
Bank; or 
(c) upon the security of any immovable property or 
the documr:nts of the title relating thereto, except to toe ex-
tent necessary for any of the purposes of this Act. ' 
25 (2) Th~ State Bank shall not. except upon a security of the kind 
specified in sub-clauses (a) to (e) of clause (i) of section 33 discount 
bills for any individual or firm for an amount exceeding in the 
whole at anyone time such sum prescribed, or lend or advance in 
any way to any individual or firm an amO'Unt exceeding in the whole 
30 at anyone time such sum as may be prescribed. 
(3) The State Bank shall not discount or buy, or advance or 
lend, or open cash credits, on the security of any negotiable instru-
ment of any individual or firm payable at the place where it is 
presented for discount which does not carry on it the safe respon-
35 sibilities of at least two persons or firms unconnected with each 
other in general partnership. 
(4) The State Bank shall not discount, lend or advance or open 
cash credits on the security of any' negotiable security (not being 
a security in which a trustee may invest trust money under section 
40 20 of t~e Indian Trusts Act, 1882, or the corresponding provision II Of rib. 

19 
of law for the time being in force in any Country where the State 
Bank has a branch) which-
(a) at the date of the proposed transaction has a longer 
period to run than fifteen months, if the security is a bill drawn 
for the purpose of financing seasonal agricultural operations 5 
and six months in other cases; or 
(b) if the security is a bill drawn after sight, it is drawn for 
a longer period than fifteen months in the case of a bill drawn 
for the purposes of financing seasonal agricultural operatiOns 
and six months in other cases. 10 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the State 
Bank from allowing any person who keeps an account with the State 
Bank to overdraw such account without se(:W'ity to such extent as 
may be provided in the regulations. 
(6) Save as otherwise provided in section 33, the State Bank IS 
shall not own or acquire any interest in immovable property except 
for the purpose of providing buildings or other accommodation' in 
which to carryon the business of the State Bank or for providing 
residences for its officers and other employees. 
35. (1) The State Bank may, with the sanction of the Central 20 State Bank 
Government, and shall, if so directed" by the Central Government may t!cquire 
in consultation with the Reserve Bank, enter into negotiations for ~e oth~· 
acquiring the business, including the assets and liabilities, of any Banka. 
banking institution. 
(2) If the terms and conditions relating to the acquisition of any 25 
such banking institution are approved by the Central Board and the 
directorate of the banking institution concerned, they shall be sub-
mitted to the Central Government, and, if sanctioned by the Central 
Government by order in writing, shall, notwithstanding anything 
VII of 1913. to the contrary contained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or in 30 
X of 1949. the Banking Companies Act, 1949, be binding on the State Bank 
and the banking institution concerned as well as the shareholders 
and creditors. 
(3) The consideration for the acquisition of any banking 
institution or of any assets or liabilities of a banking institution under 3$ 
this section may, if so agreed upon, be paid either in cash or by 
allotment of shares in the capital of the State Bank or partly in cash 
and partly by way of such allotment, and the State Bank may,for 
the purpose of any such allotment of shares, increase, subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Act relating to the increase of 40 
capital, the capital of the State Bank by the issue of such number 
of shares as may be determined by the State Bank. 

Imepadon 
aDd DewIoD· 
IDCDt Fund. 
20 
t 4) Any banking business acquired under this section shall 
thereafter be carried on by the State Bank in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act subject to such exemptions or modifications 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
! Gazette, make in this behalf in consultation with the Reserve Bank: 
10 
IS 
Provided that no such exemption or modification shall be made 
80 as to have effect for a period of more than seven years from 
the date of acquisition. 
CHAPTER VII 
FuNDs, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
36. (1) The State Bank shall maintain a special fund to be 
known as the Integration and Development Fund into which shall 
be paid-
(a) the dividends payable to the Reserve Bank on such 
shares of the State Bank held by it as do not exceed fifty-five 
per cent. of the total issued capital; and 
(b) such contributions as the Reserve Bank or the Central 
Government may make from time to time. 
(2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied exclusively 
20 for meeting-
(a) losses in excess of such yearly sum as may be agreed 
upon betwen the Reserve Bank and the State Bank and attri-
butable to the branches established in pursuance of sub-section 
(5) of section 16; and 
(b) such other losses or expenditure as may be approved 
by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sUb-section (2), the said Fund 
shall be the property of the Reserve Bank and no shareholder of 
30 the State Bank or any other person shall have any claim to the 
amount held in the said Fund. 
3'7. The State Bank shall establish a Reserve Fund which shall 
consist of-
(a) the amount held in the Reserve Fund of the Imperial 
Bank transferred to the State Bank on the appointed day; and 
(b) such further sums as may be transferred to it by the 
State Bank out of its annual, net profits before declaring a 
dividend. 

it 
38. (i) After makin~ provision for bad and doubtful debts. Dr,t ot 
depreciation in assets, equalisation of dividends, contribution to staff pta. 
and superannuation funds and for all other matters for which pro-
vision is necessary by or under this Act or which are usually pro-
S vided for by banking companies, the State Bank may, out of its 
annual net profits, declare a dividend. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of paragraph 6 of the First Schedule, 
the rate of dividend shall be determined by the Central Board. 
39. The Central Board shall cause the books of the State Bank :'''fk~ be 
10 to be closed, and balanced on the 31st day of December in each year. ea~ year. 
to. (1) The State Bank shall furnish to the Central Government Returnl. 
and to the Reserve Bank within two months from the date on which 
its accounts are closed and balanced its balance sheet, together with 
the profit and loss account and the auditors' report on the working 
IS of the State Bank during the period covered by the accounts. 
(Z) The balance sheet and the profit and loss account shall be 
signed by the chairman, vice-chairman, managing directors, if any, 
and a majority of the other directors. 
(3) The State Bank shall also. within two months from the date 
20 on which its accounts are closed and balanced. transmit to the 
Central Government and the Reserve Bank a statement showing, 
as far as may be available, the name, address and occupation of, and 
the number of shares held by, each shareholder of the State Bank 
as on the said date. 
2S 41. (1) The affairs of the State Bank shall be audited by two Audit. 
auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under sub-
VII of ISII. section (1) of section 144 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913, who 
shall be appointed by the Reserve Bank in consultation with the 
Central Government. 
30 (2) The auditors shall receive such remuneration as the Reserve 
Bank may fix in consultation with the Central Government. 
(3) An auditor may be a shareholder but no director or member 
of a Local Board or of a Local Committee or an officer of the State 
Bank shall be eligible to be an auditor during his continuance in 
3' office as such director. member or officer. 
(4) An auditor shall on relinquishing office be eligible for re-
appointment. 
(5) The auditors shall severally be, and continue to act as, 
auditors until the first general meeting after their respective appoint-
40 ment. and if any vacancy arises before the expiry of the term df 
office of an auditor. the vacancy may be filled by the Reserve Bank. 

U 
(6) Every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual 
balance sheet and profit and loss account, and a list of all books 
kept by the State Bank, and it shall be the duty of the auditor to 
examine the balance sheet and profit and loss account with the 
accounts and vouchers relating thereto, and in the performance of 5 
his duties, the auditor-
(a) shall have, at all reasonable times, access to the books, 
accounts and other documents of the State Bank; 
(b) may, at the expense of the state BlUlk, or if he Is ap-
pointed by the Central Government, at the expense of the 10 
CeIItral Govem.ment, employ &Cco.lluts or other penoas &0 
a&&lst hlm III investigating such aceGOllts; and. 
(c) may, in relation to such accounts, examine any director 
or any member of a Local Board or of a Local Committee or any 
officer of the State Bank. 
(7) The auditors shall make a report to the Central Government 
upon the annual balanc~ sheet and accounts, and in every such re-
port they shall state-
IS 
(a) whether, in their opinion, the balance sheet is a full 
and fair balance sheet containing all the necessary particulars 20 
and properly drawn up so !is to exhibit a true and correct view 
of the affairs of the State Bank, and in case they have called 
for any explanation or information, whether it has been given 
and whether it is satisfactory; 
(b) whether or not the transactions of the State Bank which a, .0; 
have come to their notice have been within the powers of the 
State Bank; ! ! 
(c) whether or not the returns received from the offices and 
branches of the State Bank have been found adequate for the 
purpose of their audit; . 30 
(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance 
of profi~ and loss for the period covered by such account; and 
(e) any other matter which they consider should be brought 
to the notice of the shareholders or the Central Government, as 
the case may be. 
(8) Without prejudice to anything COlltained in tile foreplar 
provlslollS, the Central Government may appoint at any time IIICb 
-aod.ltors as it thinks fit to esamille 1UId report 8ft the aeco1llltl of 
the ·State BalIk. 

23 
C. (1) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to as an annual Balance 
general meeting) shall be held at such time and at such place where t~t ~f 
there is a local head office of the State Bank, as shall from time to ,:, ebc dfac:-
time be specified by the Central Board before the end of February Uleed atl • &enera 
~. in each year, and a general meetmg may be convened by the State meetin,. 
Bank at any other time: 
Provided that the first annual general meeting shall be held at 
Bombay. 
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting shall 
I,) be entitled to discuss the balance sheet and the profit and loss 
account of the State Bank made upto the previous 31st day of 
December, the report of the Central Board on the working of the 
State Bank for the period covered by the accounts and the auditors' 
report on the balance sheet and accounts. 
IS, CHAPTER VIII 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
43. The State Bank may appoint such number of officers, advisers State B~ 
aud employees as it considers qecessary or desirable for the efficient =~"= 
performance of its functions, and determine the terms. and conditions other emplo-
20 of their appointment and service. ,eeL 
44. (1) The State Bank shall observe, except as otherwise Obligation 
required by law, the practices and usages customary among bankers, :~o fidelity 
and, in particular, it shall not divulge any information relating to aeaecy. 
or to the affairs of its constituents except in circumstances in which 
2S it is. in accordance with the law or practice and usage customary 
among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the State Bank to 
divulge such information. 
(2) Every director, member of a Local Board or of a Local Com-
mittee, auditor, adviser, officer or other employee of the State Bank 
,. shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity 
and secrecy as in the form set out in the ~econd Schedule. 
45. No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies Blr to liqui-
shall apply to the State Bank. and the State Bank shall not be placed dation of 
in liquidation save by order of the Central Government and in" such State Bank. 
3S manner as it may direct. 
46. (1) Every director and every member of a Local Board or I~demnity of 
a Local Committee shall be indemnified by the State Bank against ~":a~r:. ar:,1 
all losses and expenses incurred by him in or in relation to the Local BOIl'di 
discharge of his duties except such as are caused by his own wilful ~:~., 
40 act or default. etc. 

'4 
(2) Neither a director nor a member of a Local Board or a Local 
Committee shall be responsible for any loss or expense caused to 
the State Bank by the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of or 
title to any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the 
State Bank or by the insolvency or wrongful act of any customer , 
or debtor or by anything done in or in relation to the execution of 
the duties of his office or otherwise than for his wilful act or default. 
~ inot .7. (1) No act or proceeding of the Central Board or of a Local 
:=:_ Board or a Local Committee shall be questioned on the ground 
~c::: to merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the con- 10 
ICtB or::OC- stitution of the Board or Committee, as the case may be. 
eedinJII. (2) All acts done by any person acting in good faith as a director 
or as a member of a Local Board or of a Local Committee shall, 
notwithstanding that there was some defect in his appointment or 
qualifications, be as valid as if he was a director of the Central I, 
Board or a member of the Local Board or the Local Committee, as 
the case may be. ' 
: !U- a. The Central Government may, for the purpose of removing 
fficultiea. any difficulties, particularly in relation to transition from the pro-
visions of the Imperial Bank of India Act, 1920, to the provisions 20 XLVII of 
of this Act, by order, direct that this Act shall, during such period Ip). 
as may be specified in such order, have effect subject to such adap-
tations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission, as 
it may deem expedient: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of 25 
one ~ar from the appointed day. 
~o&,v_ 4'. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the Re-
~~o serve Bank, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
. to carry aut the purposes of this Act, 
Power of 
Central 
Board to 
make regu· 
lations. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 30 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the procedure for the payment of compensation .under 
this Act; 
(b) the determination of persons to whom the said compen-
sation shall be payable in cases where shares in the Imperial 35 
Bank have been held by more than one person or where the 
shareholder is dead; 
58. (1) The Central"Board may, after consultation with the Re-
serve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment. make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the 40 
rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which pro-
vision is expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provi-
sions of this Act. 

25 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
(a) the nature of shares of the State Bank, the manner in 
which and the conditions subject to which shares may be held 
and transferred and generally all matters relating to the rights S 
and duties of shareholders; 
(b) the maintenance of share registers, and the particulars 
to be entered in the principal register in addition to those speci-
fled in section 13, the areas to be served by each branch register, 
the inspection and closure of the registers and all other matters 10 
connected therewith; 
(c) the holding and conduct of elections under this Act, in-
cluding the allocation of elected directors to the various areas 
served by the different branch registers, and the final determi-
nation of doubts or disputes regarding the qualifications of IS 
candidates for election or regarding the validity of elections; 
(d) the number of elected or nominated members of Local 
Boards and Local Committees, the terms of office of the mem-
bers, the manner of their election or nomination, the powers, 
functions, and duties of the Local Boards and Local Committees, 20 
the holding of meetings of Local Boards and Committees and the 
conduct of business thereat; 
(e) the fees and allowances which may be paid to directors, 
or members of Local Boards or Local Committees for attending 
any meetings of the Central Board or of its committees or of 25 
the Local Boards or Local Committees, as the case may be, or 
for attending to any other work of the State Bank; 
(f) the manner in which the business of the Central Board 
shall be transacted and the procedure to be followed at the 
meetings thereof; 30 
(g) the formation of committees of the Central Board and 
the delegation of powers and functions of the Central Board to 
such committees and the conduct of business in such committees; 
(h) the delegation of powers and functions of the Central 
Board to the vice-chairman, the managing directors or other 35 
directors or officers or other employees of the State Bank; 
(i) the manner in which general meetings shall be convened, 
the procedure to be followed thereat and the manner in which 
voting rights may be exercised; 
(;) the holding of meetings of shareholders on branch regis- 40 
ters and the business to be transacted thereat; 

(k) the manner in which notices may be served on behalf of 
the State Bank upon shareholders or other persons; 
(1) the provision of seals for the State Bank and the manner 
and effect of their use; 
5 (m) the conduct and defence of legal proceedings and the 
manner of signing pleadings; 
(n) the duties and conduct of officers, other employees, ad-
visers and agents of the State Bank; 
(0) the establishment and maintenance of ,pension, provi-
10 dent or other funds for the benefit of employees of or for the pur-
poses of the State Banks; 
(p) the form and manner in which contracts binding on the 
State Bank may be executed; 
(q) the maximum amounts which may be advanced or lent 
IS to, or for which bills may be discounted for, any individual or 
partnership without security, the conditions under which 
advances may be made on security and the extent to which ac-
counts may be overdrawn without security. 
(r) the conditions subject to which alone, advances may be 
20 made to directors, members of Local Boards or of Local Com-
mittees or officers of the State Bank, or the relatives of such 
directors, members or officers or to companies, firms or indi-
viduals with which or with whom such directors, members, 
o~cers, or relatives, are connected as partners, directors, 
25 managers, servants, shareholders or otherwise; 
(8) the statements, returns, and forms that are required 
by this Act to be prescribed; 
(t) generally for the conduct of the business of the State 
Bank. 
30 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the first 
regulations shall be made by the Reserve Bank with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government, and thereupon shall be deemed 
to be the regulations made by' the Central Board under this section 
and shall have force accordingly until they are amended or repealed. 
~~11~~_ 3' . 51. (1) As from the appointed day, the Imperial Bank shall be, 
rial Bank dIssolved and thereafter no person shall make any claim or demand 
~ ~vhof or take any proceeding against that Bank or a director, officer or 
of IPI. employee thereof in his capacity as such director, officer or em-
playee except in so far as may be necessary for enforcing the pro-
40 visions of this Act or except in so far as it relates to any offence 
committed by any such director, officer or othel' employee. 

XLVII of 
1920· 
XLvnof 
1920• 
II of 1934. 
~7 
(2) As from the appointed day, the Imperial Bank of India Act, 
1920: shall stand repealed. 
(3) Without prejudice to the other· provisions contained in this 
Act and notwithstanding the repeal of the Imperial Bank of India 
Act, 1920, any reference to the Imperial Bank or ta the Bank of 5 
Bengal, the Bank of Madras or the Bank of Bombay in any law, 
notification or in any contract or other instrument shall, as from the 
appointed day, be deemed to be a reference to the State Bank. 
S!. As fram the appointed day, the Reserve Bank of India Act, Amektdre: 
1934, shall be amended in the manner directed in the Third Sche- 10 ~~34' I 
dule. 
53. As from the appointed day, the Banking Companies Act, 
X of 1949· 1949, shall be amended in the manner directed in the Fourth 
Schedule. 
Am9dmeDt 
of Act X rJ 
1949· 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 9) 
COMPENSATION FOR THE TRANSFER OF SHARES OF THE IMPERIAL BANK 
TO THE REsERVE BANK. 
S l. In this Schedule, "sharehalder" means any person who imme-
diately before the appointed day is registered as the holder of a 
share in the Imperial Bank. 
2. As full compensation for the shares in the capital of the Im-
perial Bank which, by reason of this Act, are transferred to and 
10 vested in the Reserve Bank, the Reserve Bank shall pay to every 
shareholder, in the manner set out hereinafter, an amount calculated 
at the rate of one thousand seven hundred and sixty-five rupees 
and ten annas per share in the case of a fully paid up share and 
four hundred and thirty-one rupees, twelve annas and four pies 
I S per share in the case of a partly paid-up share. 
3. Notwithstanding the transfer C1f the shares in the capital of 
the Imperial Bank to the Reserve Bank, any shareholder who im-
mediately before the appointed day is entitled to payment C1f divid-
end on the shares of the Imperial Bank held by him shall be en-
20 titled to receive from the State Bank-
(a) all dividends accruing due on his shares in respect of 
any half-year which ended before the appointed day and re-
maining unpaid; 
(b) dividends calculated at a rate to be specified by the 
2S Central Government in respect of any period immediately pre-
ceding the appointed day far which the Imperial Bank has not 
declared any dividend. 
4.(1) The compensation provided for in this Schedule shall be 
given in Central Government securities, and. the form of such Be-
30 curities and the value thereof, computed with reference to their 
market value, shall be such as the Central Government may, by 
notificatiOn in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf: 
Provided that where the amount of such compensation is not 
an exact multiple of the value of the government security as so 
3S notified, the amount in excess of the n.earest lower mUltiple of such 
value shall be paid by cheque drawn ctn the Reserve Bank. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-paragraph, (1), 
any person who is registered as ~he holder of a share in the Imperial 
:!8 

Bank on the 19th day of December, 1954 shall, if he applies in 
writing in this behalf to the Reserve Bank before the expiry of one 
month from the appointed day, be entitled to be paid, by cheque 
drawn on the Reserve Bank, any compensation payable to him up 
to the first ten thousand rupees. 5 
5. (1) Any shareholder to whom compensation is payable under 
this Schedule may apply to the Reserve Bank before the expiry 
of three months from the appointed day for the transfer to him of 
shares in the State Bank in lieu of such compensation, and for the 
purposes of such transfer the value of each share (jf the State 10 
Bank shall be such as may be determined by the Reserve Bank in 
this behalf. 
(2) If on receipt of an application under sub-paragraph (1), the 
Reserve Bank, in its discretion, decides to transfer any shares to 
the applicant, it shall issue to the State Bank a warrant in the pres- IS 
cribed form directing it to transfer in favour of the person speci-
fied in the warrant such number of shares as may be specified there-
in out of the shares standing allotted to it under sub-section (1) .of 
section 5, and the State Bank shall be bound to comply with such 
warrant. 20 
(3) A warrant issued by the Reserve Bank under this paragraph 
n of 1899. shall not be liable td duty under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. 
6. (1) The Reserve Bank may, if it decides to transfer, in pursu-
ance of paragraph 5, more than two lakhs, fifty-three thousand and 
one hundred and twenty-five shares, require the State Bank to issue 25 
to it such further shares as may be necessary to secure that it 
holds not less than fifty-five per cent. of the issued capital of the 
State Bank, and the State Bank shall, without prejudice to the 
provisions contained in sub-section (3) of section 5, comply with 
such requirement on the Reserve Bank subscribing one hundred 30 
rupees for each share. 
(2) No share issued to the Reserve Bank at par under this para-
graph shall carry dividend at a rate higher than four per cent. 
per annum. 
F. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
(See section 44) 
DECLARATION OF FmELITY AND SECRECY. 
I. ......................................... ,......................... .... do hereby 
35 
declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and 
ability execute and perform the duties required of me as Director, 40 
member (jf Local Board, member of Local Committee, auditor, 
adviser, officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the State 

~o 
Bank and which properly relate to the office or position in the said 
State Bank held by me. 
I further declare that I will ndt communicate or allow to be 
cmmunicated to any person not legally entitled thereto any infor-
S mation relating to the affairs of the State Bank or to the affairs of 
any person having any dealing with the State Bank; nor will I 
allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or 
documents belonging to or in the possession of the State Bank and 
relating to the business of the State Bank or to the business of any 
10 person having any dealing with the State Bank. 
IS 
lpaa r== 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 52) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934. 
Section 2.-After clause (e), insert the following, namely:-
"(ee) 'State Bank' means the State Bank of India consti-
tuted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955,". 
Section 10.-ln clause (e) of sub-section (1), for the words 
"other than a bank", substitute the following, namely:-
"other than the State Bank or any of its subsidiary banks 
20 or a bank". 
.30 
Section 17.-(1) After clause (8), insert the follOwing, namely:-
'(SA) the purchase and sale of shares in, or the capital ctf, 
the State Bank or any of its subsidiary banks". 
(2) For clause (15A), substitute the following namely:-
"( 15A) the exercise of powers and functions and the perfor-
mance af duties entrusted to the Bank under this Act or under 
any other law for the time being in force". 
Section 42.-(i) In the Explanation to sub-section (1), for the 
. words "the Reserve Bank fir the Imperial Bank of In-
dia" substitute "the Bank, the State Bank or any other 
bank notified by the Central Government in this be-
half". 
(ii) In clauses (a) and (aa) of sub-section (2), for 
the words "the Imperisl Bank of India" substitute "the 
35 State Bank and any other bank notified by the Central 
Government in this behalf." 
n of 1934-

X of 1949. 
31 
For section 45, substitute the fallowing, namely:-
"45. Unless otherwise directed by the Central Government 
with reference to any place, the Bank shall appoint the State 
Bank as its sole agent at all places in India where it does not 
have an office or branch of the banking department and there is 
a branch of the State Bank: 
Prctvided that nothing herein contained shall a1fect the 
provisions of any agreement subsisting on the day on which the 
State Bank of India Act, 1955, comes into force between the Bank 
and any other banking institution for the conduct of Government 
, 
business or other matters in a Part B State." 10 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.-For the words "Imperial Bank of India" 
substitute "State Bank c1f India". 
Omit the Third Schedule. 
-
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 53) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING COMPANIES ACT, 1949. 
In section 39.-After the words "the Reserve Bank" appearing 
for the second time therein, insert "or the State Bank of India, as 
the case may be, as stated in such application." 
15 
For section 51, substitute the following, namely: - 20 
ObU,atioo 
to appoint 
State Bank 
a. Alent. 
"51. Without prejudice to the provisions of the State Bank APplication 
of India Act, 1955, the provisions of sections 10, 13 to 17, 19 to 21, of certain 
23 to 31, 34 to 36, 37, 45, 46 to 48, 50, 52 and 53 shall also fo~h~~:'~ 
apply, as far as may be, to and in relation to the State Bank of Bank Of 
India as they apply to and in relation to banking companies: 2S India. 
Provided that nothing cO'lltained in section 46 shall apply 
to any directors nominated unaer clauses (e) and (f) of sec-
tion 19 of the State Bank of India Act 1955." 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Reserve Bank of India had appointed in August, 1951 a 
Committee of Direction for conducting an all-India rural credit 
survey. The General Report of the survey embodying the Com-
mittee's recommendations was received last year. The Report makes 
comprehensive recommendations relating to numerous aspects of 
the problem of rural credit. One of the important recommendations 
and an integral part of the solution of the rural credit problem pro-
pounded by the Committee is the setting up of a State Bank of 
India as 'one strong integrated State-partnered commercial banking 
institution with an effective machinery of branches spread over the 
whole country for stimulating banking development by providing 
vastly extended remittance facilities for co-operative and other banks 
and following a policy which would be in effective consonance with 
national policies adopted by Government without departing from 
the canons of sound business'. Such a State Bank of India is envi-
saged as coming into being by the amalgamation of the Imperial Bank 
of India with certain "State-associated" banks. On the 20th 
December, 1954, Government announced that they accepted in princi-
ple this recommendation of, the Committee and that they had decided 
as a first step towards the setting up of such an institution, to assume 
effective control over the Imperial Bank. This Bill seeks to give 
effect to this decision. 
Suitable provisions are made relative to the acquisition of the 
undertaking of the Imperial Bank, the taking over of its business and 
staff, .the payment of compensation to shareholders, the setting up 
of an appropriate machinery for the governance of the State Bank 
of India, the business which the Bank may and may not transact, 
etc. It is contemplated that the Reserve Bank will always hold a 
minimum share holding of 55 per c~nt. in the paid-up capital 
of the Bank. By virtue of this holding and the composition 
of the Board of Directors of the Bank as well as by virtue of the 
power to give directions in matters of policy involving public 
interest vested in the Central Government, it is provided that the 
general working of the State Bank of India shall be responsive to and 
in consonance with Government policies while the autonomy 
of, the institution in its day-to-day working will be fully maintained. 
Amendments necessary to the Reserve Bank of India, Act, 1934, and 
to the Banking Companies Act, 1949, consequentially to the establish-
ment of this institution, have been provided for in the Third and 
Fourth Schedules to the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th April, 1955. 
C. D. DESHMUKH, 
32 

'FlNANClIAL ~MORANDUM 
'Under clause 36(1)(b), the Central Government 'may make ~ntri­
butioDS from time to time to the- In~gration and Development Fund 
to be maintained. by the State Bank under clause 36(1). As the 
Reserve Bank of,lndiaj'besides allowing the dividends payable on its 
holding of shares of the State Bank to be" credited , to the FUnd, is 
also expected to make contribiJtions' to the -above Fund, ,Govern-
ment's contributions ,may· not be called :toT and, in an>, e~nt. 
it is not possible to make any estimate thereof at the present stage: 
L (' , _ , r,-' ~. . I· , .~ , ":~I; I 
Under clause 41(,13), Governm,nt ma~ appoint ~tors to ex~mine 
and report on the,$CC9unts of ther~t~te l3lUlkj .a.n,c;l any auditor 210 
appointed may ·at the exp,ense of the Central Govel1Ull1ent'employ 
accountants or other persons, to as$t him.Jn inveetigating the 
accounts {see <;lause4:1(6),(b)J. He~ ag,ain. it is not possible tor 
est~te, the e~di~e ijkely to be ~volved byt,.even U, auditom 
and accountants are, in fact,pP()inte4. the expenditure is not likely 
to eX4eed a few thousand rupe.es per month for the period o~ their 
appointment. 
33 

MEMORANDUM RmARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Gla~ 49 authorises lhe Central Government to make rules regu-
lating the manner in which the ,compensation payable under this 
~w will be distrib~d to tbe shareholders and for the determination: 
~ persons entitled to the eompelUation wheresbares are held- by 
~ore t~ one person. The power to regulate the day to day work-
ing of the State Bank has necessarily to be yeated in the Central 
~ of the State Ba,nk. This Bill Ulerefore confers uP9.l1 the 
Central Board a power to make re,waticms in l'espeet of the several 
matters detailed in clause 50. Such of those provisions as are con-
tained in Schedules I and n of the Imperial Bank of Indfa Act, 1920, 
and as .e of, a major character-have been incorporated in the body 
of the Bill i_If and the' other matters for which provision is made 
in those-,two SCheduleS, partieuiarl,. in Schedulen, are left to be 
regulated by the Central Board 'by' 'means of regulations made in this 
.half.'''11ileeeregulatloDS,:gebe1'aUy sfje8kingi deal with the nmnal 
day to day'working of tle'State- B&nlt. arid t~ powers delegated tG 
the ICentral Government and to the'~tral BoardUllder clauses 49 
and 50 are of a normal character. 
Clause 48 is designed to get over any difficulty that may arise in 
the course of transition from the Imperial Bank of India Act, 1920, 
to the new law, and authorises the Central Government to remove 
such difficulty by suitably modifying the provisions of this new law. 
This . power is restricted in its duration to one year. A somewhat 
similar power was included in s. 30 of the Imperial Bank of India 
Act, 1920, with respect to the first formation of certain bodies and 
is not an entirely unusual feature in similar enactments. 
34 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BItL 
to constitute a State Bank for India, to transfer· to it the under-
taking of the Imperial Bank of India and to provide for other 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri C. D. Deshmukh, 
MinistBr of Fitrtlta.) 