8W No. 31 01 11$7 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 19S7 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoIt SABRA) 

Bill No. _ of 1251. 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amend- Shon title. 
ment) Act, 1957. 
s 2 of 1934a 2. In section 17 of toe Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (herein- Amendment. 
J 0 6J ofl9SI. 
, 
after referred to as the priJlcipal Act),- of section 17· 
(i) in clause (4), for the words and figures "State Financial 
Corporations established under the State Financial Corporations 
Act, 1951, and the principal currency authority of Ceylon", the 
words and figures "and State Financial Corporations established 
under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951," shall be sub-
stituted; 
(ii) after clause (4B), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
" (4BB) the making to any financial institution notified 
by the Central Government in this behalf of loans and 
advances repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed 
periods not exceeding ninety days from the date of such 
loan or advance, against securities of the Central Govern-
ment or of any State Government;"; and 
(iii) in clause (8A), after the words "any other bank", 
the words "or financial institution" shall be inserted. 

2· 
Amen~ent 3, For sub-section (2) of section 34 of the principal Act, the fol~ 
of section 340 lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) any currency note of the Government of India or 
bank note which has not been presented for payment within S 
forty years from the 1st day of April following the date of 
"its issue, and 
(b) any bank note referred to in section 26A, 
shall be deemed not to be in circulation, and jhe value thereof 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of 10 
section 23, be paid by the Issue Department to the Central Gov-
ernment or the Banking Department, as the case may be: 
Provided that any note referred to in clause (a), if subse-
quently presented for payment, and any note referred to in 
clause (b), if directed to be paid by the Central Government, shall IS 
be paid by the Banking Department and any such payment in 
the case of currency note of the Government of India shall be 
debited to the Central Government,", 
Amendment 4. In sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (6) of section 
of section 42· 42 of the principal Act, for the words, figures and brackets "clause 20 
, (2) of section 2 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) ", the 
words and figures "section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956, or an insti- I of IS 
,tution notified by the Central Governmeht in this behalf" shall be 2 
substituted. • 
r:t 5. In sub-section (1) of section 57 of the principal Act, for the 25 
~ fie 7' words, figures and brackets "Indian Companies Act, 1913 (vn of 1913)", 
the words and figures "Companies Act, 1956" shall be substituted. i of 19 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In spite of the existence of bodies like the Industrial Finance 
Corporation, the State Financial Corporations and the Industrial 
Credit and Investment Corporation, medium-term finance facilities 
in the private sector of industry are still found to be inadequate for 
the purposes of the overall objectives of the Second Five Year Plan. 
It may, therefore, be necessary to establish financial institutions to 
provide medium-term loan assistance to industries. The Reserve 
Bank of India Act is being amended to enable the Reserve Bank of 
India to contribute to the capital of such institutions as it cannot do 
so under the existing provisions of the Act. 
2. Opportunity has been taken to carry out certain further 
amendments in the Act-one of them being intended to extinguish 
the liability of the Issue Department of the Reserve Bank of India 
in respect of the unencashed High Denomination Notes demonetized 
in terms of the High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetization) 
Ordinance, 1946. Some of the other amendments are merely formal 
in character. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th May, 1957. 

Businesa 
which the 
Bank may 
transact. 
Liabilities of 
the haue 
Department. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
No.2 OF 1934 
• • • • • 
17. The Bank shall be authorised to carry on and transact the 
several kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely:-
• • • • • 
(4) the making to local authorities, scheduled banks, State 
co-operative banks, State Financial Corporations established 
under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951, and the princi- 63 of 
pal currency authority of Ceylon of loans and advances, repay-
able on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding 
ninety days, against the security of-
(a) stocks, funds and securities (other .than immovable 
property) in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust 
money by any Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom or 
by any law for the time being in force in India; 
(b) gold or silver or documents of title to the same; 
(c) such bills of exchange and promissory notes as are 
eligible for purchase or rediscount by the Bank or as are 
fully guaranteed as to the repayment of the principal and 
payment of interest by a State Government; 
(d) promissory notes of any scheduled bank or State co-
operative bank, supported by documents of title to goods 
such documents having been transferred, assigned, or pledged 
to any such bank as security for a loan or advance made for 
bona fide commercial or trade transactions, or for the pur-
pose of financing seasonal agricultural operations or the 
marketing of crops; 
• • • • • 
(SA) the· purchase and sale of shares in, or the capital of, the 
State Bank or any other bank notified by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf; 
• • • • • 
34. (1). 
• • • • • 
4 

7 of 1913. 
S 
(2) For the purposes of this section, any curr'ency note of the 
Government of India or bank note which has not been presented for 
payment within forty years from the 1st day of April following the 
date of its issue shall be deemed not to be in circulation, and the 
value thereof shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sec-
tion (2) of section 23, be paid by the Issue Department to the Central 
Government or the Banking Department, as the case may be; but 
any such note, if subsequently presented for payment, shall be paid 
by the Banking Department, and any such payment in the case of a 
currency note of the Government of India shall be debited to the 
Central Government. 
• • • • • 
42. (1) 
• • • • • 
(6) The Bank s~all, save as hereinafter provided, by notification 
in the Gazette of India,-
I 
(a) direct the inclusion in the Second Schedule of any bank 
not already so included which carries on the business of banking 
in India and which-
(i) 
• • • • • 
(iii) is a company as defined in clause (2) of section 2 
of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 or a corporation or a 
company incorporated by or under any law in force in any 
place outside India; 
• • • • • 
Cash re,ervce 
of scheduled 
banks to be 
Irept with the 
Bank. 
7 of 1913. 57. (i) Nothing in the Indian Companies A~, 1913, shall apply Liquidation 
to the Bank,· and the Bank shall not be placed in liqUidation save by of the Bank. 
order of the Central Government and in such manner as it may 
direct. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article I 17 of the Constitution of India, recommended 
to Lok Sabha the introduction and consideration 
of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
S~cr8tary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minist~ of Finance.) 