Blot laDe. 
As DlTROD'UCED IK LoK SABBA _ 
~. 
Bill No. 21 of 1981 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1981 
'. 
A 
BILL 
further'~ amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956. 
WHEREAS for securing the interests of the Life InsUfance Corporation 
of India and its policy-holders and to control the cost of administration, 
it is ne<:essary that revision of the terms and conditions of service appli-
cable to the employees and agents of the Corporation should be under-
S taken expeditiO'Usly; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the . Thirty-:second Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Life Insurance Corporation 
(Amendment) Act, 1981. 
10 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of 
January, 1981. . 
Z. In the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred 
tc) as the principal Act), in section 48,-
(a) in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following clause 
abaU be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with 
effect from the 20th day of June, 1979, namely:-
"(re) the terms aDd conditio .. of service of the .employees 
and &rents of the COll'OratloD, IDcladlDa' those who became 
i , 
S::Jrt 
tiLeaIld 
co::nmenCE· 
mmt. 
.bend-
ment of 
section 
4£. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
49. 
2 
employees and agents of the CorporaUoa en the aPl'OJDW D.T 
dllliler ... ~~t~; 
(b) after su\)..section (2), the following sub-sections sba11 be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (2A) The ~gu1ations ana other provisions as in for.ee 5 
immediately before the commencement ot the Life Insurance ~ 
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1981, with respect to the terms 
and conditions of service of employees and agents of the Corpo-
ration including those who became employees and agents 
Of the Corporation on the appointed day under this Act, shall 10 
be deemed to be rules made 'Under clause (cc) of sub-section 
(2) and shall, subject to the other proviaions of this section. 
have effect accordingly. 
(2B) The power to make rules conferred by clause (ee) of 
sub-section (2) shall include- IS 
(i) the power to give retros~ctive etrect to such rules; 
and 
(ii) the power to amend by way of aa,dition, variation 
or repeal, the regulations and other provisions referred to 
in sub-section (2A), with retrospectiv& etrect, 2Q 
from a date not earlier than the twentj.eth day of June, 1979. 
(2C) The provisions of clause (cc) of sub-section (2) and 
sub-section (2B) and any rules made under the said clause (cc) 
shall have effect, and any such rule made with retrospective 
effect from any date shall also be deemed to have had I!Ilfec!t 25 
'from that date, notwithstanding any judgment, decree ot"-order 
of any court, tribunal or other authority and notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or any 14 of 1947. 
other law or any agreement, settlement. award or other instru-
ment for the time being in force.". 30 
3. In -section 49 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-,section (2.).-
to in clause (b), the words "and the tel11\S and conditip~ 
of service of employees or agents" shall be omitted; 
'(ii) 'Clause '('btl) shall be omitted; and 
" (b) . after sub-section (2), the following sub-6ect.ioJS shall be in .. 
. ~ n.m:81y:-
"(3) Every regulation made UBder this -UOJ1 shall l:te.!aiel, 
35 
US 'SOml as may ~ after it is made, before each BQuse ell ~ 
Uament, while it is in session, 'fCJl' a total period Of th.irtJy ~a,. 40 
wrtch .m~y bf. ,o;;oll\Pt:ised j:' ~"WiSion o.~ :i1 ~ Ql" ~ore . 
:Juccessive sessivDS, and if, ,be:tOlie .the erPil'\Y (';: tAe ......... 
mediately following the session or th£· ~Ccessive sesdons afore-
aid, IIDo\h .IIOUHS Rg'r'ee in ·makillC..my motIi1icatfon ~ the 
ngulattGl'1 'Of Wh ~ agree 'that '!he l"egfflation 'sbelj)8 n.,,· .rs 
be L' de, -the !?egulaflen shall itihE!t"eafter 'have effect otUy :in 
jiUC~ 'IIltdiAed. -4Qr11l or tbe-nf ,110' "eat. 'aJ ~e cue may b"e'; to, 
. " 
,. 

,oll.St. 
3 
". ltOwever, that any such modifi'cation -- or annuhnent shall be 
without prej udice to the validity of anything previously' done ~:-
under that regulation.":'- c,·· J • "(. 
4. (1) The Life Insur;;mce Corporation (Amendment) Ordinance, 
.5 1981 is hereby repealed. 
(~ Notwithstanding stlC~ repeal, anything done or any action taken 
. un'd'e!" the "rincipttJ Act <lS Emended by the said Onlinance shall be 
~cmed to have been do~c or taken under the principal Act as amended 
by this Act. 
Repeal 
and 
savinC. 

STATEME..'lT OF O~TS AND REASONS 
In order to control the cost of administration in the interest oftbe 
Life Insurance Corporation of India and its policy-holders whose pre-
mium income the Corporation holds as a Trustee, it became necessary for 
Government to vest itself with powers to determi~e the terms and condi-
tions of service of the employees and agents and streamline the salary 
structure. Hence the President promulgated on 31st January, 1981, 
the Life Insurancp. CorporatiQn (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 to amend 
the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 to empower the Central Gov-
ernment to frame rUles regarding the terms and conditions of all claaes 
of employees and agents of the Corporation and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
2. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. • 
of, 
NEW DELHI; 
• The 13th February, 1981. R. VENKATARAMAN. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CO:-lSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 65 (2) Ins. 111/4/31, dated the 18th February, 1981 
'from Shri R. VenkataraI'!lan, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of tile 
proposed Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 1981, recom-
mends the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under clause (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution. 
4 

FiNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (a) of clause 2 C1f the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (ee) 
in sub-section (2) of section 48 of the principal Act to empower the 
Central Government to make rules relating to the terms and cOnditions 
of service of the employees and agents of the Corporation. This work 
which has hitherto 'heen carried out by the Corporation will result in 
some additional workload on the Central Government. Even though 
every effort will be made to manage the additional workload to the 
extent possible with the existing staff, the possibility of some additional 
staff becoming necessary cannot be ruled out. Further. some expendi-
ture on stationery, corresp<?ndence and other connected matters will be 
necessary. It is estimated that the additional expenditure to be incurred 
with regard to all these matters is not likely to exceed Rs. 1 lakh per 
annum. The quantum and duration for which such expenditure will be 
required will be assessed in the light of the actual experience. As the 
intention is to control the cost of administration of the Corporation 
through the aforesaid rule-making power, the provisions of the Bill may 
result in some reduction in expenditure on the salaries and allowances 
of the employees and agents of the Corporation and, as hitherto, the 
expenditure on salaries and allowances etc. of the employees and agents 
of the Corporation will be met from au·t of the funds of the Corporation. 
2. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure 
of a recurring or non-recurring nature . 
. 
5 

MEMORANDUM nEGARotN'C DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause- 2 of the Bill-seeks to amend' sectic.1>D .4& C1f the principal Act, 
inter aZia,-
(a.) for empowering the Central Government to make with re-
trospective effect train· a date not earlier ~ the 20th . ciar . of June, 
i97S, rules with r~pec:t to the, t~ and ~di~~a of seiitice of 
the employees and, agents €If the Life Insurance Corporation (vide 
sub-clause (a) of c1.ause 2]; and - . . 
(b) for giving o'9'er..nding e1fect to stith rules by providing 
that such rules shall have ~ffeet notWithstanding an,. judgment, 
decnoe or order e)f ally eour~tl"i:buDal 0'1 other' authority and not-
with$tatlding. anytblng ·ceYrtlIb!ed ill the 1Dd1J~ Disputes AIet, 
194'7 or any other law or dIly agreement, settlement, aWani or other 
instruntent for the time bein~ in for~e [vif::N new sub-seetions (2B) 
a:hC!J (3C) as proposed to' b6 mserttd by SUlR:l~ll_-:<b) ot. said 
clmde2]. 
Sruch an over-riding effect is provided so that .the rules. can prevail 
O\'er the settlements under the Indu~trial Disputes Act, 1947 which have 
been entered into by the Corporation in the r.>ast. 
2. Matters in respect of which rules may be made tmder the afore-
said provisions pertain to matters of detail. The reason for providing 
that the rules can be made with retrospective effect and that the rules 
will have over-riding effect has been explained above. In the circums-
tances, the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal character. 
6 _1IIIIIiIiII1IImllI:I ______ . ___ . 

M tTl trandum erptaining the modification contained in the Bill ;0 replace 
the V.?e Insura-nce CcrpoT!ltion (Am'!ndment) Ordinance. 1981 
Subject to a modification, elause ~ of the Life Irlsurance Corporation 
(Amen~,n~) Bill, 19i1 CGI'1~pl!>ndi W da~se 3 Ql. ~e loife l¥urance 
Corporation (Amendment) ~ i1J!Bl and the modification is for 
making, in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation, a provision for the laying of the regulations 
made by the Corpor&tion before both Houses of Parliament'. 
'. 
7 ' 

Power to 
:-nalte 
:-ules. 
l 
~ 
"," 'r-
.... 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THI!: LIFE IKSURANCZ CORPORATION ACT, 1956 
(31 OF 1956) 
.. .. • .. .. 
-18. (1) .. .. .. .. 
(2) In partiC'Ular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoin~ power, such rutes may provide for all or any of the foU"ow-
ing matters, namely:-. 
• • • .. .. 
(c) the services which the chief agent should have rendered 
for the purpose of the proviso to section 12; 
.. .. • • . .. ., 
49. (1) .. .. • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generaUty of the fore-
going power, such regulations may provide for-
(a) the powers and functions of the Corporation which may be 
delegated to the Zonal Managers; 
(b) the method of recruitment of employees and agents of the 
Corporation and the terms and conditions of service of such em-
ployees or agents; 
(bb) the terms and conditions of service of persons who have 
become employees of the Corporation under sub-section (1) of 
section 11; 
.. • • • .. 
.... 
8 

" 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
", 
further to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956. 
(Shri R. Ven1ca"; raman, MiniSter 01 Finance) 