1
THE PROHIBITION OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING OF INDIAN
CITIZENS ABROAD AND WELFARE OF OVERSEAS
INDIANS BILL, 2014
By
SHRIMATI JAYSHREEBEN K. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of human trafficking of Indian citizens to foreign countries
and welfare of Indian citizens employed abroad and for matters
connected  therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Human Trafficking of Indian Citizens
Abroad and Welfare of Overseas Indians Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  21 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Fund” means the Overseas Indians Welfare Fund constituted under
section 5;
(b) “human trafficking” means an act of recruiting, transporting, transferring,
harbouring or receiving a person through use of force, coercion, fraud or any other
means for the purpose of exploitation including sexual exploitation or engaging him as
a forced labour in a foreign country; and
(c) “Overseas Indian” means an Indian citizen who is employed outside India by
a person who is not an Indian citizen or any company or any enterprise or any vessel
which is not registered in the territory of India but does not include Indian citizens
working in organs or agencies of the United Nations Organisation.
3. Any person who commits or attempts to commit or abets an act of human trafficking
shall be guilty of committing an offence of human trafficking under this Act.
4. The Central Government shall
(i) take such measures as it may deem necessary including entering into bilateral
agreements to generate international co-operation to check human trafficking of Indian
citizens; and
(ii) enter into social security agreements with other countries for ensuring
protection and welfare of Indian citizens working overseas.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Overseas
Indians Welfare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely:—
(a)  welfare of persons who become victims of human trafficking;
(b)  boarding and lodging facilities for distressed overseas Indians;
(c)  meeting expenditure on airlifting of mortal remains of deceased overseas
Indians to India or for cremation/burial of such persons if the employer is unable or
unwilling to do so and the family is unable to meet the cost;
(d) emergency medical care to overseas Indians in need; and
(e) legal assistance to overseas Indians in deserving cases.
6.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, credit such sums of money to the Fund as it may think fit for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
7. Whoever commits the offence of human trafficking shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to life
imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh.
8.  Every person or agency engaged in recruitment or placement of Indian citizens for
employment with foreign nationals or in companies outside the country shall get itself
registered with such authority, as may be designated by the Central Government for this
purpose.
9.  Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 8 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or with fine which may extend to
rupees five lakh or with both.
10.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Definitions.
Offence of
human
trafficking.
Duties of the
Central
Government.
Overseas
Indians
Welfare Fund.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Punishment
for human
trafficking.
Compulsory
registration of
recruiting
agencies.
Punishment
for
contravention
of section 8.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
40

3
11.  (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Human trafficking is a crime against humanity. It involves an act of recruiting,
transporting, harbouring or receiving a person through use of force, coercion or such other
means for the purpose of exploiting them. Every year, thousands of men, women and children
become victims of human trafficking. The demand for workers abroad are steadily increasing.
Many workers migrate illegally every year as the procedure for legal migration is very
cumbersome and expensive. The allurement of good life abroad often lead people to fall into
the booby trap of human traffickers.
Indian workers who migrate legally also face many problems like non-payment or delay
in payment of wages, harsh working and inhuman living conditions, retention of passport by
owners, cheating by intermediaries, incidents of physical abuse and sexual exploitation, etc.
In most of the countries access to legal recourse is denied to such workers. Moreover, in
some countries legal recourse is so expensive that in most cases employees are not able to
afford such options.
United Nations convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC) and the
protocols thereto, assists States to implement the protocol to prevent, suppress and punish
trafficking. The protocol requires States to implement the provisions of the protocol by
amending their respective domestic laws. In India, trafficking of human beings are taking
place in the guise of recruitment agencies. Therefore, it is an urgent necessity to bring the
present legislation.
The Bill, accordingly, seeks to provide, inter alia, for-
(i) making human trafficking a punishable offence;
(ii) setting up of an Overseas Indians Welfare Fund; and
(iii) compulsory registration of recruitment agencies, etc. and to provide for
punishment to those agencies who carry out the business of recruiting persons for
overseas employment without registration.
N
EW DELHI; JAYSHREEBEN K. PATEL
June 9, 2014

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for setting up of an Overseas Indians Welfare Fund. It
further provides for welfare measures for overseas Indians who are victims of human
trafficking. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall credit such sums of money
to the fund as it may think fit for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is likely to involve from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—678LS(S-3)—27.06.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of human trafficking of Indian citizens to foreign countries
and welfare of Indian citizens employed abroad and for matters connected
 therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Jayshreeben K. Patel, M.P.)