THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOV ATIVE RESEARCH
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI P.  KARUNAKARAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research
(Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 21  of  2016
Short title, and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Academy of  Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011, after section 38,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"39. (1) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be published in the
Official Gazette.
(2) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the Statute or Ordinance or both Houses agree that the Statute or
Ordinance should not be made, the Statute or Ordinance shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that Statute or Ordinance.".
Insertion of
new section
39.
Statute and
Ordinance to
be published in
the Official
Gazette and to
be laid before
Parliament.
13 of 2012
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research was established under the
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011 to provide for research in areas
which are not ordinarily taught in regular academic universities in India by disseminating
advanced knowledge in science and technology, and by providing teaching and research
facilities in frontline branches of learning in emerging areas. However, to make the Statues
and Ordinances available and accessible to public, it is necessary that the Statutes and
Ordinances are published in Gazette of India and laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
Consequently, enabling the scrutiny by the public representatives in order out any
shortcomings or lacunae.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research
Act, 2011 with a view to include the provisions pertaining to publishing the Statutes and
Ordinances in the Gazette of India as well as laying them before both the Houses of Parliament.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P. KARUNAKARAN
February 8, 2016.

GMGIPMRND—4230LS(S3)—24.02.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011.
————
(Shri P. Karunakaran, M.P.)