1
THE ARMED FORCES (SPECIAL POWERS) REPEAL BILL, 2017
By
DR. THOKCHOM MEINY A, M.P.
A
BILL
to repeal the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called Armed Forces (Special Powers) Repeal Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 is hereby repealed.
Short title and
commencement.
Repeal of the
Armed Forces
(Special
Powers) Act,
1958. (Act
No. 28 of
1958).
Bill No.  21 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Armed Forces Special Powers Act, 1958 (AFSPA) is a draconian law that gives
Indian soldiers impunity while battling insurgencies in north-eastern parts of India. The
battle against the Armed Forces Special Powers Act is a long, bitter one.
On August 15, 1942, Lord Linlithgow, the viceroy of India, promulgated the Armed
Forces Special Powers Ordinance to suppress the Quit India Movement launched by
Mahatama Gandhi. Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru and most leaders of the Indian National Congress
were imprisoned under this law.
A few years after Indian independence, the Government of India led by Shri Jawaharlal
Nehru, the first Prime Minister. faced his first insurgency in Naga districts of Assam, along
the Burmese border. In 1954, the Nagas began an insurgency for independence. India
responded by sending in thousands of Indian army soldiers and para-military forces to crush
the rebellion. An intense cycle of violence followed. To further arm his counter insurgents
and provide them with legal protection, the then Government passed the Armed Forces
Special Powers Act, 1958.
The discontent in the borderlands of India wasn't limited to the Naga areas. Signs of
trouble and disillusionment with being ruled by a bureaucrats from New Delhi were growing
in the former princely State of Manipur, which had merged with India in 1949. In 1964, a
separatist militant group seeking independence from India, the United National Liberation
Front, was formed in Manipur. India reacted to the centrifugal force by granting statehood to
Manipur in 1972, which brought an elected local Government and greater financial resources.
A few years later, inspired by Maoist ideas, some Manipuri rebels travelled to Lhasa
and, with Chinese support, formed an insurgent group, the People's Liberation Army, which
sought independence of Manipur. Several smaller insurgent groups came into being. India
responded by declaring Manipur a "disturbed area" and imposed the Armed Forces Special
Powers Act in late 1980. A brutal cycle of insurgency and counter insurgency has continued
ever since, claiming several thousand lives.
It may be seen that the disturbed areas of the country have seen grave crimes against
the citizens of the country. It has led to a culture of impunity and grave violation of human
rights including violation of article 21 of the Constitution which provides right to life and
liberty to its citizen.
The AFSPA violates the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
("UDHR''), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ("ICCPR"), the Convention
Against Torture, the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, the
United Nations Body of Principles for Protection of All Persons Under any form of Detention
and the United Nations Principles on Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra- Legal
and Summary Executions.
As a matter of fact, the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 popularly known as
AFSPA is a draconian law, which was originally framed by the British Colonial power in order
to suppress its colonial subjects.
The irony is that this law is still in vogue in this largest democracy of the world. The
Supreme Court, various Commissions, Committees including International Organisations
have recommended the repeal of this draconian law.
The report of the Justice Jeevan Reddy Committee (2005) recommending, among others,
repeal of the Act is already with the Government.
The report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission (2007) headed by none
other than the former Union Minister, Shri M. Veerappa Moily, who was also the former
2

3
Union Law Minister recommended, among others, repeal of the Armed Forces (Special Powers)
Act, 1958.
Further, the report of the Working Group on Confidence-Building Measures in Jammu
and Kashmir (2007) headed by Shri Hamid Ansari, Hon'ble Vice-President of India
recommended, among others, repeal of AFSPA. The Justice J.S. V erma Committee (2012) had
recommended the repeal of this Act.
It is a fact that many citizens had been killed in ‘‘fake encounters’’  and ‘‘several cases
of enforced disappearances’’ had been recorded in the country because of this infamous
Act.  Also, around 169 countries had recommended the repeal of this draconian Act.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to repeal the Armed Forces (Special powers) Act, 1958.
N
EW DELHI;
November  20, 2016. THOKCHOM  MEINYA

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to repeal the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958.
————
(Dr. Thokchom Meinya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4057LS(S3)—06-02-2017.