1
THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI BHOOPENDRA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Act, 2012.
2. In the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 7, for the words "shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall be not
less than six months but which may extend to five years", the words "shall be punishable
with imprisonment which shall be not less than three years but which may extend to seven
years" shall be substituted.
Short title.
Bill No. 21  of  2012
Amendment
of section 7.
49 of 1988.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In section 17 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:
"Provided also that a police officer investigating into an offence referred to in
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall compulsorily inquire into and, as far as
possible, find out the sources of and the manner of acquiring the pecuniary resources
or property disproportionate to the known sources of income of a public servant and
the extent of role of other public servants in commission of such offence.".
4. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be
added at the end, namely:—
"Provided that where a decision regarding granting or withholding the previous
sanction is not taken within a period of four months from the date of seeking previous
sanction, the previous sanction shall, after the expiry of the said period, be deemed to
have been given by the Central Government or the State Government or the competent
authority, as the case may be.".
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 19.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present, corruption is the biggest problem afflicting our country. It is difficult to
assess the extent of damage that corruption has done to our country. Corruption devalues
human rights and hampers growth. It is urgently required to put in place the strongest
possible laws to check corruption. At the same time, it is also equally important that these
laws are implemented in an effective manner. Increase in quantum of punishment to and fine
on people involved in corruption will be a step in that direction.
In various raids conducted during the past few months, some public servants including
those belonging to group 'C' and 'D' categories have been found to have amassed crores of
rupees which is beyond their known sources of income. These assets are alleged to have
been acquired through illegal gratifications. Thus, a provision should be made in the Act to
find out how and from where such assets were acquired by the public servants. Obtaining
prior sanction from the competent authority to initiate the process of prosecution against
public servants accused of corruption is a major stumbling block. There is a popular perception
in the country that no serious and meaningful effort is being made to prevent corruption. It
is therefore, necessary that the process of sanctioning prosecution should be completed
within a stipulated time frame.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHOOPENDRA  SINGH
February  21, 2012.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988.
(49 OF 1988)
* * * * * *
7. Whoever, being, or expecting to be a public servant, accepts or obtains or agrees to
accept or attempts to obtain from any person, for himself or for any other person, any
gratification whatever, other than legal remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or
forbearing to do any official act or for showing or forbearing to show, in the exercise of his
official functions, favour or disfavour to any person or for rendering or attempting to render
any service or disservice to any person, with the Central Government or any State Government
or Parliament or the Legislature of any State or with any local authority, corporation or
Government company referred to in clause ( c) of section 2, or with any public servant,
whether named or otherwise, shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall be not less
than six months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * * *
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no
police officer below the rank,—
(a) in the case of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, of an Inspector of
Police;
(b) * * * * * *
(c) * * * * * *
Provided that if a police officer not below the rank of an Inspector of Police is authorised
by the State Government in this behalf by general or special order, he may also investigate
any such offence without the order of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first
class, as the case may be, or make arrest therefor without a warrant:
Provided further that an offence referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section
13 shall not be investigated without the order of a police officer not below the rank of a
Superintendent of Police.
* * * * * *
19. (1) * * * * * *
(2) Where for any reason whatsoever any doubt arises as to whether the previous
sanction as required under sub-section (1) should be given by the Central Government or
the State Government or any other authority, such sanction shall be given by that Government
or authority which would have been competent to remove the public servant from his office
at the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed.
* * * * * *
4
Public servant
taking
gratification
other than
legal
remuneration
in respect of
an official
act.
Persons
authorised to
investigate.
Previous
sanction
necessary for
prosecution.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Bhoopendra Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4168LS(S3)—14.03.2012.