1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI S. SEMMALAI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.   This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2011.
2.  After article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(6) Any special provision referred to in clause (5) for reservation of seats in
educational institutions for socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or
for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes made by any law by the State shall
ensure that the quota of seats for socially and educationally backward classes and for
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is, as far as possible, in accordance with
their percentage to the total population in its jurisdiction.”.
Short title.
Bill No.  21 of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article 15.5
10

2
3. In article 16 of the Constitution, after clause (4B), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(4C) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for reservation in excess of fifty per cent. of total number of posts, by law, in
appointments or promotions to any classs or classes of posts, in services under State
in favour of any socially and educationally backward class of citizens or for the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, if the population of the socially and
educationally backward classes and the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
exceeds fifty per cent. of the total population in its jurisdiction.”
5
Amendment
of article 16.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Affirmative action by the State for advancement of marginalized and deprived sections
of the society is an ineluctable social necessity. Empirical and research studies conducted
have invariably concluded that affirmative action programmes are beneficial to the under
privileged persons. Despite enactment of several laws by the Union and State Governments
and constitutional provisions, social and economic upliftment of weaker sections of the
society continues to be a far cry.
After the judgement of the Apex Court in Indira Sawhney V. Union of India (AIR 1993
SC 477), several High Courts in different States have struck down legislative measures,
intended to improve the condition of the deprived sections of society, on the ground of
violating the basic structure of the Constitution. As a matter of fact, no judicial ruling has so
far clearly defined and demarcated "the basic structure of the Constitution."
In many States, the population of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes are in majority and therefore, the ceiling of fifty per cent. (Quantitative
limitation) on reservation should be done away with. For example, in the State of  Tamil Nadu,
reservation to the extent of sixty-nine per cent. has been provided to the persons belonging
to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes and it requires
constitutional protection.
Unless sufficient safeguards are provided in the Constitution, any affirmative action
by the State towards improving the conditions of socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens including the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in  the fields of
education and employment will be set at naught by judicial intervention. It is, therefore,
proposed to amend the Constitution with a view to enable the State to provide reservation
in excess of fifty per cent. of total number of seats and posts in favour of persons belonging
to the Other Backward Classes including the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in
the matters of admission in educational institutions and in posts and services under the
States for their progressive advancement.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; S. SEMMALAI
February 15, 2011.

4
Equality of
opportunity in
matters of
public
employment.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*******
PART III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General
*******
15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) * * * * *
(3) * * * * *
(4) * * * * *
(5)  Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the
State from making any special provisions, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) * * * * *
(3) * * * * *
(4) * * * * *
(4A) * * * * *
(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering any unfilled
vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any
provision for reservation made under clause (4) or clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies
to be filled up in any succeeding year or years and such class of vacancies shall not be
considered together with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for
determining the ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.
*******
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.

GMGIPMRND—7136LS(S3)—17-03-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri S. Semmalai, M.P.)