AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

_——

22. AUG ८005

.
५९5.

Bill No. 21 of 2003
in ee ee H

. THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
By |
Dr. Nitis SeNGupta, ७.7.
A
BILL
है कक to amend the Constitution of India. | a
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003. | Short title.

2. After article 356 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely,— Insertion of

new article

356A.
| “356A. (/) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, as soon as the Election Automatic
5 Commission announces the dates for elections to the Legislative Assembly of a State, pee bares of
the State Legislative Assembly shall automatically stand dissolved and the President “8 "lve

Assembly of

- . a State during
a शक : G elections.

(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Government of the

’ State and all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Governor or any
10 _ body or authority in the State; |

may by proclamation:—

(5) declare that the powers of the Legislature of the State shall be exercisable
by or under the authority of Parliament; ,



Amendment of
article 357.

(c) make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to the
President to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the object of the

proclamation, including provisions for suspending the operation of any provision
of this Constitution relating to any body or authority in the State:

_ Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorise the President to assume to himself

_ any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High Court, or to suspend in whole or in part

the operation of any provision of this Constitution relating to High Courts.

(2) A proclamation shall cease to operate on the expiration of a period of six months
from the date of issue of the proclamation or from the date on which the new Chief Minister
of the State enters upon his office, whichever is earlier.” |

3. In article 357 of the Constitution, in clause (/), for the words “under clause (J) of
article 356”, the words “under clause (/) of article 356 or article 356A” shall be substituted.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It has been widely reported that during elections in the States the ruling party resorts
_ to widespread rigging and manipulation of the electoral machinery. Party workers and State
Government officials are appointed as presiding and polling officers and even police personnel
drafted for duty at polling booths are used for partisan purposes. Also, the counting is
manipulated on a large scale. It is, therefore, necessary in the interest of fair elections to —
promulgate proclamation by the President in the States during the time of elections, i.e. from
the date of announcement of elections by the Election Commission until the new Chief -
Minister assumes the office.

The proclamation will automatically come into effect whenever elections are announced
by the Election Commission in a State. During this period the President shall assume all the
executive functions of the State Government and Parliament shall exercise all the legislative
powers in respect of that State

The proclamation shall cease to operate on the expiration of a period of six months
from the date of issue of the proclamation or from the date on which the new Chief Minister
of the State enters upon his office, whichever is earlier

The Bill, if enacted, will prove an effective measure to check misuse of Government
machinery by the ruling party in the States and will give a boost to fair and democratic
process during elections in the States.

Hence this Bill.

New DEE NITISH SENGUPTA,
February, 28, 2003 : |


Exercise of |
legislative
powers under
Proclamation
issued under
article 356.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * * * *

357. (1) Where by a Proclamation issued under Clause (/) of article 356, it has been
declared that the Powers of the Legislature of the State shall be exercisable by or under the
authority of Parliament, it shall be competent— | :

(a) for Parliament to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the .
State to make laws, and to authorise the President to delegate, subject to such conditions
as he may think fit to impose, the power so conferred to any other authority to be
specified by him in that behalf;

(5) for Parliament, or for the President or other authority in whom such power to
make laws is vested under sub-clause (a), to make laws conferring powers and imposing _
duties, or authorising the conferring of powers and the imposition of duties, upon the
Union or officers and authorities thereof: |

(c) for the President to authorise when the House of the People is not in session
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State pending the sanction of such
expenditure by Parliament. ' 7

(2) Any law made in exercise of the power of the Legislature of the State by Parliament
or the President or other authority referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) which Parliament
or the President or such other authority would not, but for the issue of a Proclamation under
article 356, have been competent to make sh all, after the Proclamation has ceased to operate,
continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other

authority.

* * ह x * * * xk


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Dr. Nitish Sengupta, M.P.) _

MGIPMRND—8307LS—21.03.2003.