TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE PERSONS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE (IDENTIFICATION)
BILL, 2007
By
SHRI  ADHALRAO SHIV AJI PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the identification of persons living below poverty line and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Persons Living Below Poverty Line (Identification)
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) “Board” means the Board for Identification of Persons Living Below the
Poverty Line set up under section 3;
(iii) “List” means list of persons living below poverty line published by the
nodal authority under section 7;
(iv) “nodal authority” in relation to a district means the District Collector of that
district;
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
Bill No.  21 of 2007
5
10

2
SERVER 4 BILL 2004 / LOK SABHA /265LS
(v) “person living below poverty line” means any person whose name has been
published in the list by the nodal authority under section 10; and
(vi) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Board to be known as the Board for
Identification of Persons Living Below Poverty Line.
(2) The Prime Minister shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the Board.
(3) The Board shall consist of the following members—
(i) the Union Minister of Finance;
(ii) the Union Minister of Planning and Statistics;
(iii) the Union Minister of Rural Development;
(iv) the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission; and
(v) the Ministers-in-charge of the Government of States dealing with matters
relating to Planning.
(4) For the effective implementation of this Act, the Board may engage the services of
such consultants or specialists, as it may deem fit.
4. (1) It shall be duty of the Board to fix the criteria to be applied for determining the
persons living below poverty line.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Board shall take into consideration   the
following factors, namely:—
(i) the total income of the person;
(ii) his family size;
(iii) his monthly food consumption;
(iv) the area of land holding, if any, held by him;
(v) his indebtedness;
(vi) such other factors, as the Board may deem fit:
Provided that the Board may fix different criteria for the purpose of determining
persons living below poverty line for different States and regions.
5. The Central Government shall give wide publicity to the criteria fixed by the Board
to determine persons living below the poverty line.
6. The Board shall review the criteria fixed under section 4 once in every five years.
7. It shall be the duty of the nodal authority in every district to identify the persons
living below the poverty line and publish the list, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed, of such persons.
Setting up of
a Board for
Identification
of Persons
Living Below
Poverty
Line.
Fixing of
criteria to
determine
persons
living below
poverty line
by the Board.
Publicity to
crtieria fixed
by the Board.
Review of
criteria fixed
by the Board.
Nodal
authority to
identify and
publish the
list of
persons
living below
poverty line.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
SERVER 4 BILL 2004 / LOK SABHA /265LS
8. (1) Any person who meets the criteria fixed by the Board under section 4 may apply,
in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, to the nodal authority for inclusion of his
name in the List of persons living below poverty line.
(2) On receipt of an application made under sub-section (1), the nodal authority shall
cause an enquiry to be made, in such manner, as may be prescribed, within a period of thirty
days.
(3) The nodal authority shall, if satisfied from the enquiry report, include the name of
such person in the List of persons living below poverty line.
9. (1) Any person, who objects to the inclusion or omission of any name in the List,
may file a complaint with the nodal authority in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of a complaint made under sub-section ( 1), the nodal authority shall,
after giving the complainant and the affected person an opportunity of being heard, dispose
off the complaint in such manner as may be prescribed, within a period of thirty days from the
date of receipt of such complaint.
10. The nodal authority shall review and revise the List of persons living below poverty
line in its jurisdiction from time to time.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, all
persons whose names have been included in the List published by the nodal authority, shall
be eligible to avail of the benefits of any welfare scheme or programme initiated by the
appropriate Government in the area under the jurisdiction of the nodal authority.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Application
for inclusion
of a name in
the List.
Complaint
against
inclusion or
omission of a
name in the
List.
Review and
revision of
the List.
Welfare
schemes or
programmes
initiated by
the
appropriate
Government.
5
10
15
20
Power to
make rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Determining the criteria for identification of persons living below the poverty line has
always been a bone of contention, as no proper guideline has been issued by the Government
in this regard. Consequently, welfare schemes initiated by the Government run into rough
weather as these schemes do not reach the targeted sections of the society.
Therefore, it is necessary to identify the persons living below the poverty line and to
extend the benefits of welfare schemes to them. The Bill seeks to provide for setting up of a
Board to be known as the Board for Identification of Persons Living Below Poverty Line to
fix the criteria for identification of persons living below the poverty line. The criteria fixed by
Board can be used by the appropriate authority while extending the benefits of welfare
schemes for poor persons launched by the appropriate Governments.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ADHALRAO SHIVAJI PA TIL
November 8,  2006.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Board to be known as the Board for
Identification of Persons Living Below Poverty Line to fix the criteria for identification of
persons living below poverty line in the country. Clause 5 provides for wide publicity of the
criteria fix by the Board. Clause 7 provides, inter alia, for the publication of the List of
persons living below poverty line by the nodal authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores is likely to be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for identification of persons living below poverty line and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—265LS(S5)—20.02.2007.