5
Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 21 of 2023
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
Amendment of 
article 214.
 2.  In article 214 of the Constitution, for the words, ‘High Court for each 
State’, the words, ‘High Court for each State to be known by the name of the State’                       
shall be substituted. 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Maharashtra Government had issued an order in the year 1960, which 
clearly stated that the ‘Bombay High Court’ would henceforth be known as the 
‘Maharashtra High Court’. But this order was not implemented. Bombay was 
renamed Mumbai in the year 1995, but the name of Bombay High Court remained 
the same. Since, the city called Bombay no longer exists, but the High Court is on 
the name of ‘Bombay’ only, which is not appropriate.
 The pronunciation of the word ‘Maharashtra’ connotes special significance in 
the life of a Maharashtrian. Therefore, its use should find expression in the name of 
the High Court also. It is much needed to change the name of “Bombay High Court” 
to “Maharashtra High Court” for implementation of a clause of the Maharashtra 
Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1960 for the protection 
of the distinctive culture, heritage and traditions of the people of the State of 
Maharashtra.
 In this context, it is also to be noted that in a PIL to rename “Bombay High 
Court” as “Maharashtra High Court”, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order dated 
03.11.2022 has mentioned that this matter involves parliamentary procedures. 
Hence, it cannot be interfered with by the courts and, however, if such a change is 
to be made, it should be done through a parliamentary or legislative body.
 Therefore, alongwith the request that in article 214 of the Constitution for the 
words “There shall be a High Court for each State”, the words “There shall be a 
High Court by the name of the State for each State” shall be substituted.  It is also 
forwarded that the concerned authorities of other States may also be directed to 
change the names of their High Courts in accordance with the names of the States 
in which they are situated.
 Hence this Bill.
    New Delhi;                       GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
December 12, 2022
3

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .) 