As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No, 21 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
Sunt ANANT GANGARAM Grete, M.P.
A
BILL
farther to amend the Constitution of India.
| itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.

2. In clause (2) of article 103 of the Constitution of India for the words "Election
ission", the words "Electoral Council” shall be substituted.

3. After article 324 of the Constitution of India, the following article shall be inserted,
ai
"324A. (1) There shall be set up an Electoral Council consisting of the Chairman of

‘ouncil of States, the Speaker of the House of the People, the Chief Election
ioner and two eminent jurists to be appointed by the President.

(2) The Chairman of the Council of States shall be the Chairman of the Electoral
il.

(3) The Electoral Council shall formulate the electoral policy and have the power
ew decisions taken by the Election Commission in the discharge of its functions."

- 3DEC 2004

Short title

Amendment of
article 103

Insertion of new
article 324A.

Electoral
Council


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The role of Election Commission as seen during earlier elections has become the
subject matter of intense debate, The decisions of the Election Commission have been both
criticised or acclaimed by the political parties, groups depending upon their political ideologies.

Article 324 of the Constitution vests in the Election Commission the power of
superintendence, direction and control of elections which is inherently an administrative
Power. The Election Commission cannot encompass policy decisions which impinge on the
functions of the executive and legislature. Even the judicial intervention had to be sought to
resolve certain controversial decisions of the Commission. This has created an unsavoury
and anomalous situation,

‘The time has come to review the provisions of the Part XV of the Constitution. An
“Electoral Council" consisting of the Chairman Rajya Sabha, Speaker Lok Sabha, Chief
Election Commissioner and two eminent jurists should be constituted to review the decisions
of the Election Commission. It will enhance transparency and credibility of the role of the
Election Commission.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Detnt; ANANT GANGARAM GEETE.
June 22,2004,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of an Electoral Council consisting of the
Chairman of the Council of States, the Speaker of the House of the People, the Chief Election
Commissioner and two eminent jurists to be appointed by the President. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh per annum.

Itis also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakh.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

Decision on 103. (1) . . . * . . . . .

questions as (0
disqualifications (2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the

of members. opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

* . . * * . . . . .


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Anant Gangaram Geete, M.P,)

MGIPMRND—855LS—29.06.2004.