Bill No.  220 of 2015
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In  article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "sixty-two years", the
words "sixty-five years" shall be substituted.
3. In article 224 of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words "sixty-two years", the
words "sixty-five years" shall be substituted.
Short title
and extent.
Amendment
of article 217.
Amendment
of
article 224.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 217(1) of the Constitution provides that a Judge of the High Court shall hold
office until he attains the age of sixty-two years. Article 224(3) of the Constitution provides
that no person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court shall hold office
after attaining the age of sixty-two years. The age of retirement of the High Court Judges,
which was fixed at sixty years in the beginning, was enhanced to sixty-two years by the
Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Since then, no revision has taken place in
this regard.
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, in its 39th Report dated the 29th April, 2010, has recommended
to raise the retirement age of the Judges of the High Courts from sixty-two years to sixty-five
years. Further, most of the reasons adduced by the Fifth Central Pay Commission in support
of its recommendation for increasing the age of retirement of the Central Government
employees, such as global practices, increase in life expectancy, improved health standards,
need for utilization of experience and wisdom of senior employees, etc. would apply to the
Judges as well. Besides, many Judges after their retirement are being appointed by the
Government in various Tribunals, Commissions and such other bodies which is antithesis
and not in consonance with the provisions as well as spirit of the Constitution. The increase
in age of retirement of Judges will restrict their re-employment after retirement. Hence, in view
of this, it is expedient to enhance the age of retirement of a Judge of the High Court from
sixty-two to sixty-five years.
In view of the present state of vacancies of Judges and heavy pendency of cases in
the High Courts, it is imperative to increase the age of retirement of the Judges of the
High Courts by three more years which would restrict occurrence of new vacancies on
account of superannuation of existing Judges. This would definitely overcome the problem
of backlog in vacancies and clear the pendency of cases in the High Courts without exerting
pressure of appointment of new Judges on account of new vacancies.
It is, therefore, proposed to increase the age of retirement of Judges of the High Courts
from sixty-two years to sixty-five years.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY
July 6, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation with the Chief Justice of  India, the Governor of
the State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the
Chief Justice of High Court, shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as
provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:
* * * *
224. ( 1) * * * *
(2) * * * *
(3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court shall hold
office after attaining the age of sixty-two years.
* * * *
Appointment
and
conditions of
the Office of
a Judge of a
High Court.
Appointment
of additional
and acting
Judges.
3

GMGIPMRND—1507LS(S3)—28.07.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P .P. Chaudhary, M.P.)