1
THE  BAN ON THE USE OF MICROBEADS IN COSMETIC
PRODUCTS BILL,  2018
By
SHRI A.P. JITHENDER REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for banning of use of microbeads in cosmetic products and for matters
connected therewith
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Use of Microbeads in Cosmetic Products
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends fo the whole of India
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No.  220 of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) 'microbeads' means a water-insoluble solid plastic particle that is less than
five millimetres in size;
(b) "plastic" means material which contains as an essential ingredient a high
polymer such as polyethylene terephthalate, high density polymers, vinyl, low density
polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene resigns or multi-material like acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene, polyphenylene oxide, polycarbonate, polybutylene terephthalate;
(c) 'rinse-off cosmetic products' means any article, substance or mixture of
substances intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or sprayed on, or introduced
into, or otherwise applied to, the human body or any part thereof, or any other areas,
surface or thing for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the
appearance, other than for medical purposes or medical devises, and includes any
article intended for use as a component of cosmetic, followed by prompt and specific
removal of the product (or any residue of the product) by washing or rinsing with
water, rather than leaving it to wear off or wash off, or be absorbed or shed, in the
course of time;
(d) "prescribe" means prescribed by rule made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anythiing contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall use, manufacture, sell or trade in any rinse-off cosmetic product, which uses
microbeads as an ingredient.
4. Whoever violate the provision of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment for
a term which may extend up to one year and/or with fine which shall not be less than rupees
ten thousand but which may extend upto rupees fifteen thousand.
5. Where an offence punishable under section 3 has been registered, the Session
Court having jurisdiction shall adjudicate within twelve months after the date on which
evidence sufficient in the opinion of the prosecutor to justify the proceedings comes to their
knowledge.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in sessio, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Prohibition on
use of
microbeads in
any rinse-off
cosmetic
product.
Penalty.
Time limit for
prosecution of
offence.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to a study, a truckload of plastic finds its way into our oceans every
minute. The extent of plastic pollutions is so, that at the  current rate of disposal of plastic
into our oceans, there is expected to be more plastic in our ocean than marine life in terms of
total weight. This raises an alarm, that we must pay heed to.
Increasing plastic chokes up the marine ecosystem—while larger chunks of plastic
entrap and strangle marine life such dolphins, turtles, whiles and shark, smaller pieces of
plastic are swallowed by smaller fish, crustaceans and even phytoplankton. This plastic
consumption can accumulate as the food chain goes higher, thus potentially ending up in
or very own food plate. Thus, instead of mitigating the effects of plastic pollution, the
primary response to reducing marine pollution, is in reducing the amount of waste generated
at the source, and this Bill seeks to address this fundamental problem.
Microbeads is one such category of plastic which account for a small percentage of
plastic pollution in marine ecosystem. They measure from one micron, to five millimetre in
size. Given their size, they are the hardest to be collected and recycled, as opposed to bulky
plastic waste material that can be simply fished out, and thus are released into open oceans
having escaped sewage treatment plants.
Microbeads from either by breaking down of larger fragments of plastic material,
making them secondary plastic, they are also manufactured to be used in cosmetic products
such as facial soaps or body bath scrubs etc. These products are not absolutely essential
in our day-to-day life since they are mere beauty-enhancing products. Several Indian
institutions have attested to the same, and the National Green Tribunal has issued several
directives in this respect.
Thus, in its endeavour to make the country, plastic-free, this Bill intends to ban the
production and use of primary micro beads in such personal care-products. It marks a
beginning in this late-fight against micro plastic pollution in our oceans, and signals a
reduced dependence on plastic for the 21st century India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A. P.  JITHENDER REDDY
November 26, 2018
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for banning of use of microbeads in cosmetic products and for matters
connected therewith
————
(Shri A. P. Jithender Reddy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2316LS(S3)—19-12-2018.