1
THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING OF GIRL CHILD FOR
COMMERCIAL PURPOSES BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide  for the  prevention of  trafficking  of  girl  child  for commercial purposes by
forcing her into prostitution or for promiscuous sexual acts in the garb of adventurous
tourism or otherwise and for providing deterrent punishment including capital
punishment for such commercialized trafficking and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of  Trafficking  of  Girl  Child for
Commercial Purposes  Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  221 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "commercial trafficking of girl child" includes pushing or forcing the girl child
into prostitution in order to earn money therefrom or using the girl child for any
unlawful or immoral purpose or procuring or supplying the girl child for such purpose
by charging or earning money or hiring or obtaining possession of a girl child for
promiscuous sexual purposes by any person including foreign tourists;
(c) "girl child" means a female who is below the age of eighteen years;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the
same meanings, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, commercial trafficking of girl child in any manner or purposes whatsoever, is hereby
prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
whoever,—
(a) abets or induces, by any means including emotional blackmail, a girl child to
have sexual intercourse or unnatural sex with any person including foreign tourist in
return for money, notwithstanding the family relation of such girl child with the accused
or any prevailing custom, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life and
also with fine which may extend to rupees two lakh;
(b) forces or pushes, by using any coercive or cruel means, any girl child into
prostitution or for unnatural sexual acts for earning money or otherwise shall be
punished with death;
(c) acts as an agent in commercial trafficking of girl child shall be punished with
imprisonment which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to life
imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh;
(d) lures, procures or kidnaps any girl child for commercial trafficking of such girl
child shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than ten years but may extend to life imprisonment and also with a fine which may
extend to rupees five lakh;
(e) owns or runs a brother or uses any house, premises or hotel to keep a girl
child as prostitute or sex worker, such owner or manager by whatever name known
shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to rupees
five lakh;
(f) hires, procures or obtains possession of a girl child for promiscuous sexual
intercourse or indulge in unnatural sexual acts with her shall be punishable,
notwithstanding the foreign citizenship of the accused, with life imprisonment and
also with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh;
(g) dedicates a girl child as Devdasi or Bhavin or by whatever name called, who
ultimately ends up in prostitution, notwithstanding that accused is a natural guardian
of the girl child or related to her in any manner shall be punished with imprisonment
which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years and also with a fine
which may be extended to rupees two lakh.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of
commencement of this Act, formulate a national policy for the rescue, rehabilitation and
welfare of the girl child covered under this Act.
Prohibition of
commercial
trafficking of
girl child.
Penalties.
Penalties.
Rescue,
Rehabilitation
and Welfare
measures.
45 of 1806.
104 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the measures
referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) rescue of the girl child forced into commercial trafficking through the
local police by making it mandatory for the police to raid the brothels and such other
places within its territorial jurisdiction where the girl child is kept or has reasonable
grounds for believing that girl child is kept therein;
(b) taking custody of the rescued girl child and as far as practicable reunite her
with her family and in case she is homeless or without natural guardians provide her
boarding, lodging and other facilities in children home established by the appropriate
Government for the purpose;
(c) welfare measures like free medical care, education including vocational
technical and medical education and training  wherever required;
(d) provision of employment in public employment through reservation and
other means;
(e) marrying the girl child when she becomes major and costs for which to be
borne by the appropriate Government;
(f) such other measures as may be deemed necessary for the welfare and
rehabilitation of the girl child covered under this Act.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
7. (1) The Offences under this Act shall be tried by the Fast Track Courts to ensure
expeditious trial of such offences.
(2) The trial shall be held in camera on daily basis till the case is decided and judgement
delivered.
(3) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Fast Track Courts
within its territorial jurisdiction as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for the establishment and running of Fast Track
Courts,  Children Homes and for other purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Offences to be
tried by Fast
Track Courts.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
30
35
40
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our country there was a time when girl child used to be worshipped as deity and this
ritual still persists in some parts particularly during Navratras. But the fact remain that the
girl child is most unwanted in our country today. Most families and married couples do not
want a daughter in the family and indulge in rampant sex determination tests and female
foeticides in the country resulting in huge gap in the sex ratio in most parts of the country
which is a major cause of concern. However, in case a girl child is born, she is neglected and
treated shabbily. The girl child of poor families in a new phenomena are being pushed into
flesh trade for commercial gains and their trafficking is going on a very large scale in the name
of adventure tourism particularly in places of tourism importance in the country. Since, the
girl child prostitute fetch more money than the women prostitutes from the prospective
clients more and more adolescent girls are being forced into flesh trade by the professional
pimps, anti-social elements, organized criminal gangs, underworld dons, brothel keepers,
hoteliers, tour operators and in many cases even by their natural guardians and near and
dear ones. There are some tribes who traditionally subsist on prostitution and they push
their girls in this profession at their tender age. In other cases, the girls are generally lured on
the promise of a decent and luxurious life and then forced into trafficking. Thousands of
minor and adolescent girls go missing from various parts of the country every year and most
of them remain untraced. In fact these unfortunate girls are kidnapped for prostitution for
commercial gains. It has also been noticed that pimps become active when the areas, mostly
in villages and remote areas, are affected by natural calamities to lure the poverty stricken girl
child into their net for using them for commercial trafficking. Since the earning in this trade is
very high, the girls are even imported from our neighbouring countries like Nepal,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, etc. for commercial trafficking by the gangs having international
connections. This commercialization is gaining momentum because adventure tourism is
also becoming popular throughout the globe and tourists do indulge in sex tourism for which
they spend large amount of money and the locals are always ready to provide them with
minor girls. Of course, we cannot and should not blame all the tourists but it is happening in
many parts of the country. Similarly, in some parts of our country, young girls are dedicated
to temples as Devdasi or Bhavin and then forced into flesh trade. Now the lives of these
innocent girls have been endangered due to spread of deadly AIDS and other sexually
transmitted diseases. In a welfare State like ours, it has become necessary to stop this
trafficking of girl child for commercial purposes by the State by providing deterrent
punishment to the offenders including capital punishment so as to save the innocent girl
child from the clutches of cunning traffickers and also from AIDS and other sexually transmitted
diseases. The State has also to undertake their proper rehabilitation and welfare.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH  RANJAN
July 6, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for rehabilitation and other welfare measures for the girl
child who is rescued from prostitution. Clause 7 provides of the establishment of Fast Track
Courts for trying the offences. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide funds for the establishment and running of Fast Track Courts, Children Homes, etc.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees ten thousand crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty thousand crore is also likely to
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide  for the  prevention of  trafficking  of  girl  child  for commercial purposes by
forcing her into prostitution or for promiscuous sexual acts in the garb of adventurous
tourism or otherwise and for providing deterrent punishment including capital
punishment for such commercialized trafficking and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1488LS—28.07.2015.