1
THE NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT
COMMISSION BILL, 2018
By
SHRI NIHAL CHAND CHAUHAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of National Sports Development Commission for the overall
development of sports, improving the quality of basic sports facilities in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Sports Development Commission Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 221 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Commission" means the National Sports Development Commission
constituted under section 3;
(b) "Fund" means the Sports Development Fund Constituted under section 7;
(c) "sports" means all types of sports played at National and International level;
and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission to be known as the National Sports Development Commission for carrying
out the provisions of this Act.
(2) The National Sports Development Commission shall consist of:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) five members;
(c) such number of experts associated with the field of sports as may be necessary
for development of all sports; and
(d) ex- sports persons having recognition as advisors and who have represented
the country,
to be appointed by Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff as may be
required along with technical Experts to the Commission for the effective management and
functioning of the Commission.
(4) The salary and allowances payable and other terms and conditions of appointment
of the Chairperson, members, experts, advisors and officers and staff of the Commission
shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. Every State Government shall send detailed information to the Commission with
regard to the following:—
(a) total number of National and International level players participated in sports
events in the State;
(b) participation of the State in different sports at National and International
level and corresponding results;
(c) level of basic facilities related with sports in the State;
(d) exploring the potential of  fresh talents in rural areas; and
(e) making list of popular sports competitions and their results at State level.
5. (1) The Commission shall, after obtaining information from all the States regarding
different sports and players in the State, from time to time shall, make the following suggestions
to the State Governments:—
(a) expansion of the scope of the sports and achieving excellence at National
and International level;
(b) development of structural frame work currently working and improving its
quality;
(c) providing assistance to the National Sports Federations and other Institution
associated with sports;
(d) strengthening the sports by imparting training in sports;
Definitions.
Constitution
of National
Sports
Development
Commission.
Obligation of
State
Governments
to send
information
about sports
and players to
the Commis-
sion.
Suggestions to
the State
Governments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(e) encouraging the players associated with sports at all levels;
(f) encouraging the participation of women, backward tribals and budding youth
at rural level; and
(g) encouraging the interest of people towards all types of National Sports.
(2) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1), appoint a
group of experts to analyse and study the assistance and resources being provided by it to
the Commission.
6. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Fund to be known as Sports Development Fund for implementing the provisions of this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of Sports
Development
Fund.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a National Sports Development
Commission for improving the quality of basic sports facilities and development of sports in
the country. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson, members, experts and advisors
and officers and staff to the Commission. Clause 5 provides for appointment of group of
experts. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of a Sports Development Fund. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees hundred crore per annum will be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In a vast country like India, there is no dearth of talent but despite having so many
talented persons, we have not been able to establish as a sports power at the international
level. Except one or two sports, we are unable to perform according to our talent. There has
been some improvement today in the field of football and olympic events as compared to
previous years, but still there is scope of  improvement in this regard.
The need is to establish a National Sports Development Commission to give due
attention to the issues related with all round development of sports in the country and
especially the talents in  rural areas and women players. A framework is required to be
prepared in order to improve the performance of India in the competitions organised at
International level. Till now, only some selected categories of sports have got special attention
in the country due to which hidden talents in various fields of sport has found it difficult to
make much headway. All categories of sports require equal attention in addition to
strengthening of basic infrastructure of sports in the country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to establish a National Sports Development Commission for
the overall development of sports, improving the quality of basic sports facilities in the
country and to make India as a sports power.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NIHAL CHAND CHAUHAN
November  20, 2018.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of  National Sports Development Commission for the overall
development of sports, improving the quality of basic sports facilities in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2520LS(S3)—19-12-2018.