THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI A.P. JITHENDER REDDY, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO DEFEND HUMAN RIGHTS
3. Right of every person to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms.
4. Right to form association for protection and realization of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
5. Rights to solicit and receive resources for protection and realization of human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
6. Right to know and seek, etc. of information about human rights and fundamental
freedom.
7. Right to develop and discuss new ideas and principles.
8. Right to communicate with non-Governmental, Governmental and non-Governmental,
regional human rights bodies and mechanisms.
9. Right to participate in public affairs
10. Right to peaceful assembly
11. Right to represent and advocate
12. Right to freedom of movement
13. Right to privacy
14. Freedom from intimidation or reprisal
15. Freedom from defamation and stigmatization
16. Right to exercise cultural rights and development of personality
Bill No.  222  of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
17. Right to effective remedy and full reparation
18. Limitations on the rights of human rights defenders
19. Other rights and freedoms not affected
CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
20. Obligation to respect, promote, protect and fulfill the rights of human rights defenders
21. Obligation to facilitate the activities and work of human rights defenders
22. Obligation to provide free access to materials relating to human rights, socio-economic
and ecological justice and fundamental freedoms
23. Obligation to prevent and to ensure protection against intimidation or reprisal and
arbitrary or unlawful intrusion and interference
24. Obligation to conduct investigation
25. Obligation to ensure effective remedy and full reparation
26. Obligation to make intimidation and reprisal an offence
27. Obligation to promote and facilitate education on human rights, socio-economic policies
and ecology, sustainability and the role of human rights defenders
28. Obligation to implement protection and urgent protection measures
29. Obligation to provide assistance to human rights defenders abroad
CHAPTER IV
M
ECHANISM FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
30. Establishment of Mechanism for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
31. Consultation with civil society
32. Resources
33. Training and vetting
34. Power to remove difficulty
35. Act to have overriding effect
36. Power to make rules
(ii)

1
THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI A.P. JITHENDER REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
to ensure protection of individuals, groups, associations engaged in protection and
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the  Republic of India as
follows:
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
* * * * *
1.(1)This Act may be called the Protection of Human Rights Defenders Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 222 of  2018
Short title,
extent,
commence-
ment and
application.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(4) It shall apply to all human rights defenders under the jurisdiction, territory, or
control of India, without distinction of any kind such as sex, race, colour, language, religion
or conviction, political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, age, economic
position, property, marital status, birth, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, sex
characteristics or any other status.
* * * * *
2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means any agency, department, body established to
carry out respective functions to those enumerated in this Act and in respect of matters
relating to,—
(i) the Union territory without legislature, the Central Government;
(ii) the Union territory of Puducherry, the Government of that Union territory;
(iii) the Union territory of Delhi, the Government of that Union territory; and
(iv) the State, the State Government concerned.
(b) 'associate' means a person with whom the human rights defender acts to promote
and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(c) 'human rights defender' means any person who, individually or in association with
others, as a professional or voluntarily, seeks to promote protect or strive for the protection
and realization of human rights, socioeconomic and social justice and fundamental freedoms,
including but not limited to individuals who are recognized as:
(i) human rights advocates;
(ii) human rights activists;
(iii) social justice activists;
(iv) women rights activists;
(v) minority rights activists;
(vi) environment activists;
(vii) disabled people rights activists;
(viii) Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender rights activists;
(ix) journalists and media persons or workers;
(x) trade unionists and labour rights Activists;
(xi) Right To Information activists; and
(xii) humanitarian workers;
(d) 'human rights and fundamental freedoms' means the rights and freedoms guaranteed
by, recognized in or declared by the Constitution, International Covenants, or customary
international law and enforceable by courts in India;
(e) 'intimidation or reprisal' means any form of violence, threat, retaliation, de facto or
de jure adverse discrimination, pressure of any other arbitrary or abusive action or threat
related to a person's status, work or activity as a human rights defender including proposed,
attempted or imputed work or activity, directed at:—
(i) the human rights defender;
(ii) an associate of the human rights defender;
(iii) a legal or other representative of the human rights defender appointed to
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
conduct the affairs of or to otherwise act on behalf of the human rights defender;
(iv) a family member or relative of the human rights defender;
(v) a group, association, community or network, whether formal or informal, with
which the human rights defender is associate; or
(vi) the home, property or possessions of the human rights defender or any of
the other persons or entities mentioned under clauses (c), (d) and (f) of section 2; and
(f) "registered group, association or non-governmental organisation" means entities
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, the
Companies Act, 2013 and other relevant Central legislations.
CHAPTER II
R
IGHTS OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO DEFEND HUMAN RIGHTS
* * * * *
3. Every person, individually or in association with others, shall have the right to
promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights, socio-economic and
ecological justice and fundamental freedoms at the local, national, regional and international
levels.
4. Every person, individually or in association with others, shall have the right to form,
join and participate in groups, coalitions or networks of groups, associations and non-
Governmental organisations, whether formal or informal and whether registered or
unregistered, for the purpose of promoting and striving for the protection and realization of
human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice and fundamental freedom at local,
national, regional and international levels.
5. (1) Every person, individually or in association with others, shall have the right to
solicit, receive and utilise resources, including from domestic and international sources,
including Governmental, inter-Governmental, bilateral and multilateral platforms, philanthropic
and private sources and individual donors for the express purpose of promoting and striving
for the protection and realisation of human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice,
and fundamental freedoms.
(2) Any human rights defender disqualified by appropriate Government for failing to
uphold legal obligations as stated in laws governing financial accountability shall be barred
from receiving, disbursing and utilizing any financial contributions only after the human
rights defender has exhausted every legal remedy.
6. (1) Every person, individually or in association with others, shall have the right
to:—
(a) know, seek access, obtain, receive and hold information about all human
rights, socio-economic and ecological justice and fundamental freedoms, including
information regarding how those rights and freedoms are given effect in the legislative,
judicial and administrative systems;
(b) know, seek access, obtain, receive and hold such information from business
enterprises as may be necessary for exercising or protecting or assisting to exercise or
protect human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice or fundamental freedoms;
(c) freely publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and
knowledge on all human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice and fundamental
freedoms; and
Right of every
person to
promote and
protect human
rights and
fundamental
freedoms.
Right to form
association for
protection and
realization of
human rights
and
fundamental
freedoms.
Rights to
solicit and
receive
resources for
protection and
realization of
human rights
and fundamen-
tal freedoms.
Right to know
and seek, etc.
of information
about human
rights and
fundamental
freedom.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(d) study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in
practice, of all human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice, and fundamental
freedoms and through these and other means to draw public attention to those matters.
(2) The rights guaranteed under sub-section (1) may be exercised orally, in writing, in
print in the form of art or through any other media, whether online or offline.
7. Every person, individually or in association with others, shall have the right to
develop and discuss new ideas and principles which relate to promotion and protection for
human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice, and fundamental freedoms, and to
advocate their acceptance.
8. Every person, individually or in association with others, shall have the right to freely
communicate with non-Governmental, Governmental and inter-Governmental organisations,
international and regional human rights bodies, including subsidiary bodies, treaty bodies,
special procedures, special rapporteurs, mechanisms or experts with a mandate relevant to
human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice and fundamental freedoms.
9.(1) Every person, individually or in association with others, shall have the right to
participate effectively in the conduct of public affairs, including participation on a non-
discriminatory basis in the Government of one's country regarding human rights, socio-
economic and ecological justice and fundamental freedoms.
(2) The right guaranteed under sub-section (1) includes the right to:—
(a) submit to any public authority or agency, or agency or organisation concerned
with public affairs, criticism on or proposals for improving its functioning with respect
to human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice and fundamental freedoms;
(b) make recommendations to any public authority regarding legislative or
regulatory changes relating to human right, socio-economic and ecological justice and
fundamental freedoms;
(c) draw to the attention of any public authority any aspect of its work that may
hinder or impede the promotion, protection and realisation of human rights, socio-
economic and ecological justice and fundamental freedoms;
(d) draw to the attention of any public authority any action or omission by any
actor, private or public, that may involve or contribute to a violation of human rights,
socio-economic and ecological justice or fundamental freedoms; and
(e) freely publish, impart or disseminate to others any information submitted to
any public authority in the exercise of the rights set out in this Chapter.
(3) In case any competent authority which receives communication of the type referred
to in sub-section (2) shall confirm its receipt in writing within thirty days.
10. (1) Every person individually or in association with others, shall have the right to
meet or assemble peacefully as well as to participate in peaceful activities concerning human
rights, socio-economic and ecological justice, and fundamental freedoms, free from interference
that is arbitrary or unlawful by public authorities and private actors, at the local, national,
regional or international level.
(2) The right guaranteed under sub-section ( 1) includes the right to plan, organise,
participate in and disseminate information regarding peaceful activities concerning human
rights, socio-economic and ecological justice, and fundamental freedoms, including
demonstrations, protests, seminars and meetings whether conducted in a public or private
place.
11. (1) Every person individually and in association with others, shall have the right to
assist, represent or act on behalf of another person, group, association, organisation or
Right to
develop and
discuss new
ideas and
principles.
Right to
freely
communicate
with non-
Governmental
Organisations.
Right to
Participate
effectively in
conduct of
Public Affairs.
Right to meet
or assemble
peacefully.
Right to assist
on behalf of
other.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

5
institution in relation to the promotion, protection and exercise of human rights, socio-
economic and ecological justice, fundamental rights and freedoms, including at local, national,
regional and international levels.
(2) The right guaranteed under sub-section (1) shall include the right to:—
(a) complain about the policies and actions of public authorities with regard to
violations of human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice, and fundamental
freedoms, by petition or other appropriate means, to domestic judicial, administrative
or legislative authorities or any other competent authority;
(b) offer and provide professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant
advice;
(c) attend public hearings, proceedings and trials so as to form an opinion on
their compliance with national law and human rights and fundamental freedoms; and
(d) submit communications and information of the type referred to in section 9.
12. (1) Every person lawfully within the territory or subject to the jurisdiction including
the power or effective control of India shall, within that territory or place of jurisdiction, have
the right to liberty of movement and freedom to choose his or her residence and the right to
carry out his human rights activities in the entire territory or place of jurisdiction.
(2) No person lawfully within the territory of India shall be expelled, by means of an
individual measure or a collective measure from the territory of India wholly or partially on
account of his acts as a human rights defender.
(3) No person shall be deprived of the right to enter or leave the territory of India on the
grounds of or in association with his status, activities or work as a human rights defender.
13. (1) Every person individually or in association with others, shall have the right to
privacy.
(2) The right guaranteed under sub-section ( 1) includes the right of a human rights
defender to protect its privacy, including through encryption, and be free from intrusion and
interference that is arbitrary and unlawful in his or her family, home, places of work, possessions
and correspondence, both online and offline.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the words "intrusion and interference"
includes any form of surveillance, recording, search and seizer in association with his or her
legitimate activity or work as a human rights defender.
14. No person shall be subjected, individually or in association with others, to any .
form of intimidation or reprisal on the, grounds of or in association with the said individual's
status, activities or work as a human rights defender.
15. Every human rights defenders shall be protected from any form of defamation,
stigmatisation, or other harassment, whether offline or online, and whether by public
authorities or private actors, in association with his or her status, activities or works as a
human rights defender.
16. Every person individually or in association with others shall have the right to the
unhindered exercise of one's cultural rights in activities and work as a human rights defender,
including the right to challenge and change traditional customs and practices that violate
human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice and fundamental freedoms, and to the
free and full development of his personality.
17. (1) Every person individually or in association with others, shall have the right to
an effective remedy and full reparation in the event of a violation of the rights in this Chapter
or in breach of obligations under Chapter III.
Right to
freedom of
movement.
Right to
privacy.
Freedom from
intimidation or
reprisal.
Freedom from
defamation and
stigmatization.
Right to
exercise
cultural rights
and to
development
of personality.
Right to effec-
tive remedy
and full repa-
ration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(2) Anyone whose rights have been violated or who has been adversely affected by a
breach of obligations shall have the right to apply to a court or a tribunal of competent
jurisdiction to obtain such effective remedy and full reparation.
(3) Any of the following may file a complaint at the competent court or tribunal relating
to the violation of rights under Chapter II or in breach of obligations under Chapter III of this
Act, —
(a) the human rights defender;
(b) an associate of the human rights defender;
(c) a legal or other representative of the human rights defender appointed to
conduct the affairs of or to otherwise act on behalf of the human rights defender;
(d) a family member or relative of the human rights defender;
(e) a group, association, community or network, whether formal or informal, with
which the human rights defender is associate; or
(f) the home, property or possessions of the human rights defender or any of the
other persons or entities in sub-sections (b) to (e) above.
18. Every human rights defender, individually or in association with others, in exercising
rights in Chapter II, shall be subject only to limitations that are prescribed by law and in
accordance with international human rights obligations and standards, are reasonable,
necessary and proportionate, and are be solely for the purpose of securing due recognition
and respect of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of others and meeting the
requirements of public order and general welfare in democratic society.
19. Nothing in this Act shall affect any provisions which are more  conducive to the
recognition and protection of human rights defender and which may be contained in domestic
or international law or instruments.
CHAPTER III
O
BLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
20. Every public authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that:-
(a) the human rights and fundamental freedoms provided in Chapter II are effectively
guaranteed and ensured;
(b) all laws, policies and programs are consistent with the rights guaranteed under
Chapter II; and
(c) human rights defenders are able to undertake their activities and work in a safe and
enabling environment free from restriction.
21. (1) Every public authority shall take all necessary measures to facilitate and protect
the exercise of the rights in Chapter II.
(2) The obligation mentioned under sub-section (1) includes the obligation to:—
(a) permit and facilitate access in accordance with the law to places where a
person is deprived of liberty;
(b) permit and facilitate access to places and to information required by human
rights defenders to exercise their rights under Chapter II in accordance with the law;
(c) provide information about violations of human rights or fundamental freedoms
that may have occurred within the territory or subject to the jurisdiction, including the
power or effective control of India;
Limitations on
the rights of
human rights
defenders.
Other rights
and freedoms
not affected.
Obligation to
respect,
promote,
protect and
fulfill the
rights of
human rights
defenders.
Obligation to
facilitate the
activities and
work of
human rights
defenders.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(d) develop and implement policies and measures to promote, support and
enhance the capacity of human rights defenders to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms; and
(e) promote and publicly acknowledge the role, function, activities and work of
human rights defenders as legitimate and important.
22. Every public authority shall make freely available and accessible both offline and
online —
(a) international and regional human rights instruments;
(b) the Constitution of India, national laws and regulations;
(c) research, studies, reports, data, archives and other information and materials within
the possession of public authorities that relate to human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(d) reports and information submitted by India to international and regional human
rights bodies and mechanisms;
(e) minutes, reports and communications of international and regional human rights
bodies and mechanisms in which India is discussed;
(f ) documents and information related to the decisions or activities of national
authorities with competence in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms; and
(g) all such other information as may be necessary to secure or enable the exercise of
any human rights or fundamental freedoms under Chapter II or access to remedy for a
violation of any such right.
23. Every public authorities shall take all necessary measures to ensure,—
(a) the prevention of, and protection against, any intimidation or reprisal by any other
public or private actor; and •
(b) protection of human rights defenders against arbitrary or unlawful intrusion and
interference in his family, home, places of work, possessions and correspondence, both
offline and online.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the words "intrusion and interference"
includes any form of surveillance, recording, search and seizure in association with any
person's legitimate activity or work as a human rights defender without his consent.
24. (1) Whenever there is reasonable ground to believe that a human rights defender
has been killed, disappeared, tortured, ill-treated, arbitrarily detained, threatened or subject
to a violation of any of the rights in Chapter II, whether by a public authority or private actor
within the territory or subject to the jurisdiction, including the power or effective control of
India, the responsible authority must ensure that a prompt, thorough, effective and impartial
investigation is conducted with due diligence and is prosecuted as appropriate.
(2) An investigation pursuant to sub-section (1) shall take into account:—
(a) whether a motive for the violation of the rights of the human rights defender
included his or her status, activity or work as a human rights defender;
(b) whether there have been previous violations of the rights of the human
rights defenders or systematic violations of the rights of similarly situated human
rights defenders; and
(c) whether the violation was perpetrated, aided, abetted or supported by multiple
actors.
(3) During an investigation pursuant to sub-section ( 1), the responsible authority
shall consult with the mechanism established under section 34 and keep the victim or his
family, relatives or associates, informed of the status of the investigation.
Obligation to
provide free
access to
materials
relating to
human rights,
socio-economic
and ecological
justice, and
fundamental
freedoms.
Obligation to
prevent and
to ensure
protection
against
intimidation
or reprisal and
arbitrary or
unlawful
intrusion and
interference.
Obligation to
conduct
investigation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(4) The Central Government shall request such assistance from relevant international
or regional human rights bodies or mechanisms as is necessary to conduct an investigation
in conformity with sub-section (1).
(5) Where the responsible authority is unable or unwilling to conduct an investigation
pursuant to sub-section (1), India shall request assistance to conduct such an investigation.
25. Every public authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that an
effective remedy and full reparation are available and provided for violations of the rights in
Chapter II and for breach of the obligations in Chapter III.
26. An act of intimidation or reprisal, whether by a public or private actor, against a
person, on the grounds of or in association with his or her status, activities or work as a
human rights defender, shall be an offence and prosecuted by the competent authority and
subject to appropriate penalties which take into account the gravity of the offence.
27. Every public authority shall promote, facilitate and adequately resource teaching,
training and education about human rights and freedoms, socio-economic justice policies,
ecology sustainability, and the role of human rights defenders, including the provisions of
this Act, within all public departments and to all persons in this country.
28. Every public authority shall take all necessary measures at all levels to fully
and effectively implement protection and urgent protection measures determine under
Chapter IV .
29. (1) Every public authority shall take all necessary steps within their power in
conformity with national and international obligations and standards to provide assistance
to a human rights defender abroad who has been or may be subject to intimidation or reprisal
on the grounds of or in association with his or her status, activities or work as a human rights
defender.
(2) The assistance referred to in sub-section (1) may include, as required by the nature
of the intimidation or reprisal and the nationality of the human rights defender concerned,
the following:—
(a) receiving the human rights defender in the diplomatic mission in that country
or visiting the human rights defender at his or her home or places of work, or places
where a person is deprived of liberty;
(b) making official representations, whether public or confidential, in relation to
the human rights defender;
(c) attending or observing trials or legal proceedings involving the human rights
defender;
(d) monitoring and producing reports on the situation of the human rights
defender;
(e) issuing emergency or replacement travel documents;
Obligation to
ensure
effective
remedy and
full repara-
tion.
Obligation to
make
intimidation
and reprisal an
offence.
Obligation to
promote and
facilitate
education on
human rights,
socio-
economic
policies and
ecology
sustainability
and the role of
human rights
defenders.
Obligation to
implement
protection
and urgent
protection
measures.
Obligation to
provide
assistance to
human rights
defenders
abroad.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(f) obtaining medical care;
(g) providing details of local lawyers;
(h) providing details of local interpreters;
(i) contacting the family members of the human rights defender;
(j) arranging for someone to accompany the human rights defender to a safe
location or providing other relocation assistance; and
(k) providing financial assistance;
(1) providing emergency loans to enable the human rights defender to travel to
a safe location.
CHAPTER IV
MECHANISM FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
30. (1) The Union Ministry of Home Affairs shall establish a National Mechanism for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, which shall have responsibility within the
aforementioned Ministry for coordinating the protection of human rights defenders.
(2) The Mechanism shall, in consultation with the National Human Rights Commission,
National Commission for Women, National Commission for Scheduled Tribes, National
Commission for Scheduled Castes and other such commissions, along with the civil society
carry out the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(3) Without generality of the foregoing provisions, the Mechanism shall,—
(a) prevent intimidation or reprisal;
(b) protect human rights defenders from intimidation or reprisal;
(c) assist in ensuring investigation of, and accountability for, acts of intimidation
or reprisal against a human rights defender;
(d) direct and promote inter-agency and inter-departmental coordination to
prevent, protect against, investigate, and ensure accountability for acts of  intimidation
or reprisal; and
(e) promote and publicly acknowledge the legitimate and important role, function,
activities and work of human rights defenders.
(4) While undertaking the functions mentioned under sub-section (2), the Mechanism
may:—
(a) monitor and respond to the situation of human rights defenders in India,
including risks to their security, and legal and other impediments to a safe and enabling
environment that is conducive to their work;
(b) consult and work closely and cooperatively with human rights defenders in
the implementation of this Law;
(c) coordinate the implementation of this Law, including by developing protocols
and guidelines for this purpose, within a period no longer than one hundred and
eighty days of the entry into force of this Law;
(d) carry out assessments of risks, vulnerability or conflict at the National, State,
Regional or Local Levels, with the aim of identifying specific needs for the protection
of human rights defenders, including by undertaking gender based and collective risk
assessments;
(e) aid, assist and inform investigations for the purpose of prosecuting the
offences created under Section 28;
Establishment
of Mechanism
for the
Protection of
Human Rights
Defenders.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(f) monitor existing and draft legislation and inform the responsible competent
authority about the impact or potential impact of legislation on the status, activities
and work of human rights defenders, proposing legislative modifications where
necessary;
(g) advise all areas of government on the design and implementation of policies
and programmes to guarantee and protect the rights of human rights defenders under
this Law;
(h) monitor and prepare annual reports on the situation of human rights defenders
in India and make recommendations to the relevant authorities on the appropriate
measures to be taken to promote a safe and enabling environment for their work and to
mitigate and prevent the risks facing them, including by tackling the root causes of
violations against human rights defenders;
(i) propose and implement, or ensure the implementation of, prevention measures
and protection measures to guarantee the life, integrity, liberty, security and the work
of human rights defenders, giving particular attention to the situation and protection
needs of women human rights defenders and other human rights defenders at increased
risk;
(j) advise the responsible competent authority on the desired profiles, selection
procedure, income and training of all staff and security personnel with responsibility
towards the protection of human rights defenders;
(k) receive and assess applications for protection measures and implement the
appropriate protection measures, including emergency measures, in coordination with
other relevant authorities;
(l) disseminate information to the public about protection programmes for human
rights defenders and how to access them, and about the Mechanism's work,
guaranteeing transparency in regards to resource allocation;
(m) disseminate information to authorities and to the public about the UN General
Assembly Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and
Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, and the vital and legitimate role, function and work of human
rights defenders; and
(n) prepare and submit reports and communications on the situation of human
rights defenders in India to relevant international and regional human rights bodies
and mechanisms.
(o) Wherever there exists reasonable ground to believe that a human rights
defender has been killed, disappeared, tortured, ill-treated, arbitrarily detained,
threatened, or subject to a violation of any of the right in this Act, whether by a public
authority or private actor within the territory or subject to the jurisdiction, including
the power of effective control, of India, the law enforcement authorities within
jurisdiction over the matter shall ensure that a prompt, thorough, effective, impartial
investigation is conducted with due diligence and is prosecuted as appropriate.
(5) The Mechanism shall respect and maintain the confidentiality of the personal data
collected on human rights defenders.
(6) The Mechanism, together with independent experts and in consultation with civil
society, shall develop obligatory information management and digital security policies for
their staff and all other authorities with access to information received by it.
(7) The Mechanism, together with independent experts and in consultation with civil
society, shall carry out periodic reviews of the implementation of this Law and the Mechanism's
effective functioning.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
Provided that the first review shall be carried out within 18 months of the entry into
force of this Law.
(8) State Mechanisms for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders shall be established
at the State level, working under the Home Ministries of their respective States, with the
function of assisting the National Mechanism in fulfilling its functions described in
sub-section ( 2), while working with State Commissions on Women, Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other such Commissions wherever established, along with members
of the civil society.
31. The appropriate Government shall consult with human rights defenders and other
civil society actors in relation to all aspects of the work of the Mechanism.
32. (1) The Central Government shall provide adequate financial resources to the
Mechanism to enable it to fulfil its functions and exercise its powers fully and effectively.
(2) To fulfil the purposes of this Act and for the purpose of obtaining financial resources
additional to those in sub-section (1), the appropriate Government shall establish a Fund for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders.
(3) The Fund shall also be credited:—
(a) grants and loans from the public sector and the private sector; and
(b) contributions from domestic and foreign persons, groups, associations and
organisations and institutions.
(4) The Fund shall be utilised exclusively for the implementation of protection measures
and prevention measures and other acts authorised under this Act by the Mechanism and
other entities authorised by it.
(5) The Fund shall be administered with full transparency and a report of the Fund's
use shall be included in the Mechanism's annual report.
33. (1) Every person involved in the Mechanism, including security and law enforcement
officials, shall be appropriately shortlisted based on their proven record on adherence,
protection and promotion of human rights wherever permissible, vetted and shall receive
training prior to the commencement of their involvement, together with continuing training
designed to ensure full and effective implementation of the Law.
(2) The training under sub-section ( 1) shall include training on human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the situation and protection needs of victims and of more
vulnerable human rights defenders, specifically those working issues of Environment,
Minorities, DNTs, SCs/STs on sexual orientation, gender identity and sex characteristics
issues, those acting or working in rural and remote areas and women human rights defenders.
34. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
35. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Consultation
with civil
society.
Fund for the
Protection of
Human Rights
Defenders.
Training and
vetting.
Act to have
overriding ef-
fect.
Power to re-
move difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Constitution was a contemporary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (UDHR), having been constructed just a few years apart. Through the incorporation
of human rights and fundamental freedoms as enshrined in the UDHR, the Indian Constitution
set the legal platform for the protection and promotion of human rights. Laws such as the
Protection of Human Rights Act, 1994, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention
of Atrocities) Act, 1989, the Right to Information Act, 2005 and several others expanded the
scope of Part III of the Constitution by guaranteeing socio-economic and ecological justice.
Successive Governments have strengthened mechanisms ensuring adherence to the Indian
Constitution, and through the same, to the UDHR.
The very nature of human rights bestows upon the State the sole responsibility of
protecting an individual's, or a people's rights from being infringed. Yet, the State remains
capable of violating these rights as well. Given this inherent conflict of interest, the civil
society has been playing an increasingly important role in keeping checks and balances on
the State-ensuring that the State not only protects, but also promotes human rights, socio-
economic and ecological justice, and fundamental freedoms. In doing so, the individuals, or
the association of individuals who qualify as human rights defenders have been increasingly
victimized by those perpetrating violations on the rights and freedoms. As the scope of
human rights, socio-economic and ecological justice, and fundamental freedoms widens,
and the role of human rights defenders broadens, the number of attacks on them increases
from both, the State and private entities. Since protection afforded to human rights defenders
has remained the same despite the evolution of rights. Bill seeks to recognize, promote and
enhance the mechanism for the protection of those most vulnerable to violation of their
rights, the human rights defenders.
Aiming at rectifying this glaring lacuna, this Bill sets out to carry out three major
functions. Firstly, it reasserts that the rights and freedoms that an ordinary Indian citizen
enjoys are to be availed by a human rights defender. Secondly by recognizing that human
rights defenders, through the virtue of their work, require enhanced protection of their
rights, it establishes the obligations of the State in protecting them. Thirdly, given the
loopholes in the existing protection mechanism for human rights defender, this Bill seeks to
establish a new Mechanism, remedying existing problems, while pre-empting future
necessities of human rights defenders.
In an increasingly rights-oriented world, this Bill provides India the opportunity to
display its commitment to the principles laid down in the UDHR and the Indian Constitution.
The immediate enactment of this Bill has the potential of creating a ripple-effect; protecting
rights of human rights defenders establishes confidence amongst them in ensuring protection
and promotion of rights of other ordinary citizens. Thus, with the aim of affirming, promoting
and protect human rights, social and ecological justice rights and fundamental freedoms in
India.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; A.P. JITHENDER REDDY
November 28, 2018
13

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 30 of the Bill provides for establishment of Mechanism for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders. Clause 32 provides for the constitution of a Fund for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve recurring and
expenditure non-recurring. However, at this stage, it is difficult to estimate the expenditure to
be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
14

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
15

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to ensure protection of individuals, groups, associations engaged in protection and
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri A.P. Jithender Reddy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2467LS(S3)—19-12-2018.