Bill No. 222 of  2015
THE RICKSHAW PULLERS AND ROADSIDE MECHANICS
(FREEDOM TO EARN LIVELIHOOD) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for complete freedom to earn livelihood to the cycle rickshaw and cart
pullers and roadside mechanics by prohibiting the local police and personnel
of local bodies from impounding or taking away the tools, wares, stuff,
cycle rickshaw, cart, etc., so as to enable the poverty stricken and
unemployed youth and other citizens to earn their livelihood
without fear and feed their dependent families and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rickshaw Pullers and Roadside Mechanics (Freedom
to Earn Livelihood) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title
and extent.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "rickshaw puller" means a person who physically pulls a cycle rickshaw of
any kind which includes a hand cart in order to earn his livelihood; and
(d) "roadside mechanic" includes persons repairing bicycle, cycle rickshaw,
scooter, motor cycle and other two wheelers or motorized vehicles or those repairing
footwear, purses, utensils and other wares, electronic items, or any other such item by
the roadside or under a tree without erecting any permanent structure at the site and
without hindering the smooth traffic flow on the road.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
every rickshaw puller and roadside mechanic shall have complete freedom to earn his
livelihood without any hindrance or interference from any authority of the Government
including those of Police and local self-Government like Corporations and Municipalities.
(2) Any officer or employee of any authority of the Government who contravenes the
provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be guilty of dereliction of his duties and shall be
punished accordingly.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
officer or employee of any authority of local self-Government such as Municipalities,
Municipal Corporations, Municipal Councils or by whatever name known or called as well
as those of Police shall confiscate or impound or forcibly take away the articles, wares, tools,
bicycle, rickshaw, carts, etc. of a rickshaw puller or roadside mechanic.
5. For earning hassle free livelihood under the provisions of this Act, a rickshaw puller
or roadside mechanic shall not,—
(a) obstruct the public place such as roads, footpath, parks and such other
places declared as public places by the appropriate Government;
(b) obstruct the flow of traffic or vehicles and pedestrians; and
(c) contravene such other conditions as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
6. It shall be duty of the appropriate Government to ensure strict compliance of the
provisions of this Act to ensure freedom to earn livelihood to every rickshaw puller and
roadside mechanic within its territorial jurisdiction.
7. Any officer of local self-Government or of any Department of the appropriate
Government including Police, who contravenes the provisions of sections 3 or 4 shall,
notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law or service rules, be dismissed
from service forthwith and shall also be liable to fine which may extend upto two lakh
rupees.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9. The Central Government may give directions to the Government of any State for
implementing the provisions of this Act in the State.
Definitions.
Freedom to
earn
livelihood.
Local self-
Government
authorities
and Police
Personnel not
to confiscate
or impound
the articles,
wares, etc.
Conditions to
be followed
for earning
livelihod.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
compliance.
Penalty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to give
directions.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
11. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
15
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a vast country and after China, we have the largest population, in the globe.
With this population boom, our nation is facing the ever growing unemployment scenario
which does not match with the growing population. Employment generation is decreasing
and the number of unemployed is increasing rapidly. The problem has become more acute
due to global meltdown and recession all over the world. Government services are  becoming
scarce and so is the case of private sector. Agriculture, micro, small and medium industries
used to be biggest employment providers, but recession has taken the toll on micro, small
and medium industries. Agriculture has become the victim of vagaries of nature and slump
because of unremunerative price structure and fall in prices of commodities. Therefore, the
employment generation is not commensurate with the ever growing population.
In such a scenario, self employment appears to be the only way to tackle the
unemployment problem but due to financial constraints everybody cannot become self
employed. However, quite a large number of citizens try to earn their livelihood through
various means such as pulling bicycle rickshaw and carts or working as roadside mechanics
repairing two wheelers, motorized vehicles, footwear, purse, utensils and other wares,
electronic items, etc. in the streets, roadside and other places to earn their livelihood and feed
their poor families but most of them are hounded by local Police and Municipal authorities.
They are compelled to pay heavy bribes and if they do not do so then their articles, wares
and other things are taken away and confiscated and heavy fines are imposed on them. As
such they are unable to earn their livelihood. They remain under constant threat and fall in
the net of anti-social elements. When State cannot provide employment opportunities, the
poor should not be denied their right to earn livelihood. So there should be complete and
hassle free freedom for all the citizens of the country so that people will earn their livelihood
and support their families and there should be no interference from Police or local authorities
in their vocation. Recently, even the Supreme Court of India expressed its concern about the
plight of  Rehri and Patriwallahs and directed to formulate rehabilitation plans for them.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
July 7, 2015.

5
 MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make  rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—1509LS(S3)—28-07-2015.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for complete freedom to earn livelihood to the cycle rickshaw and cart pullers
and roadside mechanics by prohibiting the local police and personnel of local bodies
from impounding or taking away the tools, wares, stuff, cycle rickshaw, cart, etc.,
so as  enable to poverty stricken and unemployed youth and other citizens to
earn their livelihood without fear and feed their dependent families and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)