                                                            Bill No. 222 of 2022
THE TOUR OPERATORS AND TRA VEL AGENTS
(REGULATION) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIW AL’, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of tour operators and travel agents by providing for
compulsory registration of these operators and agents by competent authority;
and by prescribing requisite norms and infrastructure for various tour
and tourist related activities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tour Operators and Travel Agents
(Regulation) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requites,–
(a) ‘appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State, and in all other Cases, the Central
Government;
(b) “Competent authority” means any office or Officer notified
by the appropriate Government under section 4;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) “tour operator or travel agent” means any person including
any establishment who undertakes and conducts packaged tours to
the various parts of the country and outside India or provides transport,
passport and visa facilities, reservation of seats for airlines, rail, bus,
steamer and ships, arrange accommodation, entertainment and other
tourism related services and consultancy to tourists; and
(e) “tourist” means any person who undertakes any journey or
visits any place in or outside India and includes a pilgrim.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette appoint, no person or establishment shall
work as tour operator or travel agent without prior registration with the
competent authority.
(2) Any person or establishment found working as tour operator or
travel agent without registration shall be guilty of an offence punishable under
this Act.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint a competent authority for the purposes of registration of
tour operator or travel agents within its jurisdiction.
(2) Any person or establishment willing to work as tour operator or
travel agent shall apply to the competent Authority for the purpose of
registration in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Any person or establishment working as tour operator or travel
agent before the commencement of this Act shall apply for registration to the
competent authority within a period of forty-five days from the date of
commencement of this Act in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(4) On receipt of an application for registration as tour operator or
travel agent the competent authority shall scrutinize the application and may
call for such other information or documents from the applicant as may be
prescribed.
(5) The competent authority shall, before registering any tour operator
or travel agent, inspect the infrastructure and facilities available with the tour
operator or travel agent to have the first hand information and ensure the
compliance of the norms and standards fixed by the appropriate Government
in this behalf.
(6) The competent authority shall, after being satisfied with the various
requirements under this Act, grant a registration certificate to the applicant in
such manner and form as may be prescribed which shall be valid for three
years.
Compulsory
registration of
Tour Operators
and Travel
Agents.
Procedure for
registration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(7) The competent authority shall renew the registration of any tour
operator or travel agent only after re-inspecting the infrastructure facilities
with the tour operator or travel    agent and on fulfilment of requirements and
norms fixed in this behalf by the appropriate Government under this Act.
(8) The competent authority may refuse to register or renew
registration of a tour operator or travel agent if he fails to comply with the
norms and standards fixed by the appropriate Government in this behalf or
the competent authority finds its infrastructure insufficient for the purpose of
working as tour operator or travel agent:
Provided that in case of non-registration or non-renewal of registration
of a tour operator or travel agent, the competent authority shall record reasons
in writing and communicate the same to the applicant.
(9) The competent authority shall take a decision on the application
filed under sub-section (2) within a period of thirty days.
(10) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint an appellate authority, to provide opportunities to the person
aggrieved by the orders of  the competent authority.
5. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) fix the maximum fee to be charged by the tour operator and
travel agents for various tour related activities;
(b) fix the rate at which vehicles shall be made available to tourists;
(c) prescribe norms and standards for various activities;
(d) lay down norms for minimum infrastructure for starting and
running tour operations;
(e) prescribe such other norms as may be necessary for the
purpose.
6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years and also with fine which may extend to five lakhs rupees.
7. (1) Where a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any
rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a company,
every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge
of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the
company as well as the company, shall be guilty of  the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished  accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, order, or
direction made thereunder has been committed by a company and it is proved
that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or
Appropriate
Government to
prescribe
norms for tour
operator and
travel agents.
Penalty.
Offences by
company.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
other officer of the company such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this  section:—
(i) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or
association of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period
of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force
on the subject and save as aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in
addition to and not derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
10.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity or anything previously
done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, there is no legislation to regulate the tourism industry,
particularly the travel agencies operating in various regions of the country.
This sector is unorganised and any person can start a travel agency
anywhere by setting up a small shop just with a telephone facility. There
is no ban on such travel agents and as a result, in some of the cases, anti
social or mischievous elements sneak into this business and flourish in the
name of providing travel consultancy. There have been cases when the
foreign tourists have been cheated and robbed of their valuables by the
unscrupulous travel agents. The Association of Domestic Tour Operators
has held several meetings with the Ministry to make registration of a travel
agency mandatory to curb the untoward incidents and dubious practices
indulged in by some travel agents with ulterior motives. It becomes all the
more important to check this menace of unregulated travel agencies, by
suitable legislative measures.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                           JANARADAN SINGH ‘SIGRIW AL’
November 22, 2022.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters
of details only. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of tour operators and travel agents by providing for
compulsory registration of these operators and agents by competent authority;
and by prescribing requisite norms and infrastructure for various tour
and tourist related activities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Janardan Singh ‘Sigriwal’, M.P .)