1
THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE (ADMINISTRATION) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the appointment of a Commission for the recruitment, appointment and
administration of secretarial staff of the House of the People and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the House of the People (Administration) Act, 2019.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Commission” means the House of the People Commission constituted under
section 3 of this Act;
(b) “House” means the House of the People;
(c) “Leader of the House” means the Prime Minister or a member of the House, as
may be nominated by the Prime Minister for the purposes of this Act;
Bill No. 222 of  2019
Short title.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(d) “Leader of the Opposition” means a member of the House who is recognized
by the Speaker as such or his nominee, who shall be a member of the House, and if
there is no such leader, then the leader of the party in the Opposition having the largest
number in the House;
(e) “Secretarial Staff” means the staff of the House of the People;
(f) “Secretariat” means the Secretariat of the House of the people; and
(g) “Speaker” means Speaker of the House of the People.
3. (1) There shall be constituted a Commission to be known as the House of the People
Commission to perform the functions conferred on it by this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be appointed by the House on a motion to be moved by the
Leader of the House and adopted by the House.
(3) The Commission shall consist of the following—
(a) the Speaker;
(b) the Deputy Speaker;
(c) the Leader of the House;
(d) the Leader of the Opposition; and
(e) three members of the House to be elected by the system of proportional
representation by means of a single transferable vote.
4. The Speaker and the Leader of the House shall continue to be the members of the
Commission until immediately before the assumption of the office by their respective
successors.
5. A member of the Commission other than the Speaker and the Leader of the House
shall cease to be a member of the Commission if he ceases to be a member of the House.
6. (1) The Speaker shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the Commission.
(2) While the office of the Speaker is vacant, the Deputy Speaker shall function as the
Chairperson of the Commission and, if for any reason, the Speaker is unable to act as the
Chairperson of the Commission, the Deputy Speaker shall act as the Chairperson of the
Commission.
7. (1) There shall be a Secretary-General of the House who shall be appointed by the
President of India on the recommendation of the Commission.
(2) The Secretary-General shall be appointed from amongst those who have
distinguished themselves and made their mark in the service of the House in various capacities
in the Secretariat for not less than twenty years.
(3) The Secretary-General shall be the head of the Secretariat.
8. The office of the Secretary-General shall become vacant—
(a) on his attaining the age of superannuation, as may be fixed by the Commission;
and
(b) on his resignation in writing addressed to the President of India.
Constitution
and
composition
of the
Commission.
Time up to
which
Speaker and
Leader of the
House
continue as
Members of
Commission.
Cessation of
membership
of the
Commission.
Chairman of
the
Commission.
Appointment
of Secretary-
General.
Vacation and
resignation of
the office of
Secretary-
General.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
9. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Commission shall,—
(a) frame rules for regulating the recruitment, appointment, promotion and other
service conditions of the Secretary-General and officers and staff of the Secretariat;
(b) adopt such service rules of the Government of India as it may deem fit;
(c) recruit and appoint officers and staff of the Secretariat;
(d) appoint officers and staff on deputation to posts in the Secretariat from other
services such as Judicial services or from office of the Comptroller and Auditor General
or from State Legislatures;
(e) determine the strength of the secretarial staff at various levels and their pay
scales and other allowances;
(f) ensure that the classification, grading, salaries, allowances and other conditions
of service, including pension and other benefits, of the personnel in the Secretariat are
kept generally in conformity with those of the personnel in other comparable services
in the Government of India and also consistent with the service requirements of the
House;
(g) consider and decide appeals against the orders of the Speaker or Secretary-
General, as the case may be, submitted by the officers and staff of the Secretariat;
(h) prepare an estimate for each financial year of the expenses of the services of
the House and of any other expenses incurred for the service of the House and lay
them before the House;
(i) appoint a member of the secretarial staff as “Finance Officer” who will be
responsible for accounting for the sums paid out of money provided by Parliament for
the service of the House; and
(j) exercise all powers necessary to implement the provisions of clause ( 1) of
article 98 of the Constitution of India towards the constitution of a separate, independent
and autonomous Secretariat of the House.
10. (1) The Commission may delegate to the Speaker or Secretary-General any of its
functions under this Act.
(2) Anything done by or in relation to a person, to whom functions are delegated under
this section, in the discharge of functions of the Commission, shall have the same effect as
if it were done by or in relation to the Commission.
(3) Any delegation of functions made by the Commission under this section or any
amendment or revocation of such delegation shall be mentioned in the annual report of the
Commission made under section 12.
11. The validity of any proceedings of the Commission shall not be affected by any
vacancy among the members of the Commission, or by any defect in the appointment or
nomination of any members of the Commission.
12. The Commission shall, as soon as possible, after the end of every financial year
present to the House a report on its functions in that year.
13. (1) The Commission may make rules to regulate its procedure and conduct of its
business.
(2) The Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to regulate
recruitment and conditions of service of the secretarial staff.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Delegation of
Functions of
Commission.
Validity of
the
proceedings
of the
Commission.
Annual
Report of the
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
20
25
30
35
40
5
15
10

4
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before the House, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, the
House agrees in making any modification in the rule, or the House agrees that the rule should
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be.
14. All persons employed in the secretarial staff immediately before the coming into
force of this Act, shall be treated, for all purposes, as if their appointment had been made by
the Commission.
15. All rules, Regulations and orders made and in force immediately before the coming
into force of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made by the Commission and shall
continue to be valid and operative unless modified or revoked by the Commission; so,
however, anything contained therein being inconsistent with any provisions of this Act,
shall be of no effect and be void to the extent of such inconsistency.
Transitional
provisions.
Saving.
5
15
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The concept of an independent Secretariat of Parliament is an essential adjunct of
Parliamentary democracy. The significance of this conceptualization of a Secretariat
independent of the Executive was fully realized in the 1920s when the then Central Legislative
Assembly passed unanimously a resolution moved by Pandit Motilal Nehru and seconded
by Lala Lajpat Rai. Later, Vithalbhai Patel ceaselessly endeavoured in this direction.
The independent position of the Secretariats of the Houses of Parliament was recognized
by the makers of our Constitution when they considered it necessary to incorporate a
separate and exclusive article (article 98) in the Constitution. This article envisages enactment
by Parliament of a law to regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons
appointed to the secretarial staff of the House. The enactment of such a legislation is long
overdue.
The unique position of the Lok Sabha Secretariat demands, as it does, a special sense
of dedication and impartiality from the secretarial staff in the discharge of their duties and
requires a broad-based institutional arrangement representing the House to be statutorily
made available to assist the Speaker in watching and safeguarding the interests of the
secretarial staff in the service of the House and its members. This institutional arrangement
is sought to be made by providing a House of the People Commission.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
July 8, 2019.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a House of the People
Commission. Its members shall be the members of the House of the People who would be
discharging their duties in relation to the Commission as its members. The expenditure towards
the payment of their TA/DA, if any, would be a part of the normal expenditure of the House.
The increase in the expenditure, if any, as a result of constituting the Commission would be
a marginal one and that would not be possible to be quantified in specific terms at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to confer on the Commission the power to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. As the matters in respect of which such rules may be
made are matters of procedure and administrative details only, the delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the appointment of a Commission for the recruitment, appointment and
administration of secretarial staff of the House of the People and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2829LS(S3)—23.10.2019.