1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. In article 338 of the Constitution, after clause ( 5), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(5A) The recommendations made by the National Commission in its reports
under clause (5), shall be binding upon, and implemented by, the Central Government
and the State Governments within a period of one year from the date of making of such
recommendations.".
Short title.
Bill No. 222 of  2016
Amendment
of article
338.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 338 of the Constitution provides for the National Commission for the Scheduled
Castes to monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes
under the Constitution and other laws for the time being in force.
The National Commission for the Scheduled Castes is working for the last so many
years but the desired result has not been achieved, so far. The major reason for this handicap
is that the recommendations made by the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes in
its reports are treated as recommendatory in nature by the Government. These
recommendations are not considered seriously by the Government when it comes to implement
the same. Therefore, it is necessary to amend the Constitution with a view to provide that the
recommendations made by the National Commission in its reports shall be binding upon, and
implemented by, the Central Government and the State Governments within a period of one
year from the date of making of such recommendations.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT RAJ
July 8, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
338. (1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the
National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.
* * * * * *
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
* * * * * *
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and
development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes as the President may, subject
to the provisions of any law made by the Parliament, by rule specify.
* * * * * *
3
National
Commission
for Scheduled
Castes.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2561LS(S3)—28-09-2016.