1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 223 of  2016
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 126 of the Railways Act, 1989, in sub-section (2), the following provisos
shall be added at the end, namely:—
"Provided that the sum paid under this sub-section to any person who has sustained
the injury or suffered any loss shall not be less than rupees one lakh and, where death
has resulted from the accident, such sum paid to any dependant of the deceased shall
not be less than rupees ten lakh:
Provided further that an inquiry under this sub-section shall be completed by the
railway administration within two weeks from the date of receipt of the application.".
Amendment
of section
126.
5
24 of 1989.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Indian Railways is the largest Public Sector Undertaking serving more than 23 million
passengers across the country every day. Even though various safety measures have been
taken by Indian Railways, the probability of Rail accidents has not been eliminated. In such
a situation, it is highly desirable that a sound compensation system be put in place.
In the year 2014, a total number of 190 passengers died in train accidents, out of which
99 deaths occurred due to train collisions, 59 owing to derailment and 32 on account of fire.
Besides, thousands of passengers were also injured. Similarly, in the year 2015, besides
injuries to hundreds of people, 84 deaths occurred due to train collision and derailment, etc.
The loss of life in accidents brings not only pain and agony to the victim's family but many
a times it results in losing the breadwinner placing the family in severe financial crisis.
Section 126 of the Railways Act, 1989 provides for the procedure for seeking interim
relief from the railway administration. However, it is observed that the Railway administration
takes a considerable time in disposing off the application for interim relief, which causes
considerable distress to the lives of affected people. Therefore, there is a need for fixing a
time limit on authorities for disposing off such applications.
It is also of utmost importance that an interim relief of minimum of rupees one lakh in
case of injury or loss and rupees ten lakh in case of death be paid to the affected person or
to the dependants of the deceased, as the case may be.
Hence this Bill.
DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
N
EW DELHI:
July 6, 2016.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RAILW AYS ACT, 1989
[24 OF 1989]
* * * * *
126.(1)
* * * * *
(2) Where, on the receipt of an application made under sub-section (1) and after
making such inquiry as it may deem fit, the railway administration is satisfied that
circumstances exist which require relief to be afforded to the applicant immediately, it may,
pending determination by the Claims Tribunal of the actual amount of compensation payable
under section 124 or section 124A pay to any person who has sustained the injury or
suffered any loss, or where death has resulted from the accident, to any dependant of the
deceased, such sum as it considers reasonable for affording such relief, so however, that the
sum paid shall not exceed the amount of compensation payable at such rates as may be
prescribed.
* * * * *
4
Interim relief
by Railway
administration.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2632LS(S3)—28.09.2016.