     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 223 of 2022
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING AND PRACTICE OF
BHAGA V AD GITA IN EDUCA TIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2022
By
SHRI BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching and practice of Bhagavad Gita in
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching and Practice of
Bhagavad Gita in Educational Institutions Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b)  “educational institution” means any school, by whatever name called, imparting
education up to senior secondary level.
3. Every educational institution shall compulsorily teach and practice the Bhagavad
Gita as a moral  education text book.
4. The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of teachers, as it
may deem necessary with such qualifications, as may be specified by the Central
Government, for teaching and practice of Bhagavad  Gita as a moral education text
book in every educational institution.
5. The appropriated Government shall derecognise a school, which does not comply
with the provisions of section 3:
Provided that a school shall be given reasonable opportunity of being heard before
any decision on its derecognition is taken.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act,
shall apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey
to the appropriate Governments their willingness to include the teaching and practice
of Bhagavad Gita as a moral education text book in their school curriculum.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
5
2
Definitions.
15
20
10
Compulsory
Teaching and
practice of
Bhagavad Gita
in educational
institutions.
Appropriate
Government to
appoint teachers
for teaching and
practice of
Bhagavad Gita
in educational
institutions.
Derecognition of
schools for non-
compliance of
the provisions  of
the Act.
CentralGovernment toprovide fund to
the State
Governments.
Application ofAct on minorityeducationalinstitutions incertain situation.
Overriding
effect of the Act.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Shrimad Bhagavad Gita is a spiritual discourse delivered by Lord Krishna
in the middle of the battlefield. It contains 18 chapters, which deal with a variety
of subjects such as the nature of the self, the need to restrain the mind and the
senses, withdrawing them from the sense objects through the practice of yoga,
performing desireless actions, the vision of the Universal Self, the qualities of
Nature, incarnation of God and reincarnation of individual souls, devotion to God,
liberation and so on.
Shrimad Bhagavad Gita is the greatest book on the moral and value
education. It not only holds holy significance to the people of India but also guides
the moral and value thinking in the time of depravity and chaos. It contains the
teaching ranging from spiritual awakening to leadership and management. Teachings
of Gita are teaching of humanity and brotherhood. Many great thinkers from our
time such as Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo, Albert Einstein, Mahatma
Gandhi as well as Ramanuja, from bygone ages, have all deliberated upon its
timeless teachings.
Mahatma Gandhi has also said “When doubts haunt me, when disappointments
stare me in the face, and I see not one ray of hope on the horizon, I turn to
Bhagavad Gita. Let the Gita be to you a mine of diamonds, as it has been to me;
let it be your constant guide and friend on life’s way”.
It  is highly deplorable that such vast literature containing infinite teachings
for all age groups is neglected by our educational institutions. It is high time to
make sincere effort to spread the teachings to our children and grownups. Teaching
and daily practice of Bhagavad Gita in educational institutions will enable the
younger generation to enrich their knowledge and skills and shine the personality
in the light of noble traditions and thoughts of Bhagavad Gita, become sensible
and responsible citizens.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                         BHOLA SINGH
22 November, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint
teachers for compulsory teaching and daily practice of Bhagavad Gita  in every educational
institution. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
funds to the State Governments carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore
will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching and practice of Bhagavad Gita in
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Bhola Singh, M.P.)