1
THE EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (REGULATION) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate employment agencies for the help of domestic workers, interns and other
employees seeking employment, apprenticeship or internship with employers
indulged in legitimate occupation in order to enhance social security of
employees and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted in the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  223   of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child "means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(c) "domestic worker" means any person who is employed for remuneration in
any household, through any agency either on a temporary, permanent, part time or full
time basis;
(d) "employee" means any person who is employed or engaged on contract
basis, continuously for a period not less than one hundred and eighty days, in an
establishment to do any work for remuneration;
(e) "employer" means a person who hires the service of another person whether
part time or full time and includes a natural or judicial person or an association of such
persons by whom any person is engaged or employed through any agency for
remuneration;
(f) "employment agency" means an agency involved in the employment of persons
in any capacity and finding workers employment with employers or of supplying
employers with workers for employment by them; whether physically established or
operating electronically/online through a website and includes a placement agency or
any agency by whatever name called carried on (whether for the purpose of gain or
reward or not).
(g) "intern" means any person who is employed or engaged on contract basis,
continuously for a period less than one hundred and eighty days in an establishment
to do any work;
(h) "license" means a licence granted under this Act;
(i) "licensee" means the person to whom a licence is granted under this Act; and
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
R
ESTRICTIONS
3. Nothing in this Act shall operate to relieve any employment agency of any duty or
liability imposed upon it by any other law for the time being in force or to limit any powers
given to any public officer under any other law.
4. No child shall be employed as a domestic worker or for any work which is prohibited
under any law for the time being in force.
5. No employment agency shall hire for employers engaged in occupation deemed
illegal by the Government of India such as gambling.
CHAPTER III
LICENSING
6. (1) No person shall carry on an employment agency unless he is the holder of a
license authorizing him to carry on such an agency.
(2) The appropriate Governments shall on an application from an agency for functioning
as an employment agency in the prescribed format, issue a license after having been duly
satisfied that:
(a) the agency is registered either as a sole proprietorship, partnership firm,
company or as a non-profit organization;
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Definitions.
Prohibition on
employment
of a child.
Employment
for illegal
occupations.
Persons
carrying on an
employment
agency to be
Licensed.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) maintains proper books of accounts, Memorandum of association, rules, bye
laws, as the case may be and the details of the office bearers of the organization and
details of persons employed by such agency;
(c) that there is no criminal cases pending against the said agency or agency
owners or both; and
(d) premises or place being or to be used for the purpose of placement or
employment agency exists are as per requirement.
(3) The form of a licence which may be granted or renewed under this Act, the conditions
subject to which the licence may be granted or renewed, the fees payable for the grant or
renewal of a licence and the security, if any, required to be furnished for the due performance
of the conditions of the licence shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) Every employment agency shall, upon issues of license which is valid for a period
of twelve months and is to be renewed periodically, furnish to the appropriate (Government,
quarterly  of details of the persons who are registered with the agency for employment:—
(a) the details of the addresses where these persons are placed;
(b) the fees charged against each individual for placement; and
(c) proof of adequate verification process for each individual.
7. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,—
(a) appoint such persons, being officers of appropriate Government, as it thinks fit to
be licensing officers for the purposes of this Act; and
(b) define the limits, within which a licensing officer shall exercise the jurisdiction
and powers conferred on licensing officers by or under this Act.
8. (1) Every owner of the employment agencies to which this Act applies shall, within
the period as the appropriate Government may fix, make an application to the licensing officer
in such form and manner and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed for the license
of employment agency.
(2) The licensing officer shall within one month after the receipt of an application for
license, if the application is complete in all respects, issue license to the employment agency
or if the application is not so complete then return the application to the principal owner of
the agency in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) No principal owner of the employment agency to which the Act applies shall
procure or place any worker or employee or intern in any household or any other work unless
he holds a valid license issued to the agency under this Act.
9. If the licensing officer is satisfied either on a reference made to him or otherwise that
the license granted to any employment agency has been obtained by misrepresentation or
suppression of any material fact or the holder of the license has without reasonable cause
failed to comply with the conditions subject to which the license was granted or has
contravened any provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder then the licensing officer
after giving the reasonable opportunity to the principal owner of the agency to be heard, by
order in writing revoke the license and communicate it to the principal  owner  in such manner
as may be prescribed.
10. Where an order of revocation becomes effective under section 9, the licensee
concerned shall forthwith cease to carry on the employment agency:
Provided that revocation of license shall not prejudice the enforcement by any person
of any right or claim against the licensee concerned or by the licensee concerned of any right
or claim against any person arising out of or concerning any matter or thing done prior to the
revocation of the license.
Appointment
of licensing
officers.
Procedure for
licensing of
agency.
Revocation of
license.
Effect of
revocation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND DUTIES OF LICENSED EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES
11. (1) It shall be lawful for a licensee to charge and receive such fees as may be
prescribed, from time to time.
(2) No licensee shall charge or receive any form of fees, remuneration, profit or
compensation otherwise than as may be prescribed.
12. (1) Every employment agency shall maintain the records of all the domestic workers
and other workers or employees being contracted by them for purposes of employment.
(2) The record maintained under sub-section (1) shall consist of the following:—
(a) name and address of the employer under whom such domestic worker-or any
other employee or intern is working;
(b) the period of employment;
(c) rate of wages and the mode of payment of the wages;
(d) displacement allowance payable;
(e) passport size photograph of the employer and the domestic worker or any
other employee or intern;
(f) nature of work and the working hours; and
(g) copy of contract.
13. The terms of contract between employee and the employment agency shall include
inter-alia the following:—
(a) whether the work-seeker is or may be employed by the employment business
under a contract of service or apprenticeship or internship, or a contract for services,
and in either case, the terms and conditions of employment of the work-seeker which
apply, or may apply;
(b) an undertaking that the agency shall pay the work-seeker in respect of work
done by him, whether or not it is paid by the hirer in respect of that work;
(c) The length of notice of termination which the work-seeker may be required to
give, and which he shall be entitled to receive in respect of particular assignments with
hirers;
(d) the rate of remuneration payable to the work seeker; and
(e) the minimum rate of remuneration, the employment business reasonably
expects to achieve for the work-seeker, details of the intervals at which remuneration
shall be paid and such other amenities.
14. (1) An employment agency shall not enter into nor purport to enter into, a contract:—
(a) on behalf of a work-seeker with a hirer; or
(b) on behalf of a hirer, with a work-seeker,
unless the following requirements are fulfilled—
(a) the person for whom the employment agency acts has appointed the agency
as his agent with authority to enter into the contract on his behalf; and
(b) where the agency acts for the work-seeker,  it has been permitted by the act
to charge a fee in relation to the introduction or supply to which the contract relates.
(2) where an employment agency enters into a contract on behalf of a work-seeker with
a hirer, or on behalf of a hirer with a work-seeker, the agency shall ensure that the terms of the
Fees for
services
rendered.
Maintenance
of registers.
Ensure the
given
minimum
terms of
contract.
Entering into
a contract on
behalf of a
client.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
contract are notified to the party on whose behalf the agency entered into the contract, as
soon as is reasonably practicable and in any event no later than the end of the fifth business
day following the day on which such agency entered into the contract.
(3) Where an employment agency enters into a contract on behalf of a work seeker
with a hirer, or on behalf of a hirer with a work-seeker, the agency shall ensure that the terms
of the contract are notified to the party or parties to the contract other than the party on
whose behalf the contract was entered into, as soon as is reasonably practicable and in any
event no later than the end of the fifth business day following the day on which the agency
entered into the contract.
CHAPTER V
G
RIEVANCE REDRESSAL AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
15. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 9, may, within thirty
days from the date on which such order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to an
appellate officer who shall be a person nominated in this behalf by the appropriate
Government:
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellate was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing the appeal in time.
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the appellate officer shall, after
giving the appellate an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as
possible.
16. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a complaint
made by an inspector or authorized person or a non-Governmental Organization and no
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER VI
A
PPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF INSPECTORS
17. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and define
the local limits within which they shall exercise their powers under this Act.
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, within the local limits for which he is
appointed, an inspector may—
(a) if he has reason to believe that any Child is employed in any premises or
place, enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any), being persons in the
service of the Government or any non-Governmental organization as he thinks fit;
(b) if he has a reason to believe that any illegal work is being undertaken in any
premises or place, enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any), being
persons in the service of the Government or any non- Governmental Organization as
he thinks fit;
(c) satisfy himself whether the provisions of this Act are being complied with;
(d) at any reasonable time, and without previous notice, enter and inspect any
employment agency or any premises reasonably suspected of being used for the
purposes of an employment agency, and examine all books, or other documents found
in the premises, which may appear to him to be the property of or to have been used for
the purposes of an employment agency and remove them for further examination; seize
or take copies of such register, record of wages, or notices or portions thereof as he
may consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to
believe has been committed by a principal employer or contractor; and
Appeals.
Cognizance of
offences.
Role of
inspector.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
(3) Where there is reason to believe that any person has been subjected to any form of
abuse which prima facie discloses the commission of any cognizable offence, the Inspectors
shall take assistance from any non-Governmental Organization agency in rescue and
rehabilitation of victims in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Any person required to produce any document or thing, or to give any information
required, by an Inspector under sub-section ( 2), or by a person appointed under sub-
section (3), shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 175
and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(5) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be,
apply to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made
under the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
18. Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with the provisions in Chapter III
of the Act shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine not exceeding rupees
fifteen thousand and in the case of a second or subsequent conviction to a fine not exceeding
rupees thirty thousand and /or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or with
both.
19. Whoever, if any licensee,—
(a) charges or receives himself or through another person, for his services, any
sum greater than the prescribed fee; or
(b) knowingly and voluntarily deceives any person by giving false information;
or
(c) instigates or induces any person not to admit in his service any employee
who has not applied for employment, work or position through his employment agency;
or
(d) knowingly sends, directs or takes any girl or woman to any place for immoral
purposes or to a place where she is likely to be morally corrupted; or
(e) make available young children as domestic workers; or
(f) fail to maintain records of the workers placed by them; or
(g) fails to adhere to any other matter as may be prescribed,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months
but which may extend upto seven years and with fine which may extend upto rupees fifty
thousand or with both.
20. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly. Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without
his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
Penalty for
not obtaining
license under
the Act.
Offences by
Companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

7
secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
21. ( 1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any agreement or contract
of service, or in any standing orders applicable to the establishment whether made before or
after the commencement of this Act.
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any domestic
worker or employee or intern from entering into an agreement with the principal employer or
the contractor, as the case may be, for granting them rights or privileges in respect of any
matter which are more favourable to them than those to which they may be entitled under this
Act.
22. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any licensing
officer, inspecting officer or any other employee of the Government or any non-Governmental
Organization for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance
of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government for any damage
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
in pursuance of this Act or any rule or notification or order made or issued thereunder.
23. ( 1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous
publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which an application for functioning as an employment
agency in the prescribed format may be made under section 6 (2);
(b) the form in which an application for the grant or renewal of a licence may be
made under section 6 (3) and the particulars it may contain;
(c) the manner in which an investigation is to be made in respect of an application
for the grant of a licence and the matters to be taken into account in granting or
refusing or revoking a license;
(d) the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed under this Act, the
conditions subject to which the licence may be granted or renewed, the fees payable
for the grant or renewal of a licence and the security, if any, required to be furnished for
the due performance of the conditions of the licence;
(e) the circumstances under which license may be varied or amended under
section 10;
(f) the form and the manner in which appeals may be filed under section 15 and
the procedure to be followed by appellate officers in disposing of the appeals;
(g) the powers that may be exercised by inspectors under section 17 and the
local limits within which they shall exercise their powers under this Act;
(h) fees to be charged by the agencies under section 11; and
Effect of laws
and
agreements
inconsistent
with the Act.
Protection of
action taken
under Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Reserve Bank of India's data on the employment elasticity of India from 1972
to 2012 proved that the country faces declining employment elasticity, i.e. the percentage
changes in employment with every one percent point change in economic growth. According
to the 'State of Working India 2018' report by Azim Premji University, every 10 percent increase
in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) results in less than one percent increase in employment.
While the unemployment rate in India increased to 3.52 percent in 2017 from 3.51 percent in
2016, it has doubled between July 2017 and April 2018, whereas the number of jobs in the
country in the last financial year 2017-18 also fell to 406 million from 406.7 million in the
previous year. According to 'The World Employment and Social Outlook — Trends 2018'
released by the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the vulnerable employment rate in
India remains high at 77%. It shows that of the 1.4 billion people estimated to be in vulnerable
employment globally this year, 394 million or more than a quarter will be in India alone.
As a result the exploitation of workers has been increasing rapidly in the country.
Poverty has forced people to migrate in search of work and workers with no other skills, turn
to domestic work. This has also led to the trafficking and other forms of exploitation of
millions of women and children of both the sexes. To meet growing demand for domestic
help, there has been a spurt of thousands of placement agencies providing domestic workers
in metro-towns of many States who remain outside the purview of any legislative control.
The issue of exploitation of women and children domestic workers is frequent and regularly
reported. With no rights and rules to fall back on, the domestic helps, mostly migrants from
eastern States, have become contemporary slaves. It is also a known fact that many women
and children are trafficked and exploited by the placement agencies, which operate openly
without any form of restrictions and regulations, also escaping the tax net, thus necessitating
the need for regulation and control. The domestic workers fall outside the Labour legislations
thus domestic workers are unable to access their rights. That non recognition of domestic
work as legitimate work combined with hidden nature of the worksite results in exploitative
living and working conditions and sometimes forced labour and trafficking. Reports of abuse
are many with workers facing among other things , extremely long working hours , absence of
rest and leave periods, deprivation of food, delayed or non-payment of wages and physical
and sexual abuse, recruitment related fees, deceptive recruitment practices and discriminative
policies further jeopardizes domestic workers right to just and favorable working conditions.
Formal employment has become very competitive which forces young people to apply
for various internships so as to gain experience. Unpaid internships have become a big,
exploitative, self- perpetuating circle in India, where countless graduates enter into these
internships every year to gather that all important marker for employment — experience.
Since most companies insist on a certain amount of work experience before they hire for a
particular role, the only avenue for many fresh graduates is to allow their labour to be
exploited via 14 internship work over a specific period of time. The world of internships and
interns in India is by no means tiny. It is mildly disturbing, then, that there are absolutely no
laws that cover interns in India. Thus, there is a need for a new law which regulates the huge
market of internships in the country. The vast reach of internet and increasing use of online
and electronic services to seek job also creates a need to regulate such employment agencies
which operate online.
Thus it is imperative that a law be enacted to provide for safety and security of domestic
workers, interns and other employees and regulate the placement/employment agencies
which cater to providing employment to any class/category of persons. The law needs to be
broader and go beyond the scope of domestic workers as placement agencies not only cater
to domestic but also other employment requirements.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA   KUMAR  JENA
November 28, 2018.
9

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for appointment of Licensing Officer. Clause 15 provides
for nomination of an Appellate Officer. Clause 17 provides for appointment of Inspector. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum will
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
10

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
11

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate employment agencies for the help of domestic workers, interns and other
employees seeking employment, apprenticeship or internship with employers
indulged in legitimate occupation in order to enhance social security of
employees and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2377LS—19-12-2018.