1
Bill No. 224 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF WEST
BENGAL BILL, 2019
By
PROF. SAUGATA ROY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Sections of people; for the development, exploitation and
proper utilization of its resources and to relieve its debt burden.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of West
Bengal Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year,  as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of  Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections
of people and for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the
State.
3. The State of West Bengal shall be given a moratorium on payment of interest on its
outstanding debt by the Central Government for a period of three years.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
West Bengal.
Moratorium
on interest
payment.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of West Bengal is socially and economically backward. The problems of
poverty, unemployment and illiteracy are required to be addressed urgently and in a time
bound manner. Measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker sections in
the region and initiating new development schemes are also required to be undertaken in an
expeditious and time-bound manner. The State of West Bengal has also been facing the
problem of naxalite violence for a number of years. In view of its economic backwardness, the
naxalites have found sympathetic elements within the population. Therefore, economic
backwardness is the root cause of the naxalite problem. It is, therefore, necessary that the
Central Government should provide special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal
for its all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the development
and exploitation of its vast natural resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance to
this State would go a long way in building this nation more and more strong.
Further, when the previous Government took charge in 2011, the State of West Bengal
had an outstanding debt of rupees two lakh and three thousand crore. As such, the State is
required to pay bulk principal and interest at the rate of rupees twenty six thousand crore a
year, which is more than the revenue earnings. Therefore, the State of West Bengal also
needs a moratorium on its interest repayments for a period of three years in order to overcome
its financial problem.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SAUGATA  ROY
June 12, 2019.
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND
117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
————
[Copies of Letter No. 42(3) PF-S/2019-20 dated 25 July and 07 October, 2019 from
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs to the Secretary
General, Lok Sabha].
I.  The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Special Financial
Assistance to the State of West Bengal Bill, 2019 by Prof. Saugata Roy, M.P., recommends
consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
II. The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Special Financial
Assistance to the State of West Bengal Bill, 2019 by Prof. Saugata Roy, M.P., recommends
introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under article 117(1) of the Constitution.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of West Bengal as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage. The moratorium would not
involve any outgo from the Consolidated Fund, but would only mean deferment of income.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Sections of people; for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources and
to relieve its debt burden.
————
(Prof. Saugata Roy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2900LS(S3)—24-10-2019.