                                                            Bill No. 224 of 2022
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
DR. KRISHNAP AL SINGH YADA V, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Amendment of
section 135. 2. In section 135 of the Companies Act,–
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “three or more directors’’, the
words “three or more directors and a Corporate Social Responsibility
professional’’ shall be substituted; and
(b) in sub-section (5), for the first proviso, the following proviso
shall be substituted, namely:–
    “Provided that it shall be mandatory for the company to give
preference to the local area and areas around it where it operates, for
spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility
activities.”
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The last two decades have seen significant economic growth and
integration into the global economy, resulting in several changes in the
business landscape. The role of businesses within the larger society has
come under intense scrutiny by several stakeholders. Governments across
the world have been using different forms of regulation to shape corporate
behaviour with calls for increased accountability, disclosures and actions
from them. India’s progress on corporate governance and the Companies
Act, 2013 (Act) needs to be viewed within this larger discourse.
The primary objective of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) was not
to mobilize resources for Government to bridge resource gap in meeting
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The primary objective is to promote
responsible and sustainable business philosophy at a broad level and encourage
companies to come up with innovative ideas and robust management systems
to address social and environmental concerns of the local area and other needy
areas in the country.
However, even after the mandatory provision in the act various
companies failed to perform their prescribed duty. The Government
has sanctioned prosecution proceedings against 284 companies and sent
5,382 notices to companies that have not fulfilled the mandatory
CSR expenditure norms. Thus in order to robust the mechanism a High
Level Committee (HLC) was incorporated by the Government to
suggest substantial changes to get rid of any lacuna under the act. In furtherance
to that, the Committee has noted that HLC-2015 suggested that
CSR provisions also be made applicable to profit making entities not
incorporated under Company Law, but operating under other specific
statutes on mutatis mutandis basis. The Guidelines on Corporate Social
Responsibility and Sustainability for Central Public Sector Enterprises
(CPSEs) issued by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) in October
2014, also prescribed/advised that CPSEs which are statutory corporations
also comply with CSR provisions.
An analysis of the CSR data from FY 2014-15 to FY 2017-18, reveals an
acute concentration of CSR funds in a few geographical areas to the exclusion
of the rest. There is a skew in favour of industrialised States such that the
least developed States receive the least funds. This skew may have been caused,
inter alia, by the clause on local area preference. Not only that, upon a bare
perusal of Section 135, at the first blush it may seem that by incorporating the
term “shall” before the terms, “preference” and “local areas”, the Act intended
that it is mandatory to comply with CSR obligations within a geographical/
territorial area limitation.
Further, the amendment also seek to the presence of a CSR professional in
the CSR committee because it is often seen that the committee are not at par
3

4
with the practicality and not at the centre-stage while planning and approving
the CSR projects due to lack of technical expertise. Thus to get rid of
this problem it is imperative to have a presence of professional in the
committee.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                KRISHNAPAL SINGH Y ADA V
23 November, 2022.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013.
(ACT NO. 18 OF 2013)
* * * * * *
135. (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or
more, or turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of
rupees five crore or more during any financial year shall constitute a Corporate
Social Responsibility Committee of the Board consisting of three or more
directors, out of which at least one director shall be an independent director.
* * * * * *
(5) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1), shall
ensure that the company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent.
of the average net profits of the company made during the three immediately
preceding financial years, in pursuance of its Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy:
       Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and
areas around it where it operates, for spending the amount earmarked for
Corporate Social Responsibility activities:
       Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the
Board shall, in its report made under clause (o) of sub-section (3) of section
134, specify the reasons for not spending the amount.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section – average net profit shall
be calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 198.
* * * * * *
Corporate
Social
Responsibility.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
————
(Dr. Krishnapal Singh Yadav, M.P .)