1
Bill No.  225 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE  NARCOTIC  DRUGS  AND  PSYCHOTROPIC  SUBSTANCES
(AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2016
By
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 42 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985,  after
sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be added, namely:—
"(3) The officer empowered to enter, search, seize and arrest under sub-section
(1) shall—
(a) record the post-entry search, seizure and arrest by audio-video
electronic means:
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 42.
61 of 1985.
5
10

2
Provided that the recording device shall not be switched off till the
completion of search, seizure and arrest; and
(b) inform the accused or the person being arrested or the person present
in any such building or place about audio-video recording of such search, seizure
and arrest.
(4) The officer empowered to enter, search, seize and arrest under sub-section (1) shall
handover the audio-video recording under sub-section (3) to his superior officer who shall
keep such recording in his custody for evidentiary purpose."
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The issue of illegal use of drugs is soaring in India. With passage of time, the problem
has been a major setback in evolution of India as a developed economy. Use of illicit drugs
in India has increased with more than three million drug addicts across the country. Cannabis,
Heroin, Opium, Methamphetamine and Hashish are the most commonly used drugs in the
country. Drug addiction not only causes a major discomfiture, both physically and mentally,
upon the persons consuming but also creates great inconvenience to the family members of
such persons.
The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985. commonly referred to as
NDPS Act., 1985 came into force on 14 November, 1985 and since then is being used by the
law keeping agencies to keep a close surveillance on production, manufacture. cultivation,
sale, purchase, transportation, storage, possession and consumption of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances.
Section 42 of the Act empowers certain officers to enter in any building or place and
search and seize or arrest the offender even without warrant or authorization, if he has
reasons to believe that an offence in respect of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance
has been committed.
The process of searching is the most pivotal step in the procedure as it provides the
base for setting the case. The task needs to be done in the most patient way and by the most
trusted officials as in many cases innocent people are penalized without any reasonable
cause.
According to the latest reports, in many cases of search and seizure, the police officers
mostly pick up the innocent people who do not have the capacity to pay bribes so as to
complete their monthly targets. In order to enhance the transparency in the procedure, the
officers should be provided with a camera and a voice recorder. This will not only help in
better administration and investigation but will also help the law to identify the accused and
punish them accordingly. As per the statistics, around 64,737 drug trafficking cases have
been reported in the past four years, out of which many are false and frivolous. The
investigation procedure taken up by the officers is not appropriate and needs to be more
resolute. The suggested amendment will augment the investigation and also aggrandize
faith of people in law and justice.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
July 6, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the officer empowered shall make audio-video
recording of the post-entry search, seizure and arrest procedure. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees five crore per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore will also be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC
SUBSTANCES ACT, 1985
(61 OF 1985)
* * * * *
42. (1) Any such officer (being an officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or constable)
of the departments of central excise, narcotics, customs, revenue intelligence or any other
department of the Central Government including para-military forces or armed forces as is
empowered in this behalf by general or special order by the Central Government, or any such
officer (being an officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or constable) of the revenue, drugs
control, excise, police or any other department of a State Government as is empowered in this
behalf by general or special order of the State Government, if he has reason to believe from
persons knowledge or information given by any person and taken down in writing that any
narcotic drug, or psychotropic substance, or controlled substance in respect of which an
offence punishable under this Act has been committed or any document or other article
which may furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or any illegally acquired
property or any document or other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally
acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter V A of this
Act is kept or concealed in any building, conveyance or enclosed place, may between
sunrise and sunset,
(a) enter into and search any such building, conveyance or place;
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove any obstacle to such entry;
(c) seize such drug or substance and all materials used in the manufacture thereof and
any other article and any animal or conveyance which he has reason to believe to be liable to
confiscation under this Act and any document or other article which he has reason to believe
may furnish evidence of the commission of any offence punishable under this Act or furnish
evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing or
forfeiture under Chapter V A of this Act; and
(d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any person whom he has reason
to believe to have committed any offence punishable under this Act:
Provided that if such officer has reason to believe that a search warrant or authorization
cannot be obtained without affording opportunity for the concealment of evidence or facility
for the escape of an offender, he may enter and search such building, conveyance or enclosed
place at any time between sunset and sunrise after recording the grounds of his belief.
(2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing under subsection ( 1) or
records grounds for his belief under the proviso thereto, he shall within seventy-two hours
send a copy thereof to his immediate official superior.
* * * * *
5
Power of
entry, search,
seizure and
arrest without
warrant or
authorization.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2637LS(S3)—30-09-2016.