Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No.  226 of  2022
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං  Aൻൽඎඅ Kඁൺඅൾඊඎൾ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order , 1950.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) 
Act, 2022.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.   In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, paragraph 3 shall be omitted.
Short title and commencement.
Omission of 
paragraph 3.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The founding fathers of our Constitution made several provisions in the Constitution 
which ensured rights and equality to the citizens of this diverse country. Unity in diversity is 
one of the brightest aspects of our country.
 Para 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled Caste) Order, 1950 states that no person 
who professes a religion different from Hinduism shall be deemed to be a member of the 
Scheduled Caste. Thereby, the Order ceased to recognise a person as the Scheduled Caste 
if he or she belonged to any religious minority groups. The order was amended later to 
grant Scheduled Caste status to those people of Scheduled Caste origin who embraced 
Buddhism and Sikhism. However, Dalit Christians and Dalit Muslims have been kept out of 
the amended order thus denying them equality and fair justice.
 Meanwhile, several State Governments have recommended that Dalit Muslims 
and Dalit Christians should be brought under the preview of the amended rule and provide 
a level playing ground to all.  Further amendment of the original Order is  necessary to 
establish an equilibrium amongst the religious minority communities and provide justice. 
Non-inclusion of Scheduled Caste Muslims and Christians is religious discrimination which 
is against the spirit of our Constitution.
 Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                  ABDUL  KHALEQUE
   23 November,  2022.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ (Sർඁൾൽඎඅൾൽ Cൺඌඍൾඌ) Oඋൽൾඋ, 1950
(C.O. 19)
*                         *                            *          *
 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 2, no person who professes a 
religion different from the Hindu, the Sikh or the Buddhist religion shall be deemed to be a 
member of a Scheduled Caste.
 *                         *                            *          *
 
                      

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
————
(Shri  Abdul Khaleque, M.P .)