1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE FARMERS (GUARANTEED INCOME AND WELFARE)
BILL,  2018
By
ADV. JOICE GEORGE,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Farmers Welfare Fund to ensure guaranteed income
to farmers irrespective of natural calamity or price fall and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers (Guaranteed Income and Welfare) Act,  2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come  into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Agricultural produce" means any agricultural produce grown by the farmer;
Bill  No. 226 of  2018
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Central
Government
to declare
guaranteed
income for
farmers.
(b) "farmer" means a person possessing agricultural land measuring not more
than ten acres and have no major income from any source other than agriculture
operations;
(c) "Fund" means Farmers Welfare Fund constituted under section 4;
(d) "guaranteed income" means assured income to the farmer from the agricultural
produces, fixed and declared by the Central Government under section 3;
(e) "natural calamity" includes drought, flood, cyclone, hailstorm, landslide,
cloud burst, tsunami, earthquake or fire especially in forest and adjacent areas or such
other conditions as may be notified by the appropriate Government, from time to time,
and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare
guaranteed income for each crop, in every financial year.
(2) The declaration of guaranteed income under sub-section (1)  shall be on the basis
of the cost of production including the value of manpower employed for producing each
crop.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Farmers Welfare Fund for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
or otherwise including money received as corporate social responsibility from corporate
sector shall also be credited to the Fund.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Farmers Welfare Board for the purpose of administering the
Fund.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed;
(b) one representative of the NITI Aayog;
(c) one representative of every State Government;
(d) three members representing the agro-based commerce and industry sector,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) three representatives of the farmer, to be appointed by the Central Government
in such manner as may be prescribed;
(f) three Members of Parliament representing States where agriculture is the main
stay of population; and
(g) the Secretary of the Union Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare who
shall be ex-officio Secretary to the Board.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson, members and other officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers and
staff as may be required for its efficient functioning.
Constitution
of Farmers
Welfare Fund.
Constitution
of Farmers
Welfare
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. (1) The Board shall take such steps, as it may deem appropriate, for the welfare of
farmers.
(2) without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Board shall
ensure the following provisions for the benefit and welfare of farmers, namely:—
(a) Good quality seeds, manure, pesticides, fertilizers and other necessary
tools and machineries at reasonable price as per their requirements;
(b) uninterrupted power and water supply at reasonable rates for agricultural
operation;
(c) fix and declare minimum support prices of agricultural commodities before
the sowing seasons after taking into consideration all the relevant factors and in
particular the following factors, namely:—
(i) input cost including capital investment;
(ii) labour charges;
(iii) maintenance cost of the farm;
(iv) transportation and marketing facilities for agricultural produce;
(v) payment of adequate compensation to farmers or their family members
in case of accident or death during agricultural operations;
(vi) free medical and health insurance facilities to the farmers and their
family members;
(vii) adequate cold storage facility for agricultural products at appropriate
places;
(viii) provision of loan facilities or financial assistance to farmers;
(ix) provision of a comprehensive crop insurance scheme for reparation
of loss of crops due to natural calamities; and
(x) a guaranteed income for farmers so that agriculture and allied
activities may be adopted by public as a profession.
7. The Central Government may give such directions to the State Government as it may
think necessary for the purposes of this Act.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Farmers Welfare Board for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
Functions of
the Board.
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds to
Farmers
Welfare
Board.
Act not
inconsistent
with other
laws.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, makes rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid before each House of the Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form  be of no effect, as the case may
be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Agriculture supports more than half of India's population, but the per capita income of
farmers is only about one-fifth of the average per capita income of the country. Moreover, the
farming community now has been experiencing a situation of distress on account of several
factors, such as rising lost of production, increasing frequency of extreme climatic events,
viz. droughts, heat waves and floods, and vagaries of guaranteed income.
Currently, a farmer is born in debt, live in debt and dies is debt. Due to total negligence
and non-remunerative, people are not preferring agriculture as a profitable profession. In
short, an immediate effective intervention by the Government to safeguard the dreams,
hopes and aspirations of agrarian people, is the need of the hour. The establishment of
Farmers Welfare Board, will lend a helping hand for the poor farmers to remove indebtedness
and social insecurity by providing guaranteed income.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JOICE GEORGE
November 19, 2018.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Farmers Welfare Fund by the
Central Government. It further provides that the State Government shall contribute to the
Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed. Clause 5 provides for constitution of a Farmers
Welfare Board. Clause 6 provides for utilisation of Fund by the Board for welfare of farmers
including guaranteed income for each crop. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees one hundred crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Farmers Welfare Fund to ensure guaranteed income to
farmers irrespective of natural calamity or price fall and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Adv. Joice George,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2121LS(S3)—19-12-2018.