1
THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 10D of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"10E. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Admission and Fee Regulatory Authority (hereinafter referred to as
the Authority) for the supervision and guidance of admission process and for fixation
of fee and other amounts to be charged from the candidates seeking admission in
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 227 of  2017
Insertion of
new section
10E.
Constitution
of Admission
and Fee
Regulatory
Authority.
102 of 1956.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
medical institutions at under graduate and post-graduate level, other than those
promoted and maintained by the Central or the State Government, in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall—
(a) ensure that the admission to medical institutions be made with its prior
approval;
(b) fix the fees and other amounts to be charged from the candidates by the
medical institutions in such manner as may be prescribed.
(c) restrict admission of candidates to the medical institutions who fail to pay
prescribed fee and other amount charged within one month of the date of admission
scheduled for such medical institutions.".
3. In section 33 of the principal Act, after clause (mb), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
"(mc) the Admission and Fee Regulatory Authority, fixation of fees and other
amounts charged in medical institutions;".
Amendment
of section 33.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was enacted for the purpose of reconstituting
the Medical Council of India (hereinafter referred to as the Council) and to provide for the
maintenance of the Indian Medical Register and for matters connected therewith.
The Act confers upon the Council the responsibility of maintenance of the highest
standards of medical education throughout the country. In pursuance of the responsibility,
the Council makes its recommendations to the Central Government for matters related to the
courses of study, examination to be undertaken for such qualifications and inspection of
examinations, etc.
The Government of India made it mandatory that all admissions to medical and dental
seats in all Government colleges, deemed Universities and private medical colleges be made
only through National Eligibility Cum Entrance Test list strictly on merit.
However, there were reports of malpractices by various medical educational institutions
to tide over the admission procedures and charging of exorbitant fees. A legislation is
required for the regulation of admission and fixation of fee in such medical institutions.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Indian Medical Association, 1956 with a view
to establish an Admission and Fee Regulatory Authority to fix the fee and other amounts
charged in medical institutions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
November 27, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Admission and Fee Regulatory
Authority by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees ten crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Council to make regulations regarding the fixation of
fees and other amounts charged by the medical institutions. As the regulations will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.

6
ANNEXURE
(EXTRACT FROM INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL ACT, 1956)
NO. 102 OF 1956
33. The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, make
regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the
generality of this power, such regulations may provide for :—
* * * * * *
(mb) the designated authority, other languages and the manner of conducting of
uniform entrance examination to all medical educational institutions at the undergraduate
level and post-graduate level;".
* * * * * *
Power to
make
regulations.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2673LS(S3)—14-12-2017.