1
THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION BILL, 2018
By
DR. DHARAM VIRA GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide employment to the local residents of any area in which an industry has been or
is going to be setup, ensure basic income to all workers and to establish a regulatory
mechanism to protect environment from any adverse effects due to industrialization
in such area and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Employment and Environmental Protection
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 227 of 2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "annual report" means a report giving the details of the development activities
taken up over the year by the Authority and providing details about the targets set and
achieved;
(b) "appropriate Government" means the concerned State Government or the
Union territory Government, as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(c) "Authority" means the Industrial Employment and Environmental Protection
Authority established under section 3; and
(d) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be known as
the Industrial Employment and Environment Protection Authority for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(i) Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Labour and Employment—
ex-officio Chairperson;
(ii) Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Environment— ex-officio Vice
Chairman; and
(iii) Director, Central Board for Employment, Union Minister of Labour and
Employment—ex-officio member
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority who have special knowledge
pertaining to employment schemes and environmental issues.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the officers
and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Headquaters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(2) The Authority shall establish offices at such other places in the Country as it may
deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
6. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this section, the functions of
the Authority shall include,—
(a) undertaking a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about the existing
minimum number of local resident employees working in all industries to which land
is provided by Government;
(b) undertaking a baseline study to collect comprehensive data of adverse effects
on the environment within the circumference of 5 kilometer where  the particular
industry has been setup, due to the working mechanism of the industry;
(c) formulating a scheme and giving mandatory guidelines to the industries to
reserve a certain percentage (at least fifty per cent.) of employee positions exclusively
for local residents of that area;
(d) formulating a scheme for providing wages 
throughout the year for those
employed seasonally;
(e) creating an establishment to maintain data on the workers of closed sick
industries and to formulate schemes for the welfare of such workers;
Definitions.
Establishment
of the Industrial
Employment
and
Environment
Protection
Authority.
Headquarters
and other
Offices of the
Authority.
Meetings and
procedure of
the Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(f) formulating eco-friendly schemes and giving mandatory guidelines to protect
the flora and fauna in the circumference of 10 kilometer of the particular industry;
(g) installing regular test mechanisms to trace the effects on the environment
due to industry production;
(h) recommend penalty including cancellation of license or such other penalty
as are necessary to save the environment for violation or norms or guidelines by
industries; and
(i) undertaking such other activities, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(2) The Authority shall disseminate the necessary knowledge and information collected,
to the respective departments of the Central Government and the State Governments.
7. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year an Annual Report in such form and as
may be prescribed by the Central Government, giving a summary of its activities including
schemes it has undertaken and recommended to the appropriate Government during the
previous year and it shall contain the statements of Annual Report of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the Annual Report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the
Central Government shall cause the Annual Report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removal of the difficulty:
Provided that such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government, in constitution with the State Governments, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree
that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
Annual Report.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 38 provides that the State shall promote welfare of the people and secure a
social order and protect social, economic and political justice to the people. This explicitly
means that the State is free to form such policies for the promotion of welfare of the people,
as and when it deems fit.
Unemployment is a serious issue for the growing population of the country and the
statistics collected in the last decade certainly prove that unemployment is growing rapidly
and to generate jobs for the youth is the need of the hour. Setting up of industries is one of
the promising solutions to control the unemployment rate. There have been several examples
where the State as well as Central Governments have acquired lands from the people and
given them to industries to promote industrialisation in the country. In return, monetary
compensation is given to the land holders for the land acquisition done by the Government.
However, one-time monetary compensation is not the only way, the Government can also
formulate such schemes by giving mandatory guidelines to the industrialists to hire certain
percentage of their employees from the local area where the industry is being set up. This can
be the adept way to tackle the problem of rapidly growing unemployment rate of the country.
Studies of the industrial revolution show that the growth of industries has adversely
affected the environment. This also alludes to the fact that proper precautionary measures
are not being taken either by the industries or the Government. Right to clean and healthy
environment is a fundamental right which comes under the purview of article 21 of the
Constitution. Human needs are limitless and when it comes to urbanisation, they are never
satisfied. We as humans compromise with nature as per our convenience. But, we often
forget about the role the environment plays in our  lives. The green environment that we live
in consists of air, water, sunlight, trees etc. Everything that the environment consists of is
important to us. It is the duty of the State to establish an Authority and some kind of control
mechanism for the industries, given their arbitrary practices have already affected the
environment adversely.
This Bill provides for the aforementioned necessary safety net. By providing for these
measures, it will be the much-needed antidote required to control unemployment and growing
environmental issues within the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHARAM VIRA GANDHI
November 27, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Industrial Employment and
Environment Protection Authority. It also provides for appointment of officers and staff to
the Authority. Clause 4 provides for establishment of Headquarters and officers of the
Authority. Clause 6 provides for the Authority to undertake studies and formulate schemes
for the better management of industry and environment. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees twenty five crore per annum will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,  the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide employment to the local residents of any area in which an industry has been or is
going to be setup, ensure basic income to all workers and to establish a regulatory
mechanism to protect environment from any adverse effects due to industrialization
in such area and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2513LS(S3)—19-12-2018.