Short title and 
commencement.
5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 227 of 2024
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT 
AND REJUVENATION OF WATER BODIES IN THE STATE OF 
MAHARASHTRA BILL, 2024
By
Shri Ra vindra Dattaram Waikar, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the State Government of Maharashtra to meet  
the expense of development and rejuvenation of water bodies and for matters  
connected therewith in the State of Maharashtra.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Development and 
Rejuvenation of Water Bodies in the State of Maharashtra Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “aquatic ecosystem” means all organic and inorganic matter and all living 
organisms living in or located in or on water or the beds or shores of a water body; 
(b) “drain” includes gutters, wastewater canals, sewers and all outlets or flow of 
waste water including overflow of rainwater; 
(c) “groundwater” means all water under the surface of the ground, whether in 
solid or liquid form; 
(d) “water” means all surface water and ground water, whether solid or liquid form; 
and 
(e) “water body” means any body of flowing or standing water, whether natural or 
artificial and whether the flow or presence of water is continuous, intermittent or occurs 
only during a flood, including but not limited to a lake, river, creek, stream, tank, well, 
pond and wetland.
3. (1) The State Government of Maharashtra shall forward the details of the required 
infrastructure and the estimated cost of the water bodies project falling in the State.
(2) The Central Government, shall on receipt of details, provide funds to the State 
Government for the development of water bodies in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The funds provided under sub-section (2) shall be utilized for,
(a) expeditious completion of ongoing water bodies projects in the State of 
Maharashtra;
(b) construction of small ponds for the use of animals;
(c) digging wells and bore wells;
(d) installing electric pumps for pumping water;
(e) meeting costs incurred on implementing the “Water Bodies Rejuvenation 
Scheme” based on the water resources;
(f) renovation of old ponds and water reservoirs; and
(g) construction of canals.
(4) The State Government of Maharashtra shall furnish the details of expenditure likely 
to be incurred on the water bodies development works to the Central Government in such 
manner and in such times as may be prescribed:
4. The State Government of Maharashtra shall, before forwarding the details to Central 
Government under section 3, make the regulation for the purpose of—
(a) designating any area as a water quality control zone for the purpose of protecting 
water, aquatic eco-system or drinking water source;
(b) governing, regulating or prohibiting any use or activity in a water quality 
control zone or any part of a zone;
(c) improving the drainage and sewerage system;
(d) ensuring clear separation between sewerage or waste water and sources of clean 
water to avoid contamination; and
(e) ensuring quick absorption or clear flow of rain water and sources of clean water 
to avoid contamination.
5. The Central Government shall render scientific and technical advice and 
assistance to the State Government of Maharashtra, if so required, to achieve the 
purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide financial assistance to the State Government of 
Maharashtra for protection of water bodies and for promotion of rain harvesting and 
watershed management programmes.
Definitions.
10
5
State 
Governments 
to forward 
the details to 
the Central 
Government.
15
20
25
Power of State 
Governments 
to make 
regulations.
Central Government 
to provide financial 
assistance to State 
Government of 
Maharashtra.
Central 
Government to 
render scientific 
and technical 
advice.
30
35
40
45

(2) The Central Government before releasing the money shall ensure that State 
Government has complied with the provisions of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
Power to make 
rules.
5
3
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water bodies are the key to recharging groundwater level and developing flood 
resilience. Building storage capacity in tanks, rainwater harvesting, and wastewater reuse 
will improve water resilience in the State.The widening gap between rising water demand 
and seasonal supply can be bridged by building storage in waterbodies and treating sewage 
for reuse.
India today is desperately in need of answers to resolve its water crisis. The country 
faces a critical challenge of improving the productivity of drinking fresh water. No socio-
economic development will ever be possible without ensuring uninterrupted supply of 
quality potable water. It is therefore clear that river rejuvenation will need to be distributed 
across the country. In other words, we will need to capture rain water, where it falls, over 
vast parts of the country so that we can provide local water security and recharge every well. 
The Bill strives to mandate special financial assistance for river rejuvenation work to be 
implemented in Maharashtra. 
According to the National Wetland Inventory and Assessment report, India has 5,55,557 
small water bodies (including village ponds) with area less than 2.25 ha. As such, rejuvenation 
of these water bodies has large potential of achieving water security and climate resilience. 
There have been many success stories of pond and lake rejuvenation throughout the country. 
Unfortunately, there exists no scientific atlas/repository of village ponds with coordinates, 
present status in terms of spread area, storage capacity, quality of water, availability of 
animal and plant life, etc. This is required at the government of India level.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide financial assistance to meet the expense of 
development and rejuvenation of water bodies in the forest areas and for matters connected 
therewith in State of Maharashtra.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                   RA VINDRA DATTARAM WAIKAR  
November 13, 2024
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 provides for the arrangement of funds from Central Government to State 
Government for the development of water bodies. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for rendering 
of scientific and technical advice and assistance to the State Government of Maharashtra. 
Clause 6 provides for financial assistance to the State Government of Maharashtra for 
development, rejuvenation and protection of water bodies etc.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Maharashtra as special 
financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after 
the plans to be implemented by the State Government of Maharashtra with the approval 
of Government of India as identified, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of 
recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at 
this stage.
No  non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purpose 
of this Act. As the regulations and rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation, 
therefore, is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the State Government of Maharashtra to meet  
the expense of development and rejuvenation of water bodies and for matters  
connected therewith in the State of Maharashtra.
_______ 
(Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar, M.P .) 