Bill No. 228 of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL MALNUTRITION POLICY COMMISSION BILL, 2018
By
SHRI NIHAL CHAND CHAUHAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of National Malnutrition Policy Commission and for  matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Malnutrition Policy Commission Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Commission" means the National Malnutrition Policy Commission
constituted under section 3;
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "Fund" means the malnutrition Fund constituted under section 7;
(c) "malnutrition area" includes malnutrition affected naxalite and backward tribal
areas; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission to be known as the National Malnutrition Policy Commission for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson;
(ii) a Vice-Chairperson;
(iii) five members from amongst persons of ability, expertise and standing
having experience in the field of public health; and
(iv) two consultants from backward, tribal and naxal affected areas,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowance payable to and other terms and conditions of the services
of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, members and consultants shall be such, as may be
prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall provide such member of officers and employees
alongwith technical experts as may be necessary for the proper coordination and functioning
of the Commission.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of officers, employees and technical experts shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. Every State Government shall provide detailed information to the Commission
regarding:—
(a) total malnutrition affected areas earmarked by the State Government;
(b) detailed information of plans to eradicate malnutrition;
(c) detailed information of the plans started by the Central Government in the
State to eradicate malnutrition;
(d) total number of backwards, tribals and malnourished persons; and
(e) detailed information of the total funds spent on welfare of backwards, tribals
and malnourished persons.
6. (1) The Commission shall, on receipt of information from a State Government
under section 5, appoint a team of experts to study the current status of the backward, tribal
and malnutrition affected areas and , make recommendations to the States with respect
to:—
(a) measures to solve the problems of underweight, anaemia and dwarfism at the
time of birth in children of the malnutrition affected areas;
(b) access to health service for safe maternity, safe natal care and safe mother
care in backward areas;
(c) improvement in the health awareness and education system in the tribal and
naxalite affected areas of the country;
Constitution
of the
National
Malnutrition
Policy
Commission.
Officers and
employees
of the
Commission.
State
Government
to provide
detailed
information
to
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(d) effective implementation of the ongoing schemes to bring down child
malnutrition by the Central Government.
(e) steps to eradicate prevailing diseases relating to malnutrition such as rickets
and  anaemia; and
(f) take preventive measures to overcome the incidence of malnutrition among
children, pregnant women and lactating mothers.
(2) The team of experts appointed under sub-section (1) shall, at every six months, visit
the malnutrition affected backward and tribal areas in the country and shall recommend
measures to overcome malnutrition and for better utilization of the Fund.
(3) The Commission shall, on the basis of the report submitted by the team of experts,
release adequate funds to a State Government for development of malnutrition affected
backward and tribal areas.
7. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Fund to be known as the Malnutrition Prevention Fund to implement the provisions of this
Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more succesive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Malnutrition
Prevention
Fund.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The biggest strength of any country is its public which means its human resource. The
working population is considered as strength  of  that nation. India has always benefitted
from this very feature, but there is a problem faced by India which is becoming a national
challenge, i.e. malnutrition. The country has taken firm steps to end malnutrition, but due to
the huge population of India the measures and plans undertaken in this direction are not
enough. Now, India is capable enough to have sufficient store of grains and even then if a
child remains malnourished it is a matter of concern. There are 4.7 crore malnourished children
in India who are not able to display their full human potential. This means every four out of
ten children are facing this very problem.
Malnutrition is a big hindrance on  the country's way to development. In the 'Global
Hunger Index' report presented in 2017, India slipped by forty-five positions and is ranked
100th in the Index. It is important that the Government and the Ministries concerned and
institutions work hand in hand in order to uproot the problem like malnutrition.
The total numbers of malnourished people in India is approximately 19.50 crore.
According to a report of the United Nations, India is taking various steps to address this
challenge. Various steps are being taken to double the income of the farmers by 2022, work is
also being done to increase the irrigated land, coarse grains are being encouraged. India has
taken various measures to end malnutrition in the past two decades wherein Midday Meal,
Anganwadi Programme, providing dietary items to the poor through Public Distribution
System and National Food Security enactment have been included.
In the presented Economic Survey 2017-18, they stated that child and mother
malnutrition is still a big challenge for India. Presently, malnutrition is a widespread problem
in almost fifty per cent. of the villages of India. Of the total deaths per year in India, the
reason behind five per cent. of them is malnutrition. According to the report by UNICEF the
total number of malnutrition affected children is 14.6 per cent., out of which India alone has
5.7 crore. It is worrisome that forty-seven per cent. of the children of our country below the
age of three years are malnourished. According to the Family Health Survey-4 of 2015-16,
height of 38.5 per cent. of the children upto five years of age is far below their age due to
malnutrition. According to the figure, seventeen lakh children die before attaining the age of
one year whereas 1.08 lakh children are unable to complete even one year of age.
Hence with the aim to uproot the grave problem of malnutrition from the country and
to accelerate the development in the backward, tribal and naxalite affected areas establishment
of "National Malnutrition Policy Commission" is proposed in the Bill.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NIHAL CHAND CHAUHAN
November 28, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a National Commission for the
development of malnourished, backward and tribal areas. It also provides for the salaries and
allowances for the Chairperson  and other members of the Commission. Clause 4 provides for
availability of required officers and employees by the Central Government for proper
coordination and functioning of the Commission. Clause 6 provides for appointment of
technical experts for issuance of funds to States for development of malnutrition affected
backward and tribal areas. Clause 7 provides for the constitution of a Malnutrition Prevention
Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees  one hundred
crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers  the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of National Malnutrition Policy Commission and for  matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2517LS(S3)—19-12-2018.