Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 228 of  2022
THE CENSUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋංආൺඍං Sඎඉඋංඒൺ Sඎඅൾ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Census Act, 1948.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Census (Amendment) Bill, 2022.
 (2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
   2. For section 3 of the Census Act, 1948, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), 
the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
Short title and commencement.
Substitution of new section for section 3.
37 of 1948

“3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare its intention of taking a census in the whole or any part of the territories to which 
this Act extends, decennially (every ten years), and thereupon the census shall be taken.
 (2) The Central Government shall release the latest Census data in the year 2024 
and thereupon the Census shall be conducted and be made public decennially: 
Provided that in exceptional circumstances, the release of Census data may be 
delayed by not more than two years:
Provided further that if when the Central Government fails to release decennial 
Census data, the Central Government shall lay the reasons for such delay before each 
House of Parliament and get approval of the House with at least two thirds majority.”
       Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,—
“(a) 'census' shall include information about the education, income and caste of 
the population (individuals or households), in addition to the demographic parameters;
(b) “income” of the population shall include the source of income, level of income 
and any other parameters representing disposable income of the households; and 
(c) “caste of population” shall mean the self declaration of the name of the caste 
and sub-caste by individuals or households.”.
   
Central 
Government to 
take census.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Census Act, 1948 governs the conduct and release of census data in India. 
This law in its present form does not have provisions mandating the timing and frequency 
of census in our country. For a diverse country like India, census data is very crucial as it 
provides information about the growth, development of citizens across gender, communities, 
age groups and regions. This serves as an important tool through which the Government can 
design new policies for population groups that are stagnating and identify target populations 
for their policies. 
 In India where there is much diversity in social, income and education status, census 
can also validate backwardness of certain communities. In K.Krishna Murthy and others v/s. 
Union of India (2010), the Supreme Court held that it cannot comment on the quantum 
of reservation provided for Other Backward Classes (OBCs) without contemporaneous 
empirical data about the nature and implications of backwardness. It held the Executive 
responsible for conducting rigorous empirical inquiry into the patterns of backwardness that 
act as barriers to political participation of OBCs.
 Following the judgment, to study the social, educational and economic backwardness 
of OBCs the Centre initiated empirical enquiry into OBCs on 02 October, 2011 in the 
form of Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC), 2011. But this SECC, 2011 data is 
withheld by the Central Government on the pretext of inaccuracy of the data, when in fact 
the Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India has deposed before the Standing 
Committee on Rural Development in 2016 that data has been examined and 98.87% data on 
individuals’ caste and religion is error free. The Central Government contradicted itself by 
further claiming in the Parliament that no study was undertaken by them on OBCs.
 Since the political participation of more than 56,000 OBCs in Maharashtra and 
9 lakh OBCs across India, through reservation in local Government is threatened, it is 
imperative to conduct a census that includes information about the education, income and 
caste of the population, in addition to the demographic parameters.
 This Bill aims to precisely do this, by stipulating timing and frequency of census and 
by inclusion of caste, income related parameters in the regular census itself. This provision 
does away with the need for undertaking a completely new Socio-Economic and Caste 
Census. The Bill, thus, bestows liability on the Central Government to conduct empirical 
study on the progress and backwardness of various communities across the country and 
release the data decennially (every ten years).
 Political reservation of communities and their participation in local-self 
government is important as it empowers the community that the elected representative 
belongs to. The objectives of democratic decentralisation are not only to bring governance 
closer to the people, but also to make it more participatory, inclusive and accountable to 
the weaker sections of society. Many States including Maharashtra, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Kerala are experiencing roadblocks to conducting local 
body elections due to a lack of empirical data on OBCs.
            Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                        SUPRIYA SULE
      19 November,  2022.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ Oൿ Rൾඅൾඏ ൺඇඍ Sൾർඍංඈඇඌ Fඋඈආ Tඁൾ Cൾඇඌඎඌ Aർඍ, 1948.
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 37 ඈൿ 1948)
*                         *                            *          *
 3. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare its 
intention of taking a census in the whole or any part of the territories to which this Act 
extends, whenever it may consider it necessary or desirable so to do, and thereupon the 
census shall be taken.
*                         *                            *          *
Central 
Government to 
take census.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Census Act, 1948.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.)