                                                            Bill No. 229 of 2022
THE DALIT, BACKWARD AND OPPRESSED YOUTH
(DEVELOPMENT AND WELFARE) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive national
policy for ensuring overall development of the dalit youth belonging to the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes
and oppressed categories and for their welfare to be undertaken
by the Central Government and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dalit Backward and Oppressed Youth
(Development and Welfare) Act, 2022.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the
Government of the State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘backward youth’ means youth belonging to castes which have
been declared, by notification in the Official Gazette, as backward by the
appropriate Government from time to time;
(c) ‘dalit youth’ means a youth belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be;
(d) ‘oppressed youth’ means a youth who has been a victim of any
cruelty or discriminations for the reason that he professes any faith or religion
other than religion or faith professed by majority of persons in that State or
belongs to a caste not covered in SCs or a victim of poverty, as the case
may be;
(e) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) ‘youth’ means any person who has attained the age of eighteen
years but is not above the age of forty-five years.
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate
a comprehensive national policy for the overall development and welfare
of the dalit, backward and oppressed youth of the nation.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
sub-section (1), the national policy may provide for:
(a) Free higher education, including medical, technical and
information technology education;
(b) Free coaching training for admission to management courses
with assured admission in management institutes of repute;
(c) Books, stationery, equipment and educational gadgets free
of cost;
(d) Scholarships in deserving cases;
(e) Hostel facilities free of cost;
(f) Free public transport facilities;
(g) Monthly pocket expenses allowances at such rate as may be
prescribed;
(h) Free entertainment facilities;
(i) Free access to all libraries and technical institutions;
(j) Training in sports to every eligible youth covered under this
Act and facilities and appropriate incentives to participate in sports
activities, events and tournaments in and outside the country;
(k) Provision of free of cost healthy and nutritious meals to all
the student youth covered under this Act in the schools, colleges,
universities, hostels and technical institutions;
Definitions.
Formulation of
comprehensive
national policy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(l) Free medical and healthcare;
(m) Apprenticeship in business, trade, vocation etc. in factories
and commercial establishments;
(n) Providing military training to physically fit youth covered
under this Act and those successfully completing training to be given
preference for recruitment in defence services;
(o)  Free of cost coaching and study material for all India
Services and other competitive examinations which are conducted
by Union Public Service Commission, State Public Service
Commissions and other examinations bodies such as of Railways,
Banks Staff Selection Commission and other bodies of the
Government at the Centre, States and Union Territories; and
(p)  Such other facilities, incentives and welfare measures as
may be prescribed from time to time.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the appropriate Government shall provide gainful
employment to the youth covered under this Act as per their ability and
qualification.
(2)  If the appropriate Government fails to provide gainful
employment, the youth shall be paid unemployment allowance on monthly
basis at such rate as may be prescribed till he is given gainful employment.
5. The Central Government shall–
(i)  appoint expert committees in the capital of every State and
Union Territories and in every district for carrying out the purposes
of this Act;
(ii)  promote youth cooperatives such as village industry
ventures, dairy projects, food processing, poultry, fair price shops,
LPG distribution at village or district level to provide self employment
to youth belonging to dalits, backward and oppressed classes; and
provide requisite financial assistance and guidance to them for
procuring raw materials and promoting marketing;
(iii) ensure availability of requisite credit at nominal rate of
interest from the Banks and other Financial Institutions to the youth
covered under this Act for their self employment projects; and
(iv) extend such other welfare measures to the youth covered
under this Act as it may deem appropriate and necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
6.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) The Central government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Employment
and
unemployment
allowance.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The youth are the strength of a strong nation and are capable of
substantially influencing polity. In recent times, youth have transformed
some monarchies into Republics by overthrowing monarchial power. As
such, youth are always at the centre stage of socio-political activities of
every country and similar is the position in our nation.  To maintain this
strength, a clear youth policy is required to rid the country of problems
related to education, poverty, nutrition, employment opportunities, self
employment, vocational training, health, sports etc. The country at present
has no institutional mechanism to harness the potential of our youth and
channelize their energy for the betterment of the country. The plight of the
youth belonging to backward communities such as Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes who have been oppressed
for centuries is even worse. Even today the Dalit youth have to face social
ostracization; though thanks to the reservation policy propounded by
Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, many of them have made some progress,
but youth of the backward classes still require special attention because
there is need to instill a sense of belonging among them by providing them
all opportunities for their overall development so that they too can contribute
to the progress of the country to their full potential. The facilities and
opportunities should be provided as a matter of right and it should not be
allowed to remain a privilege of the elite only.  Employment needs to be
guaranteed to them and if employment opportunities are not provided to
them, they have to be given unemployment allowance. They have to be
linked directly to the production processes by eliminating disparities
between rural and urban youth. For this, a comprehensive national policy
is an absolute necessity.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                           JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’
22 November, 2022.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a national policy for the Dalit,
backward and oppressed youth under which various facilities are to be
provided to such youth. Clause 4 provides for employment opportunities
and payment of unemployment allowance by the Government. Clause 5
provides for promoting youth co-operatives such as village industry ventures,
dairy projects, food processing etc. at village and district level and
requisite financial assistance; requisite credit at nominal rate of interest
from banks and other financial institutions and other welfare measures to
the youth. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore may be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of Rupees Twenty Thousand
crores may also be involved for creating assets and infrastructure.
6

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill gives the power to the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the purposes of Bill. As the rules will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive national
policy for ensuring overall development of the dalit youth belonging to the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes
and oppressed categories and for their welfare to be undertaken
by the Central Government and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Janardan Singh ‘Sigriwal’, M.P .)