1
Bill No. 229 of  2019
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 62 of the Representation of the People Act 1951, in sub-section (5),—
(a) the words, "or is in the lawfull custody of the police" shall be omitted; and
Short title
and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 62.
5
43 of 1951

(b) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person convicted of an
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not more than five years or subjected to
preventive detention under any law for the time being in force:".
2

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are more than 4 lakh prisoners in the country (419,623, including pre-trial and
remand prisoners, according to the National Crime Records Bureau, on 31 December 2015).
A person who is an under-trial has no right to vote, but a person who has committed a grave
offence and is on a parole, or on a bail has a right to vote. This is a nothing but miscarriage
of justice. In a country like India, where the constitution has guaranteed equal rights and
equal protection of the same, it seems obnoxious and superfluous if the country does not
protect the political rights of its citizens.
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 was enacted to provide for the conduct of
elections of the Houses of Parliament and House or Houses or the Legislature of each State,
the qualifications and disqualifications for membership of those Houses, the corrupt practices
and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the decision on doubts and
disputes arising out of or in connection with such elections.
For the purpose of deepening of democracy, it is our duty that we confer the right to
elect one's representatives to those who deserve it. Anything less than that it is a hollow
system which needs to be rectified with immediate effect. Countries across the world have
provided voting rights to people under trial and to prisoners having duration of imprisonment
less than five years. So what is stopping us to provide the same.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 with a
view to confer voting rights to every under-trial who is under custody of the police and to
the person convicted of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not more than
five years.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE V ARUN GANDHI
July 3, 2019.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE  REPRESENTA TION  OF  THE  PEOPLE  ACT , 1951 (43 OF  1951)
* * * * *
62. * * * * *
(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, whether under a
sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful custody of the
police:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to preventive
detention under any law for the time being in force:
Provided further that by reason of the prohibition to vote under this sub-section, a
person whose name has been entered in the electoral roll shall not cease to be an elector.
* * * * *
Right to vote.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act,1951.
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2690LS(3)—24-10-2019.