As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

20 APR 2a

Feel

BARRDIS

ae, Be
Bar- है 7

yeep eed nen

Bill No. 76 of 2000

THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
COMMISSION) BILL, 2000
By
Dr. RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SincH, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the prevention of corruption and disclosure of assets by Ministers, elected
representatives, civil servants and businessmen for public scrutiny and for matters
connected therewith,
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Prevention of Corruption (Establishment of a
Commission) Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Short title,
extent and
‘commence-
ment.


Application of
the Act.

Definitions,

Establishment
of a Commis-
sion for
‘corruption at
the Centre and
State level

Headquarters
of Commis-
sion.

2. This Act shall apply to:—
(@ civil servants;
(ii) elected representatives; and
(iéi) businessmen.

3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise Tequires,—

(#) “assets” includes all properties, both movable and immovable, held by Person
or by his dependants, legally or benami within the country and/or abroad;

(ii)“businessman” means and includes a person who is engaged in any business,
trade, commerce, service or manufacture construction or any adventure or concem in
the nature of trade, commerce or manufacture or service or construction and earns
more than rupees twenty thousand or more per month or pays income-tax or any other
tax to the Union or the State Government under any law for the time being force;

(iii) “Chairman” means and includes Chairman of the Council of States, Chairman.
of Legislative Council ofa State and Chairman of any Municipal body or Panchayat
Institution or by whatever name he is called;

(iv) “civil servant” means and includes a person appointed to public services and
Posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or a State or local body including an
employee of an Organisation or a Corporation or a Company ora Firm or an Institution
owned or aided or controlled by the Union ora State or: any other Authority established
under any law or statute; 4

(०) “Commission” means a Commission established under section 4;

(vi) “dependant” includes spouse, parents, sons and unmarried daughters;

(vii) “elected representatives” means and includes a Member of Parliament or
aMember of State Legislature or a Member of any Municipal body or any Panchayat
Institution;

(viii) “Minister” means a Minister in the Union or in a State;

(ix) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(x) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the People or the Legislative
Assembly of a State,

4. (1) There shall be established a Commission to be known as the Commission
for Prevention of Corruption at the Centre and in every State.

(2) The Commission at the Centre shall be headed by a retired Judge of the
Supreme Court and shall consist of such other number of members, as may be
prescribed.

(3) The Commission in the State shall be headed by a retired Judge of the High Court
and shall consist of such other number of members, as may be prescribed.

(4) (i) The Chairman and other members of the Commission at the Centre shall be

appointed by a Committee headed by the Prime Minister and consisting of the S|

of the House of the People, Union, Home Minister and the Leader of Opposition i

the House of People.

(di) The Chairman and other members of the Commission in a State shall e
appointed by a Committee headed by the Chief Minister and consisting of Speaker of

the Legislative Assembly of the State, Home Minister and the Leader of Opposition i

the respective State Legislative Assembly.

5. (1) The headquarters of the Central Commission shall be at New Delhi.

(2) The headquarters of a State Commission shall be at the respective State


6. The Commission shall perform the following functions: —

(i) to thoroughly examine the details of assets of every Ministers, elected
representative, civil servant and businessman within the country and abroad:

(ii) to call for any detail it may require in connection with the proper examination
of the documents;

(iii) maintain a register containing therein complete details and other information
regarding the assets of individual, year-wise;

(iv) publish a directory or a booklet containing details of assets of all persons to
whom this Act applies for the public use on payment basis;

6) suggest any other measures as it deems fit so as to contain the corruption
prevalent in the high places of society; and

(vi) to perform such other work as may be assigned to it from time to time.

7. The respective Government shall provide sufficient number of staff to the
Commission for conducting its business efficiently.

8. (7) Every Minister and an elected representative as defined in section 3 shall
submit to the Speaker and the Chairman, as the case may be, complete details of assets
owned by him and his dependants in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.

(2) The Speaker and the Chairman, as the case may be, shall forward the details of
assets submitted to him to the respective Commission.

9. Every civil servant shall submit the details -f his assets owned by him and his
dependants in such form and manner, as may be prescribed to his appointing authority who
shall cause the same to be forwarded to the respective commission.

10. Every businessman shall submit the complete details of assets owned by him and
his dependants to the respective Commission, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.

11, (1) Whosoever fails to submit or does not submit the complete detail of assets
owned by him and any of his dependants to the respective authority shall be subject to such
punishment as may be deemed necessary by the respective Commission.

(2) An offence under sub-section (/) shail be cognisable.

12. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
tules for carrying out the purpose of this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters:-—

(i) the form in which the declaration of assets shall be submitted;
(ii) the manner _ in which the declarations shall be scrutinised;

(iii) the action to be taken in case of declaration of assets submitted by Minister
or elected representative or civil servant or a businessman, is false;

(iv) the action to be taken in case of delay in declaration of assets; and
(0) any other matter that is necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.

Functions of
the Commis-
sion.

Provision for
staff to the
Commission.

Submission of
complete
details of
assets by
Ministers and
elected
representa-

tives

Submission of
details of
assets by civil
servants to the
appointing
authority

Submission of
details of
assets by
businessmen to
respective
‘Commission.

Punishment in



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There is rampant corruption in public life throughout the country. Corruption has
become a major problem in public life. It is evident that influential persons in high positions
have amassed huge assets disproportionate to the known sources of their income. They are
spending money openly more than that of their legitimate incomes. This is a corrupt practice
which has brought disgrace to the esteemed institutions of the nation. Transparency is the
only major solution to end corruption. Therefore, annual disclosure of assets/property owned
or possessed by the Minister, Members of Parliament, Civil Servants and Businessmen and
their dependants is imperative in order to restore public faith in the political system. It will
help in curbing the corruption which is plaguing public life and put a check on the growing
tendency of acquiring easy wealth/property among general public through corrupt practices.

Hence the Bill.

NEW DELHI, RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH
March 2, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a Commission
for prevention of corruption at the Centre, consisting of a retired Judge of the Supreme
Court and other members to examine assets held by Ministers, elected Representatives,
Civil servants and businessmen within the country/abroad. Necessary provision for State
Commission has also been made,

Clause 7 provides that respective Government shall provide sufficient number of
staff to the Commission for conducting its business effectively. The Bill, therefore, ifenacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees fifty lakh is likely to be involved per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also
likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame the rules for carrying
Out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules to be framed will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the prevention of corruption and disclosure of assets by Ministers, elected
Representatives, civil servants and businessmen for public scrutiny and for the matters
connected therewith.

(Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—107LS—1 1-04-2000.