'} 
(t) 
OORRIGI£NDA 
to 
THE ALL-INDIA KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRlJl:S 
COMMISSION BILL, 1955. 
(As Introduced in 10k Sabha) 
In page 2, line 29,-
fo~ "Gov~rrm,ent El¥" ~ "Government nayll , 
(2) In page 3,-
m. lines 16, ~ -
"of its functions under this Act, the 
Central Government may, by" 
(3) . In page 3, line 20,-
atter IIJn~y think fit" insert a CODll1a. 
(J..) In page ;,-
In the marginal heading to clause 15 -
for "F-ower to Central Governnent" read 
- "Power of Central GovernmentU-
(5) In page 5, line 38,-
a.tter "idth the previous ai-proval of" insert a 
COlIlna.. 
(6) In page 7, line 42,-
for colon" read tull stop. - -
Docket page 
(7) In the Docket page, in the Certificate by Secretary, 
(1) ~ "Const:lii.u~t,cnll read "'Const1tution"; am 
(11) for thb colon at th~ onei, read tull stoP. 
-
NEW Drl:LHI, 
The 25th April, 1 955. 

BiUNo. 22 of 1955 
THE ALL-INDIA KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
COMMISSION BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment oj,a Commission jor the development 
of khadi and village Industries and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
CHAPT£R I 
PRELIMINARY 
, 1. (1) This Act may be called the All-India Khadi and Village Short title 
Industries Commission Act, 1955. and extent. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
10 (a) "the Board" means the Board constituted under 
section 9; 
(b) "chairman" means the chairman of the Commission; 
(c) "Commission" means the All-India Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission established under section 4; 
I' (d) "khadi" means any cloth woven on handlooms in India 
from cotton, silk or woollen yarn handspun in India or from a 
mixture of any two or all of such yarns; 
(e) "member" means a member of the Commission and 
includes the chairman; 
20 <I) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
Definition •• 

Powcrtoadd 
totbe Sche-
dule. 
BatabUsh-
mentand 
constitution 
oftbe Com-
mission. 
Secretary of 
the (.om-
million. 
Resignation 
ofoffi('e by 
member. 
Vacancies 
etc. nOt to 
invalidate 
acts and pro-
ceediDgs of 
the Commi-
Ilion. 
~ 
(g) "secretary" means the secretary of the Commission 
appointed under section 5; and 
(h) "village industries" means all or any of the industries 
specified in the Schedule and includes any other industry deemed 
to be specified in the Schedule by reason of a notification under , 
section 3. 
3. (1) The Central Government may, of its own motion or on 
the recommendation of the Commission, declare, 'by notification in 
the Official Gazette, any other industry to be a village industry to 
which this Act applies, and thereupon the industry so declared shall 10 
be deemed to be an industry specified in the Schedule for the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall 
be laid before each House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it 
is issued. 15 
CHAPTER II 
THE ALL-INDIA KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION 
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf, there 
shall be established a Commission to be called the All-India Khadi 20 
and Village Industries Commission which shall be a body corporate 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may by 
the said name sue and be sued. 
(2) The Commission shall consist of not less than three and not 25 
more than five members appointed by the Central Government, one 
of them being nominated by the Central Government to be the chair-
man thereof, and the members may be either whole time or part-
time, as the Central Government ay direct. 
5. The Central Government shall appoint, after consultation with 30 
the Commission, a member other than the chairman, to be the 
secretary of the Commission. 
6. Any member may resign his office by giving not~e in writing 
to the Central Government and, on such resignation being notified 
in the Official Gazette by that Government, shall be deemed to have 35 
vacated his office. 
7. No act 01' proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid by 
reason only of the existence Gf aDN' vacancy amongst its members or 
any def~ct in the constitution thereof. 

3 
.•. (1) The Commission may ItlSOciate with itself in such manner 
and for such purposes as may be determined by regulations made 
under this Act auy pel'soDs whose al'sislallce or advice it may desire 
ID complying with any of the provisions of this Act. 
S (2) A person associated with it by the Commissidn under sub-
10 
section (1) for any purpose shall have the right to take part in the 
disCllssions of the Commission relevant to that purpose, bui shall 
not have the right to vote, and shall not be a member for any other 
purpose. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, depute one or more officers of the Government to attend 
any meetings of the Commission and to take part in the discussion~ 
of the Commission, but such officer or officers shall not have the 
t'ight to vote. 
IS 9. For the purpose of assisting the Commission in the discharge 
of the Commission, but such officer or officers shall not have the 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be called 
the All-India Khadi and Village Industries Board consisting of a 
chainnan and such number of other members as the Central Govern-
20 mellf. may think fit. chosen from among persons who, in the opinion 
of the Central Government. are qualified as having had experience, 
and shown capacity, in matters relating to the development of khadi 
and village industries. 
Temporary 
association 
of persona 
with the 
CommillOn 
{or particu1al 
purpose •• 
Constitution 
o{the Board 
10. The Commission shall ordinarily consult the Board with Commission 
25 respect to the discharge of its functions under this Act. ~he a:::3!t 
11. (1) The Commission shall meet at such times and places and 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), observe 
such rules of J)rocedure in regard to transaction of business at its 
meptings (including thf" quorum at meetings) as may be provided by 
30 regulations made by the Commission under this Act: 
Provided that the Commission shall meet at least once in every 
month. 
(2) The chairman or, in his absence, any member chosen by the 
members present from among themselves, shall preside at a meeting 
35 of the Commission. 
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Commission shall be decided 
by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting and 
in t~ case of an equality of votes, the chairman or, in his absence 
the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
Meeting' of 
the Com-
mission. 

Term of 
office and 
conditioDs 
of service of 
chairman, 
leer-etary 
and other 
memben. 
Officers and 
servants of 
the Com-
asion. 
4 
12. The term of office and the terms' and conditions of service 
of the chairman, the secretary and the other members shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 
13. (1) The secretary shall exercise such powers and perform BUell 
duties as may be prescribed or as may, from time to time, be delegated 
to him by the Central Government or by the chairman. 
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf, the Commission may appoint such other officers 
and servants as it considers necessary for the efficient performance 
of its functions: 
Provided that no person whose honorarium or the maximum 
salary exceeds five hundred rupees per month shall be appointed by 
the Commission except with the previous approval of the Central 
Government. 
CHAPTER III 
FuNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
, 
10 
Fdt~cti~! 14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the 
mission. Commission shall generally be to plan, organize and implement 
programmes for the development of khadi and village industries. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 20 
foregoing' power, the Commission may take such steps as it may 
think fit-
(a) to plan and organise the training of persons engaged in 
the production of khadi or in village industries; 
(Ib) to build up a reserve of raw materials and implements 2, 
and to supply them to persons engaged in the production of 
khadi or in village industries at such economical rates as may 
be suitable in the opinion of the Commission; 
(c) to provide for the sale and marketing of khadi or of 
products of village industries; 3u 
(d) to encourage and promote research in the technique of 
production of khadi or in the development of village industries, 
or to provide facilities for a study of the problems relating to 
khadi or village industries; 
(e) to maintain or assist in the maintenance of institutions 3' 
for the development of khadi or village industries; 

5 
<f) to undertake, assist or encourage the production of khadi 
or the development of village industries; 
(g) to promote and encourage co-operative efforts among 
manufacturers of khadi and persons engaged in village industries; 
(h) for ensuring the genuineness of, and for granting certi-
ficates to producers of, or dealers in, khadi or the products of 
any village industry; 
(i) to carry out any other matter which may be prescribed. 
15. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Commis-
10 sion shall be bound by such directions as the Central Government 
may give to it. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ~EPORTS 
16. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
I, by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commis.ion in each 
fbumcial year such sums as may be considered necessary for the 
performance of the functions of the Commission under this Act. 
17. (1) The Commission shall have two separate funds to be 
called the khadi fund and the village industries fund, and all grants 
30 and advances made to the funds, from time to time, by the Central 
Government for the purposes of the development of khadi or the 
development of village industries, and all receipts of the Commission 
in respect of khadi or village industries shall 'be credited to the 
khadi fund or village industries fund, as the case may be, and all 
2, payments by the Commission for or in respect of khadi or village 
industries shall be made from the appropriate fund. 
(2) Except as otherwise directed by the Central Government, all 
moneys belonging to such funds shall be deposited in the Reserve 
Bank of India or with the agents of the Reserve Bank of India, or, 
ge where there is neither an office of the Reserve Bank of India nor 
an agent of the Reserve Bank of India, in a Government Treasury, 
or be invested in such securities as may be approved by the Central 
Government. 
Power to 
Ccntrlll 
Government 
to give 
directions. 
Payment to 
the Com-
mislion. 
Funds of the 
Commil8lon. 
11. Subject to the provisions of section 19, the Commission shall Power of the 
., have power to spend such sums as it thinks fit on purposes authorised <:~~~n 
by this Act: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent 
the Commission from spending, with the previous approval of 

Budget. 
Borrowjng 
t)f money. 
Transfer of 
Iiabili tics 
and obHga-
tiODa to the 
Commis8ion. 
6 
the Central Government, such moneys, as . it thinks fit on any such 
purpose outside the territories to which this Act extends. 
19. (1) The Commission shall, by such date in each year 3S may 
be prescribed, prepare and submit to the Central Government for 
approval two separate budgets in the prescribed form for the next 5 
financial year, to be called the khadi budget and the village industries 
budget, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure in respect 
of khadi and village industries respectively during that financial 
year. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4), no sum 10 
sha 11 be expended by or on behalf of the Commission unless the 
expenditure is covered by a specific provision in the budget approved 
by the Central Government. 
(3) The Commission may within the respective limits of the 
khadi budget and the village industries budget, sanction any reappro- 15 
priation from one head of expenditure to another or from a provision 
made for one scheme to that in respect of another, but in no ca~e 
shall a reappropriation of fund be made from the khadi budget to' 
the village industries budget or from the village industries budget 
to the khadi budget: 
Provided that no reappropriation from the head 'Loan' to any 
other head of expenditure and vice versa in either budget shall be 
sanctioned by the Commission, except with the previous approval of 
the Central Government. 
(4) The Commission may, within such limits and subject to such 25 
conditions as may be prescribed, incur expenditure in excess of the 
limit provided in the budget approved by the Central Government 
under any head of expenditure or in connection with any particular 
scheme, so long as the aggregate amount in either budget approved 
by the Central Government is not exceeded. 30 
20. Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf. the ~:. 
Commission shall have power to borrow on the security of the khadi 
fund or the village industries fund or any other asset for any purposes 
for which such funds may be applied. 
21. All liabilities incurred by, all contracts entered into with. 3' 
and all matters and things engaged to be done by or for the Central 
Government in connection with the development of khadi or village 
industries at any time after the 14th day of January, 195.'i, and before 
the commencement of this Act, snall, after such commencement, be 
deemed to have been incurred by, entered into with, 40 
or engaged to be ~one by, or for, the Commission. 
\ 

Zi. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, includ-
ing the profit and loss account and the balance sheet in such form 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Com-
ptroller and Auditor General of India at such intervals as may be 
prescribed by him. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General of India and any person 
10 appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Commission shall have the same rights and privileges and authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor Gene-
ral has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, 
in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books. 
I, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and 
to inspect any of the offices of the Commission. 
(4) The accoUl).ts of the Commission as certified by the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf together with the audit report thereop shall be 
30 forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Govern-
ment shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parlia-
ment. 
23. (1) The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government, 
at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or 
2S as the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements 
and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme 
for the promotion and development of khadi and village industries, 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, require. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
30 Commission shall, as soon as possible after the end of each financial 
year, submit to the Central Government a report, in such form and 
before such date as may be prescribed, giving a true and full account 
of its activities, policy and programme during the previous financial 
year. 
35 (3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
40 Gazette, direct that the Commission shall be dissolved from such 
date as may be specified in the notification and thereupon the Com-
mission shall be deemed to be dissolved accordingly: 
Ac:coUilts and 
Audit. 
Returns and 
reportl. 
Dllsolution 
oftbe Com-
mission. 

8 
(2) On and from the said date-
(a) all properties and funds which, immediately before the 
said date, were in the possession of the Commission for the pur-
poses of this Act shall vest in the Central Government; and 
(b) all members shall vacate their office as members of the S 
Commission. 
~ rulc~~ 25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow- 10 
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the term of office of. and the manner of filling casual 
vacancies among, the members of the Commission, and the terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairman. the secretary and the 
other members including the salaries and allowances to be paid 15 
to them and the travelling and daily allowances to be drawn by 
them when they are on tour; 
(b) the disqualifications for membership of the Commission 
and the procedure to be followed in removing a member who is 
or becomes subject to· any disqualification; 20 
(c) the term of office and other conditions of service of, the 
procedure to be followed in the discharge of functions by, and 
the manner of filling casual vacancies among, members of the 
Board; 
\, 
(d) the powers and duties to be exercised and performed by 2$ 
the secretary; 
(e) the date by which, and the form in which, the budget 
shall be prepared and submitted in each year under sub-section 
(1) of section 19; 
(f) the procedure to be followed for placing the Commission 30 
in possession of funds; 
(g) the procedure to be followed. and the conditions to be 
observed in borrowing moneys or in granting loans; 
\ (h) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, 
, contracts may be entered into·by or on behalf of the Commission; 3S 
" \ (i) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Com-
~ission shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 22; 

9 
(j) the form and manner in which the returns, reports ot 
statements shall be submitted under section 23; and 
(k) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
26. (1) The Commission may, with the previous sanction of the 
, Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there-
under, for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act . 
. 
(2) In particular. and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
10 following matters, namely:-
(a) the terms and conditions of appointment and service and 
the scales of pay of officers and servants of the Commission, other 
than the secretary, including payment of travelling and daily 
allowances in respect of journeys undertaken by such officers and 
15 servants for the purpose of this Act; 
(b) the time and place of meetings of the Commission, the 
procedure to be followed in regard to transaction of business at 
such meetings and the quorum necessary for the transaction of 
such business at a meeting; 
20 (e) the delegation of powers and duties to the secretary or 
any employee of the Commission; 
(d) the maintenance of minutes of meetings of the Commis-
sion and of the Board and the transmission of copies thereof to 
the Central Government; 
25 (e) the persons by whom, and the manner in which, pay-
ments, deposits and investments may be made on behalf of the 
Commission; 
(f) the custody of moneys requil'ed for the current ('xpendi-
ture of the Commission and investment of moneys not so re-
30 quiredj 
(g) the maintenance of accounts; and 
(h) the form in which certificates of genuineness of khadi 
and products of village industries may be granted by the Com-
mission. 
35 (3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, rescind any regulation which it has sanctioned and there-
upon the reiulation shall cease to have effect. 
Power to 
make rep-
lations. 

THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(h) and 3(1)] 
1. Bee keeping. 
2. Cottage match industry. 
3. Cottage pottery industry. 
4. Cottage soap industry. 
5. Flaying, curing and tanning of hides 8hd skins and ancilliary; 
industries connected with the same and cottage leather industry. 
6. Ghani oil industry. 
7. Hand-made paper. 
8. Manufacture of cane-gur and khandsari. 10 
9. Palm-gur making and other palm-products industry. 
10. Processing of cereals and pulses. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With a view to promoting and developing khadi and village indu~ 
tries. the Central Government constituted a Board called the All 
India Khadi and Village Industries Board and vested it with powers 
to prepare and organise programmes for the production and develop-
ment of khadi and village Industries and to deal with other matters 
incidental theretp. It has, however, been found in actual practice 
that the work of the Board has been hampered by certain procedural 
and financial difficulties, difficulties which would be removed if a 
Commission were set up .by law. It is, therefore, proposed to set up 
a Commission, called the All India Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission, which will be vested with powers, executive as well as 
administrative, for the proper development of khadi and village in-
dustries. The Bill also provides for the All India Khadi and Village 
Industries Board functioning as an advisory body which will advise 
the Commission generally in the discharge of all its duties. 
NEW DELHI; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 16th April, 1955. 
• 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
In order to assist the development of Khadi aod village industries. 
the. All-India Khadi and Village Industries Board was set up under 6 
reso.ll1tion of . the Government of India in the Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry, No 45-Cot. Ind. (5)/52 dated the 14th January, 1953. 
The Bill contemplates the establishment of the All-India Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission as a statutory body. 
Under clause 16 of the Bill, the Central Government may, from 
time to time, make grants and advances to the fund of the Commis-
sion to the extent the Central Government considers necessary. The 
expenditure on khadi will be met from the provision for the d~velo~ 
ment of handloom and khadi industries and expenditure for the 
development of village industries from the provision of cottage and 
small-scale industries under the appropriate budget head of the 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry. Clause 19 provides that the 
Commission shall prepare and submit to the Central Government 
for approval two separate budgets accordingly and expenditure will 
be incurred after this budget is approved. 
It is not possible to indicate what such expenditure would be. 
During 1954-55, the amounts sanctioned by the Central Government 
for the, development of khadi by way of both loans and grants were 
about Rs. 3' 25 crores and for ..-mage industries about Rs. 90 lakhs. 
Loans and grants to be made to the Commission in subsequent 
years will vary and will be determined from time to time. It is, 
however, expected that the expenditure during the next few years 
would show a considerable increase. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in respect 
of which such rules may be made are specified in that clause, and 
ienerally speaking, they are of routine character. They relate to 
the tenns and conditions of service of the Chairman, and other 
members of the Commission including the Secretary; the procedure 
to be followed in removing any member who may become subject 
to any disqualifications; filling up of casual vacancies in the Com-
mission; powers and duties of the Secretary; prescribing the form 
in which the budgef sliould be prepared and the date on which the 
budget should be submitted to the Central Government; procedure 
for placing the Commission in possession of funds, borrowing of 
money by the Commission; procedure to be followed by the Com-
mission in maintaining its accounts and the 'submission of periodical 
reports and returns to the Government. 
Clause 26 of the Bill empowers-the Commission to make, sub-
ject to the previous sanction of the Central Government, regula-
tions consistent with the provision of the Act and the rules made 
thereunder. The matters in respect of which such regula:Jon may 
be made aie also specified therein. These powers are also of a rou-
tine character. They relate to the terms and conditions of appoint-
ment and service of the officers and servants of the Commission 
other than the Secretary; tlie pro('edure to be followed in conducfing 
the mel"tings of the Commission, Bnd maintaining a minute of such 
meetings; delegation of powers and duties to the Secretary or any 
employee of the Commission, manner in which payments, deposits 
and tnVestme~~ on behalf of the Commission may be made and 
the form in which certificates of genuineness (If khadi and products 
of 'Villaielnd.uatl'iea may be aranted by the Commission. 
---
13 

LOK SABPA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a Commiss!on for the 
development of khadi and village Industries and for 
matters connected therewith. 
The President bas, jn pursuance of clause (3) of article u7 
,of the Constituiton of India, ~mmended to the 
Lok Sabha, the cons:deration of the Bill: 
M~ N. KAUL, 
sei;IlIJ1'ji •. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister for Commerce and 
Industry.) 