Bm No. 22 of 1951. 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MEMBERS OF 
PARLIAMENT BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the salaries and allowances of Members oil ParZiament. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called the 
Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 .. 
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of June, 1954. 5 
2. Definitions.-In this Act,-
(a) 'committee' means a Committee of either House of Parlia-
ment, and includes a Joint Committee of both Houses; 
(b) 'member' means a member of either House of Parliament, 
but does not include- 10 
(i) a Minister as defined in the Salaries and Allowances 
of Ministers Act, 1952 (LVIII of 1952); and 
(ii) an officer of Parliament as defined in the Salaries and 
Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953 (20 of 1953); 
(c) 'new member' means a member who takes his seat in JS 
either House of Parliament after the commencement of this Act 
and includes a member who is re-elected or re-nominated; 
(d) 'period of residence on duty' means the period during 
which a member resides at a place where a session of a House 
of Parliament or a sitting of a committee is held or where any 20 
other business connected with his duties as such member is 
transacted, for the purpose of attending such s~ssion or sitting 
or for the purpose of attending to such other business, and 
inc1udes-
(i) in the case of a session of a House of Parliament, a 2S 
period of such residence, not exceeding three days, immediate-
ly preceding the commencement of the session and a period 
• 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
2 
of such residence, not exceeding three days, immediately 
succeeding the end of the session, and 
(ii) in the case of a sitting of a committee or any other 
business, a period of such residence, not exceeding two days, 
immediately preceding the commencement of the business of 
the committee or other business and a period of such resi-
dence, not exceeding two days, immediately succeeding the 
conclusion of the business of the committee or other business; 
Explanation.-A member who ordinarily resides at a place 
where a session of a House of Parliament or a sitting of a Com-
mittee is held or where any other business connected with his 
duties as such member is transacted shall, for the duration of the 
session or .sitting or the time. occupied for the transaction of other 
business (including the three or two days immediately preceding 
or succeeding), be deemed to reside at such place for the purpos~ 
of attending such session or sitting or, as the case may be, for 
the purpose of attending to such other business; 
(e) 'tenn of office' means,-
, (a) in relation to a person who is a member at the com-
mencement of this Act, the period beginning with such 
commencement and ending with the date on which his seat 
,becomes vacant; 
(b) in relation to a new member, the period beginning 
with the date when such member takes his scat in the House 
of the People or the Council of States, as the case may be, 
and ending with the date on which his seat becomes vacant. 
3. Salaries and daily allowances.-( 1> A member sbaIl be eatlUed 
to receive at his option, elther-
(a> a salary at the rate of three hwu1red rupees per meaaem 
during the whole of hls term of o8ice plus an allowance at the 
rate of twenty rupees for eaeh day durlng any period of resldeaee 
on duty, or 
(b> an allowance at the rate of forty rupees ·for each day 
during any period of residence oa duty. 
(2) The option given by sub-section (1) shall be exercised provi-
sionally in the. first insfJince for a period of one year, and finally on 
the expiry of that period. 
(3) A member shall, by letter addressed to the Chainnan of the 
Council of States or, as the case may be, the Speaker of the House 
40 of the People,-
4S 
(i) exercise his provisional option not later than the 30th 
day of June, 1954, or if he is a new member, within one month of 
taking his seat in the House of the People or the Council of 
States, as the' case may be; and 
-(ii) exercise his final option, during the month of June, 1955, 
or, if he is a new member, during the month immediately follow-
ing the date on which he completes the first year of his term of 
office. 

3 
(4) If a member does not exercise an option in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (3) and within the period specified therein. 
he shall-
(a) in the case of a provisional option, be deemed to have 
opted for the daily allowance specified in clause (b) of sub-section 5 
(1) of section 3; 
(b) in the case of the final option, be deemed to have exer-
cised such option in terms of the provisional option exercised or 
deemed to have been exercised by him. 
4. Travelling allowances.-(I) There shall be paid to each 10. 
member In respect of every journey performed by him for the pur-
pose ot attending a session of a House of Parliament or a meeting 
of a Committee or for the purpose of attending to any other busi-
ness connected with his duties as a member, from his usual place of 
residence to the place where the session or the meeting Is to be held IS 
or the other business Is to be transacted and for the return journey 
tl'Olll such place to his usual place of residence-
(a) If the journey Is performed by rail, an amount equal to 
two second class fares plus one third class tare for each such 
journey, irrespective of the class in whieh the member actually 20 
travels; 
(b) if the journey Is performed by air, an amount equal to 
one and one-toUlth of the air fare for each such journey; 
(e) it the journey or any part thereof cannot be performed 
~~M~ . ~ 
(i) where the journey or any part thereof Is performed by 
steamer. an amount equal to one and three-fifths ot the fare 
(without diet) tor the highest class In the steamer for each 
such journey or part thereof; 
(U) where the joumey or any part thereof Is performed 30 
by road, a road mUeage at the rate of eight annas per mile 
for each such joumey or part thereof. 
ExpIaDatlon.-For the purposes of sub-clause (U) of clause (c) of 
this sub-section, the expression 'journey' shall Include the journey 
from and to the railway station, port or aerodrome to and from ~S 
the usual place of residence ot the member or, as the case may be, 
tberesldence of the member at the place where the session of the 
House of Parliament or a meeting of the Committee is to be held or 
where any other business is to be transacted. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a 40 
member who performs a journey by road between places connected 
'hy rail or steamer, either wholly or in part, may draw the mileage 
allowance referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) of sub-section 
(1) in place of the travelling allowance which would have been 
admissible to him if he had travelled by rail or steamer, as the case 4S 
may be: 
Provided that the total amount of travelling allowance drawn by 
such member for the entire journey sha1l not f'xceed the amount which 
would have been admissible to him had he performed such journey by 
rail .or by steamer, as the case may be. So 

4 
5. Travelling or dally allowances for intermecUate journeys.-
Where a member absents himself for less than fifteen days during a 
session of a House of Parliament or a sitting of a committee for visit-
ing any place in India, he shall be entitled to receive travelling 
S allowances in respect of such journey to such place and for the 
return journey-
10 
. (a) if the journey is performed by rail, equal to two second 
class fares for each such journey irrespective of the class in which 
the member actually travels; 
(b) if the journey is performed by air, equal to one fare by 
air for each such journey: 
Provided that such travelling allowances shall not exceed the total 
amount of daily allowances which would have been admissible to 
such member under section 3 for the days of absence if he had not so 
15 remained absent. 
Explanation.-The provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (1) and 
of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall, so far as may be, apply to travel-
ling allowances payable under this section as they apply to travelling 
allowances payable under that section. 
20 6. Allowances during short intervals between the termination of 
one session and the commencement of another session, etc.-Where 
the interval between the termination of one session of a House of 
Par.liament or, as the case may be, one sitting of a Committee and the 
commel)cement of another session or sitting at the same place does 
25 not .exceed seven days and the member concerned elects to remain 
at such place during the interval, he shall be entitled to draw for each 
day of residence at such place a daily allowance at the rates specified 
in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3 according to 
the option exercised or deemed to have been exercised by him under 
30 that section: 
Provided that if the member leaves ;uch place during the interval, 
his absence from the place shall be treated as absence during a session 
of a House of Parliament or a sitting of the Committee, as the case 
may be, and the provisions of section 5 shall apply, accordingly. 
35 7. Power to make rules.-(l) For the purpose of making rules 
under this section, there shall be constituted by the Speaker of the 
House of the People, in such manner as he deems fit and after' consul. 
tation with the Chairman of the Council of States, a Joint Committee 
of both Houses of Parliament consisting of ten members from the 
40' House of the People and five members from the Council of States. 
(2) The Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament constituted 
under sub-section (1) may make rules to provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the shortest possible routes for the performance of any 
4S journey; 
(b) the manner in which fractions of a day shall be dealt with 
for the purpose of determiflin~ th~ dlliIy allowance admissible 
for that gay; 

S 
(c) the travelling allowance admiss~ble where a member is 
provided with free transit for the whole or apy pax:t of a journey; 
(d) the travelling allowance admissible where the place from 
which a member commences his journey or to which he returns 
is not his usual place of residence; S 
(e) the form in which certificates, if any, shall be furnished 
by a member for the purpose of claiming any allowance under 
this Act; and 
<f) generally for regulating the payment of daily and travel-
ling allowances under this Act. 10 
(3) Any rules made under sub-section (2) shall not take effect until 
they are approved and confirmed by the Speaker of the House of the 
People after consultation with the Chairman elf the Council of States 
and are published in the Official Gazette, and such publication of the 
rules shall be conclusive proof that they have been duly made. IS 
8. Validation of payment of certain travelling allowances.-Where 
a member is entitled to receive travelling allowance in respect of 
any journey performed by him by a railway before the commence-
ment of this Act, he shall, notwithstanding the abolition of first class 
accommodation on such railway, be entitled and be deemed always 20 
to have been entitled to receive travelling allowance in respect of 
such journey at the rates admissible to him in accordance with the 
law then in force, as if the first class accommodation had not been 
abolished on such railway and as if the member had in fact travelled 
by first class and, accordingly, the payment of any travelling allow- 2S 
ance to such member in respect of such journey at the aforesaid rates 
shall be deemed to have beEm validly made and shall not be called 
in question by any authority on the ground only that the first class 
accommodation had been abolished on such railway and that tne 
member had not in fact travelled by first class. 

6 
STA~MENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 106 of the Constitution Members of Parliament are 
entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time 
to time be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in 
that respect is so made, allowances at such rates and upon such con-
ditions as were immediately before the commencement of the Consti-
tution applicable in the case of members of the Constituent Assembly. 
Parliament has not enacted any law so far with the result that 
Members have continued to receive allowances at rates which applied 
to the Members of the Constituent Assembly despite certain changes 
which have since occurred in the classification of accommodation on 
railways. This Bill seeks to establish the basis on which salary and 
allowances should be drawn by Members of Parliament. 
S. N. SINHA. 
NEW DEIJU; 
The 3rd May, 1954. 

7 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill does not involve any new expenditure. Budgetary pr~ 
vision for expenditure on allowances of Members of Parliament has 
been made from time to time under the Budget Head relating to 
Parliament. 
MEMORANDUM ON THE DELEGATION OF LEGISLATIVE 
POWERS UNDER THE BILL 
Claus"=, 7 ot the Bill empowers a Joint Committee of Parliament 
to make rules to provide for certain matters of detail, such as the 
shortest routes for the performance of any journey, the manner in 
which fractions of a day shall be dealt with for the ~etermination 
of daily allowance etc. The rule-making power is of a· routine and 
normal character. . 
, , 

HOUSE ·OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the salaries and allowan:es of Members of 
Parliament. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the House 
of the People the consideration of the Bill. . 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(SAri S. N. Sinha, 
Minister for Parliamentary Affairs.) 
GIPD-LAD-I79 M of LaW-7"S'S4-I7S0 