HOUSE OF T HE PEOPLE. 
-----'" 
Corrigenda 
to 
THE AIR CORPORATIONS BILL, 1953 •. 
• At page 3, line 36, 1:.Q~ "underatking" ~ 
"undert aking" 
• At page 17, line 14, m It( j) the training 
of the employees of either of the two 
Corpora .. 1t ~ "( i) the issue of stocks 
or bonds by either of the two Corpcretions" 
pege 19, line 22, ~ "cr" ~ "for" 
• At pege 20, line 9, ill "approval" ~ 
It apprcved" 
New Delhi, 
he 21st March, 1953. 
M •. N. KAUL, 
SEC RET A R Y. 

Bm .0. d.of 1111 
THE AIR CORPORATIONS BILL, 1953 
[As DfTBODUOBD IN TBJI HOU.B OJ' TBB PBOPLB] 
A 
BILL 
to provide fOT the 8Ittabli.hment 0/ AiT OOTporationB, to fllflilitat4 th9 aoqui-
unon by the Air OorporationB 0/ undertaking' belonging to oewin 
e~iating (liT companiB' and genBTaUy to mGlke furtkft and hettll1 frot'l-
lIionll /UT the ol,eration of air tTaJUport '6rvic6'. 
BE it enaoted by Parliament as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELlKIN ABY 
1. Short title aDd commencemeut.-{l) This Act may be called the 
Ail' CorporEitions Aot, 1953. . . 5 
(2) .It shall come into force on such date as th~ Central Government o:ay, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. DeflnitioDa.-In this A<lt, unless the context otherwise requires,:-
(i) "aircraft" means any maohine which oan derive suppon in the 
atmosphere from reactions of the air and includes b"Uoon8, whetlher 10 
fixed or free, airships, kites, glidE'rB -e.nd flying machines j 
(il) "air transport service" meana a service for the .tr~port by air 
of persons, mails or any other thing, animate or inanimate, for ally kind 
of remuneration whatsoever. whether such servioe consists of a single 
flight or a series of flights; 15 
(iii) "r.ssociate" in relation to either of the two corporations means 
any subsidiary of the oorporation or any person 'with whom the corpora-
tion ha.s made an agreement in acoordaDce with olause (It) of sub-section 
(2) of seotion 7; 
(iv) "Corporations" meBns "Indian Airlines" and "Air-India Iuter- 20 
national" 6Rtablished under section 3, and "Corporation" means either 
of the Corporations j 

2 
(v) the expression "existing air companies" means the Air India 
Ltd., thlJ Air Services of India Ltd., the Airways (India) Ltd., the 
.Hhal·at AirwnYi Ltd., the Deccan Airways Ltd., the Himalayan Avia-
tion Ltd" the Indian National Airways Ltd., the Kalinga Airlines and 
the Air Indi'l International Ltd., and "existing air oompany" meRns 
any of the existing air oompanies ; . 
(1,i) "prescribed" means presoribed by rules made UDder this Act; 
(vii) "regulations" means r~l" made by either of the two 
corporatiollil under section 42; ~ u 10000'~J 
10 (viii) ·'seheduled air transport service" means an air transport 
service undertaken between the same two or more plooes and operated 
oocording to a published time table or with flights so regular or fre-
quent that they constitute a recognisably systematic series, eooh flight 
being open to use by members of the public; 
16 (iz) "Tribunal" means the Tribunal constituted under section 25. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION AND V1Jp.1CTIONB OF THE CORPORATIONS 
a. lDoorporr.tIoIl of the OorpontloM.-(l) With effect from such date 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Ge.zette, 
20 appoint, there .hall be established two Corporationa to be known as "Indian 
AirJines" and ·'Air·India International' '. 
(2) Each of the Corporations aforesaid shall be a body corporate having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provi-
sions of this Act. to acquire and hold property, and may by its name sue 
28 and be Rued. 
t. OODltitutioD of the Oorporat&mul.-{l) Each of the CorporatiOOls shall 
consist of not less than five but not more than nine members appointed 
by the Central Government and one of the members shall be appointed 
by the Central GovArnme,t to be the Chairman ot the Corporation: 
80 Provided that.-
(a) the same person may be appointed to be the Chairman of both 
the Corporations or Chairman of one and member of the other; 
(b) the SQUle persons may be appointed to be members of both 
the Corporations. 
36 (2) During the temporary abeence of the Chairman of either of the 
Corporations, the Central Government may appoint another person, whtlther 
~ Inembul' of tbe COl'poration or not, to act as the Chairman. 
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to disqualify the 
~ General Manager of either of the Corporations from being appointed to be 
40 a member thereof. 
6. OoIDdltiODl of servtce of mamberl.-{l) The Chairman and other mem-
beN of ea.ch of the. Corporations shall ordinarily be entitled to hold oftiC6 
for the period specified in the order of appointment, unless the appointmenfl 
is terminated earlier by the Central Government: 

3 
I 
~ Provided that any member may at· any time by notice in writing 
rddressed to the Central Gavernment resign his office: 
Provided further that a member relinquishing his offioe on the expiry 
'thereof shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
(9) Subject to the previous apprcmU. of the Central Government, each of 5 
the (~orntion8 Bhall pay to every member thereof in respect of his offi.oe 
88 such, such rejl'mnLl'lition b.v way of allowances, fees or otherwise &"8 lllay 
be determined by the Corpora.tion, and to the Chairman in respect of his 
offiee ElS such. Hu~h remuneration, whether in addition to the remuneration 
to which he mAy be entitled in respect of his office as 1\ member or other- 10 
wise, lUI it may t'imilarly determine. . 
I 8. Vacancy 111 OorporatlOD not to 1I1vaUclate prooee41Dp.-No act or pro-
~
ce.eding of eit·her of the Corporations shall be deemed to be invalid by 
Mon merely of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
OJPoration. 11 
.~ , '. , 
7. !'unctions of the Oori'HXatlOM.--(l) Subject to the rules, if any, mAde 
y thA Central Government in this behalf. it shall be the function of each 
f the Corporatiolls to provide safe, efficient, adequate, economical and pro-
erl.v oo-ordinnted air transport services, whether internal or international 
r both, and the Corporations shall so exercise their powers 88 to eecure 
hat the air transport services are developed to the best advantage and, in 20 
articular, so exercise those powers as to aecure that the -servicea are pro-
ided at reasonable charpa. 
(2) Without preJudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-
ction (1), each of the Corporation. shall, in partioular, have power- 21 
(a) to operate any air transport service, or any flight by aircraft for 
a commereill.l or other purpose, and to carry out all forma of aerial 
work; 
(b) to provide for the instruotion and training in matters connected 
with aircraft or flight by aircraft of persons employed, or desirous of 30 
being employed, either by the Corporation or by any other person; 
(c) with the pre~iouB approvRf of the Central Government, to pro-
mote any organization outBide India for the purpose of engaging in any 
activity of R kind which the Corporation has power to carry ~n; 
(d} to acquire, hold or dispose of any 1'roperty, whether movable 3G 
or immovable, or Rny air transport undere.tking; 
(6) to repOlr, overhaul, reconstruct, assemble or recondi~ion air-
otaft, vehicles and other maChines. or to repair, overhaul, reconstruct, 
recondition, aBSemble or manufacture parts, Accessories and instru-
ments of. or for, aircraft. vehioles or ot.her machines, whether O\vued 
b:v it or by !tny other person ; ~ 

, 
(f) to enter' into and perform all such contmcts I\S Ilre oaloulbted.l 
to further the effioient performanoe.of its duties and the exercise of its ~ 
powers under this Aot; 
(g) to perform any functions as agent or contractor in relation to 
an air transport service operat~d by any other person; 
(h) with the previous approval of the Central Government, to'ellter 
into agreements with any person engaged in air transportation with a 
view to enabling such pet'llOn to provide air transport servicea cn behalf 
of or in 88sociation with the Corporation; 
10 (i) with the previous approval of the Central Government, to deter-
mine and levy fares and freight rates and other charges for or in respect 
of the carriage of passengers alld goods on air transport servioes operated 
by it; 
(j) to take suoh steps 81! arc calculated to promote the interests of 
the COl'poration 01' to improve the services the Corporation may pr0-
vide, including provision of catering, rest-rooms, good" ·.,;heds, Vial'e-, 
houst's nnd tronsport by lond or water in connection with uny ait' 
transport service or any other a.menity or facility; 
(k) to take all such steps as may be neo8lJ8ary or convenient for, or 
may be incidental to, the e:s:ercise of any power, or the discharge of any 
function or duty confelTed or impoMd on it by this Act, 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be oonstrued a8-
(a) authorising the disregard by the Corporation of any law for the 
time being in force, or 
(b) authorising any person t.o institute any proceeding in respect of 
a duty or liability to which eitht'l' of the two Corporations or its em-
ployees would not otherwise be subject. 
8. Appointment of oftlcel'l aDd other 8mploJMII of the OorporatlOU.--(l) 
For the purpose of enabling it efficiently to discharge ilis functions under 
3Q this Act, each ofthe Corporations shall appoint a General Manager and, sub-
ject to such rules as may be prescribed in this behalf, may also appoint BUO~ 
number of other officers and employees as it may think necessary : ~, 
Provided that the appointmE'nt of the General Manager nnd lIuch other 
categorieR of offinf'rs as may be specified (after consultation with the Chair-
36 man) in such rilles shall Ill' subject to the approval of the Cen"r.:ll GOV~Tll­
ment. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 20 eVAry person ernplo.ved by each 
of the two Corporations shall be subject to such conditions of service and 
shull b(· entit)pd to such remuneration Bnd privileges as may be determined 
'0 b!f regulatiom; made by the Corporation by which he is employed. 
(3) Neither the General Manager nor any other employee of either of the 
Corporations shall, during his service in the Corporation, be employed in any" 
capacity whatsoever or directly or ir.directly have any interest in any a.ir 
transport Ilndertaking other than an undertaking of either of the Corpora-
~ tions, or in any other undertaking which is interested in any contract with 
f'ither of the two Corpora.tions. 

5 • 
9. Oorparationa to act on buiDe. prIDc1ple •• - In carrying out any of the 
• duties vested in it hy this ACti, each of the two CorporatioJls shall set tIO 
far as may be on business pl'in<'iples. 
CHAPTER m 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT IS 
10. Oapital of the 00rp0ntI0aa.-(1) AlI non-recurring ~enditUre 
incurred by the Central G(,vernment for, or in connection w~~It, each, Clf 
the Corporatiou8 up to the dote of esta.blishment of that CorpQration and 
declared to be capital e:xpenditure by that Government, shull ile treated 
AS capital provided by the Central Government to that Corporation. 10 
(2) 'rhe Centrp.l Gm'E.rnment may provide any furth(1r cnpital th'lt 
msy be required by either of thE' Corporations for the <:a.rrj'l:lg on of the 
business of the Corporation or far any purpose connellted therev.ith on 
such temlS lind conditions as the Central Government may determine. 
(3) Each of the Cc:rporations may, with .he consent oC thE:' Cent.ral 15 
J]overulllcnt, or in f\ccordlllJ~e with the tenns of nny gf'neral ""lthm'ity 
-'(jiven to it by th'3 Centrol Gol"t::rnment--
(a) borrow mouey for all or any of the purposeil of the CorJ,orl\-
tiOll, lind 
(Il) secure the T,a;\"ment of liny IDODey borrowed hv ii or Pony J(J 
interest thereon by the issue of bonds, debentures, debenture··Rtock 
or any mortgage or charge or other security on the undertaking of the 
Corporation or any pud of it nr on any of its properties. 
11. Veltlng of properties in the OorporaUou.-All properties, assets 
and fun<lt; oWlled or -r.cquired by the Central Government for the purpose 26 
of Indian Airlines or, ns the east. may be, Air India lnte.'ndiollsl bl'forc 
the est!\bJishment 0: those Corporations shall, on such ostabli9linll'nt, vest 
in the Corporation cOllcerned. 
11. J'undl of the O(ltpOratiODl.-( 1) Each of the OorpU'l'utioTls shall 
have ita own funds and all receipts of the Corporation shall be carried 30 
therto ond all payments for the Corporation shall be made therefrom. 
(2) ~3ach of the Corporations may keep in current h'Ccount with any 
,~scheduled bank as dt!fined in F,eetion 2 of the Reserve Bauk of ll"iiu .\oct, 
1934 (11 of 1934) or in any other bank approved by the Central Govern· 
men~ in this behalf a slim of money not exceeding such amounli fiS may 35 
be prescribed, but any moneys in excess of the said sum s~all b~ deposited 
in the ReBerv\~ Rank of India or with the agents of the Resen'f\ Ba:lk of 
India or invested in such n'n.nner as may be approved hy the Ceutral 
Government. 
.. 
13. Powers of the Corporations in regard to ezpendlture. -E:\~h of the 40 
Corporll~ion" sh~dJ have power .subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
spentl such Bun's I.S it thinks fit on objects or for purposes authorised by 
this Act and such sum sholl be treated 8S expenditure out of the lunds of 
that l'orporatiou. 
1'. Oorporation to &88Ume obligations of Oentral GO'vllDDlent in 46 
respeot of certain matter •• --All obligations incurred, all "ont~cta elltert>Cl 
into and all matters and thingI engaged to be done by, with. or for the 
Cenfral Government for any of the purposes of tbia Act before the establish • 

• 8 
meut of either of the Corporations shall be deemed to have been incurred,~ 
entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for Indian Airlines or, as I 
th~ CBse mllv bA, Air Inuia International according as the ()!'1i .. utic,n~, 
c:.mtracts, rnatturs and things relate to the purposes of the f')r:m~r C"rportt-
6 tion or the latter. 
16. Account. and aUdit.-(l) The Corporations shall ma'nta\in pro,)er 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statemeut of 
accounts, including the profit and los8 account and the balance shed in 
such form 8S may be prescribed by the Central Government in cOllllul-
10 tation with the Comptrc.ller and Auditor General of India. 
(9) The aecounta cf the CorpcoratioDS shall be· audited aunu1llly h" t.be 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India and any expenditure incurred by 
him in connection wit·h such audit shall be payable by the Corporations 
to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
15 (3) 'l'he Comptroller and Auditor General of India and any person &1>-
pointed by hi:11 in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Corporu-
tiOIlIi shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in conneotion 
with such audit us the Comptroller and Auditor General has in connection 
with the audit of Government aC'.lOunts and in particular, shall have the'" 
10 right to demand the produotiOll of books, Hccounts, connected vouchers and 
other documents and papers and to inspect any of the omces of tue 
Corporatiolis. 
(4) 'l'be accounti of the Corporations as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of Iudia m any other person appointed bv him in this 
i5 behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annua.lly 
to the Central Government and that Oovernment .hall OIll1SA tb~ 1111 Ule k-
he laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
30 
36 
OHAPTER IV 
ACQl'l~ITION OF UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING AIR COMPA)JIBS 
16. U'nclertaklDp of eaistllli air compaDiea to .est III the Oar.poratSonl.-
On such date HS the Central Government may, by nollifioatioo in the 
OffioiBl Gazette. appoint (hereiuafter referred to B8 "the !Iop~oint(id dllte''), 
there shall 00 trall&ferred. to ColJd vest in- ' 
(a) Indiaa Airlines, the undertakings of all the existing air com. 
panies (other thau Air India International Ltd.), and .1. .. 
(b) Air India International, the undertaking of the Air India. Inter-
national Ltd. 
1'1. QeJleral .8tot 01 v8lttDa 01 und.erta1dDp in the Oorporatlou.-
(1) The undertaking of etv·h of tbe existing air companies which is tran~­
~ ferred to and which ve'lts in either of the Corporations under seotioll 16 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (9) of section 22, be deemed 
to includ9 all atlsets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all pro- • 
• perty, movable an~ immovable, including lands, works, workshops, aircraft. 
cash balances, reserve funds, investment,1I and book debts and all other , 
4IS right"! and interests Hrising out of such property as were, immediately be-
fore the appointed date in the ownership, possession or power ot tt.o cxil;tinfl ~ 
air company in relation to the undertaking, whether within or without lndin, . 
and all books of aC(lount' and doouments relating thereto, r.nd, subject to 
the provisions oontained in aectiCln 22, shall also be deemed to inolude an 
50 borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kin~ then subsistinl.Z of 
the existing coDlpany in relation to the undertaking. 

'1 
(.2) Any la.nds. works. aircraft, aliisets or other property 'ves~~n~ in the 
Corporation under sub-section (1) shall by force of such vestinJ be freed 
and discharged from all trusts, obligations, mortgages, chargd~, liens and 
other encumbrances afteoting it, and any att80hment, injunotion or allY 
othtll' order of a oourt rl~strictil1~ the use c:A such property in an~· Jntillner 6 
shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(3) Subject to ih~ othtlr provisions contained in this Act, 0.11 t'olltral'ti 
and working arra~gements which are subsisting imme<iidotely before the 
"pp:>inted date and atlectinll all} of the exii>ting air comp'-\!lias sh,,11, tn Iii 
80 far as they· relate to the undertaking of that company, cease to have 
efff'ot or be enforceable allain~t, that company or any per'lon wber WIlS 
surety or had guaranteed the perfonnunce thereof. Bnd snail be oC D.£I full 
force and effect agnillst or ill favour of the Corporation in which the under-
taking h&& vested hy viI tue of this Act, and enforceable :IS fully alld 
etJectuBlly as if, insteat! of the company, the Corporation had been named 15 
therein or hlld heen B party thereto. 
(4) Any proceeding or cause of action pending or existing immediately 
befon' the appointed tInt\' Ly 01' against any of the existing nir oGm))Bnies 
in relation t/) it'l undertaking may ~B from that date be continued and 20 
enforced by or agaiust the Corporation in which it has vested by virtue of 
this Ac.t as it might have been enforced by or against tnat cODlpany if 
this Act had not been passed, and &hall cease to be enforceable by or asainst 
that co~pany, its surety or ~uarantor. 
18. Belerntion of scheduled air t ..... .....- Hrvlcea to the n..-... --....... -r--- :!G ~.-(1) .After the appointed date, it shaJ.l not be lawful for any person 
other than the Corporations or t.heir associates to operate any scheduled 
e.i.r transport service fro~, to, in or acrols India: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall restrict the right of any 
person,-
(a) for the ·purpoae of any air transport undartaking of which 39 
flbe pn~cipal place of 'busiD81s i. in aDY QOUDUy OlJteide India, to 
operate an ail' trauaport service in aoBOrdance ~th the terms of 
any agreement for the time beiDJ( in foree between the Government 
gf India and tdle GOTernment of that country; or 
( b) to catTy passengers for the aple purpose of instructing tbem 36 
in flying or on duties of aircrews; or 
(0) to carry pass~n¥ers or geods for the sole purpose of providing 
an air ambulance service or a rescue or relief service during any 
natural cnlumity; or 
(I) to carry passengers or goods for the sole purpose of providing 40 
joy ~d8S consisting of 1Jights operated from and to the same aer0-
drome or place without any intermediate landing or for the purpose 
of nerial survey, fire fighting, crop-dusting, locust control or sny other 
aerial work of a similar nature, 
(.9) Any person who operates an air transport service in contravention 
of the provisions of this section shall be liable in respect of each offence 4$ 
to a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. or to imprisonment 
which may extend to three months, or to both. 
-

8 
It;zplanation.-Th& operation of each flight shall oonstitute a !Separate 
offence for the purposes of this seotion. 
19. LicaDcea to celie to be valid.-With effect from the appointed 
date, all licences granted under the Indian Aircraft Act., 1984 (XXII of 
1984) or under the rules made thereunder for the operation of scheduled 
air transport services shall cease to be valid . 
. 20.. Provlsions ropecttng otIlcers. and employees of emUng air 
companl8l.-(1) Every offioer or other employee of an existing air 
company (exce'pt a Direotor, M&IUIoI'er, Managing Agen~ or ally other 
10 - person entitled to manage the whole or &0 substantial part of the busine88 
and affairs of the company .under a speoiaJ agreement) employed by 
that company prior to the first day of July, 1952, and still in its employ. 
meut immediately before the appointed date shall, in 80 far as Buch 
1~ officer or other employee is employed in conneotioQ with the under· 
taking whicn hilS vested in either of the two Corporations by virtue of 
this Act, become 8S from the appointed date an officer or other 
employee,' ~ the, caae ma.y be, of the Corporation in which the under· 
taking h~ vested. 8n4 shall bold his office or. service therein by the 
tenure, fit the remuneration and upon the' same terms and conditiolltl 
~r: and with tjhe 8&IQe rights an.d privileges as to pension and gratuity and 
otbermatters &.& he, would ha.ve held. the same under the existing air 
, com.pany if i_ ,UJ;lderta.king had not vest~ in the Corporation and shall 
continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Corporation 
is torminnted or uutil his remuneration, terms or conditions are duly 
2li,~~~ by(!Lc.~C9rp~ation: .... 
' .. Provided th~b' nothing .contained in thiR section shall apply to any 
rifficer or otheremplo,Ytle ,who has, by notice in writing given to the 
(Jorporatiml concerned prior to such date as may be fixed by the (Jentral 
'Uoyer~flnt by llotiticjJtion in the Official Gazette, intimated his intention 
30 of not becoming an offioer or other employee of the Corporation. 
'(9) As from :the fIoppointeddate the' trustees of the provident funds 
1 and' pension fundS· 'or 'pension schemes of each of the· existing air 
• . companies shaU tro1l8fer to the Corporation concerned the balances lying 
to the-credit;' of eaeh of t·he employees whose services have been trans-
35 fflrred to tha.t Cot'lloration by virtue of this Aot Iilld also all other balanoes 
of the !un4s or. schemA2 as shall remain after satisfying all demands nnd 
. liabilities, and t'hereupon . the trusteee shall be discharged of the trusts by 
virtue of this Act. 
, " . (8) .Notwitbsta.ndi,ng, anything contained in any law for the time 
.ro heinl in force, no director, manager, managing agent or a.ny other 
, .'tu.'8onentitled to manage the whole or a substantial part of the busi-
,ll~S~ . And af(airl1 of ,thecQmpany under a special agreemen~ shall be 
:,:i'qtitled to any compen,Sation against either of the CorporatIons for the 
.. ·.1088 of office pr, for tp.e prem!lture termination of any oontract of manage-
. .0 . mant' ent~red ihto by him With any existill~ /lir company. 
. " IJ •. ~ty to. deliver up poaeulon of property acquired and cloeR-
.lUlJtI ~~.-:-(l)·'Where any property has vested in either of 
t.be -.COJ:P.O~onlJ . unliler . ~cti.OD. 16, every person in whose posst!airion or 
custody or under whose control the. p!,"operty may be, shall deliver up the 
30 property to ~. Corporation oonoerDeci for1;hwi~. 
-

9 
• (.e) Any person who on tohe appoiuted date has in. his possession or 
under his control any books. documents or papcrs relatmg to any under-
tllking which has vested in either of the two Corporations under th18 
Act and which belong to an existing air company or ,would have 10 1/ 
helonged if its l\nderto.kin~ had not so vested shall be liable bO account " 
'for the said books. doclUmenta and papers to the Corporation in wh!ch 
tho undertaking has vested a.nd 'Jhall deliver them up to the Corporati0 n 
Or to such person 8S the Corporation may direct: 
Provided that the Corporation shall produce for inspectioo by such 
(lompllnies or their 8uthoriv.ed reprcRentative'.! the books of aecount !tnd 10 
documents as relate to the e.fiairs of the company for any period prior 
to. the appointed date. 
(8) Witbout prejudice to the other provisions cOntained in this section, 
it shall be lawfUl for t.he Corporation and the . Central Government to 
takt' all necessary steps for securing possession of all properties which 16 
have vested in the Corporation under secUon 16. 
-tJ 251. Duty of alatblg air companies to suPply partlcul&l'l.-(1) Where 
the undertaking of an existing air company vests in either of the Corpo-
rations under this Act, the existing air company shall, within thirty 
dnys from the appointed date or within such further time as the Corpo- 20 
ration concerned may allow in any case, supply to the Corporation 
pnrticulllors of book debts and investments belonging to and all liabilities 
and obligations of the company subsisting immediately before flhe 
appointed date, and also of all agreements entered into by the existin~ 
air company and in force on the appointed date under which by virtue 26 
of thi" Act. the Corporations have or will or may have liabilities except 
sllch agreement!> as the Corporation may exclude either generally or in any 
particulnl' case from the operation of this, sub-section. 
~ 
(2) If any existing air comp8.ny fails to supply to the Corporation con-
cerned particul0f8 of such book debt8, liabilities and &:greement8 within the 30 
time allowed to it for the purpose under sub-section (1), nothing contained 
in this .\r-t shaJI ,have effect so as to transfer any such book debts"liabili-
ties and agreements to or to vest the same in the Corporation. 
(8) Either Corporation may by notir-e in writing within a period of 
ninety days after submission of the particulars referred to in sub-section 
(1) intimate to the existing air company submitting the partioulars that 
such of the book debts and investments as are specified in the notice are 
not included in the properties vesting in the Corporation whereupon 
the compensation provided by section 25 of this Act u.ud the Schedule 
thereto shaU be reduced by the amount of such excluded book debts and ~ 
investments but the right of such existing air company to recover ad 
retain Stich exoluded book debts shall remain unaffected 'by this Act. -, ,.. 
28. Bight of OOrporattoDl to disclaim certain agreementl.-Where it 
appea.rs to either of the Corporations that the making of any suohagree-
ments 8S is' referred to in section 22 under which the Corporation has or ~ 
will hOlve or mr..y have liabilities WIIoIl not reasonably necessary for the 
purPr:'Jls of the activities of the existing air company or has not been 
entered into in good faith, the Corporation may, within six months from 
the appointed date;' apply to the 'rribunal for relief from such 8gt"eement, 

10 
30 
10 
and tnl' Tnbullal, i! satisfied after making such inquiry into the matte; 
8S Iii thinks nt that the agreement WBS not reasonably necessary for the 
purposes of the activities of the existing air compa.ny or has not been enter-
ed into in good faith, may make an order cancelling or varying the agree-
ment all such terms as it may think fit to impose and the agreement shall'. 
thereupon have effect accordingly. 
~. TraD8act1oDa rualtIDg in dlIIIpatton of U88t1.-(1) This section shall 
apply where any existing air company has. after the firat day of July, 1952, 
and before the appointed date,-
(a) made BUY payment to a.ny person without consideration or lor 
Iln Inadequate conaidera.tion; 
(b) sold or disposed of any of its properties or rights withou' 
c01lsideration or for an inadequate consideration; 
(0) acquired any property or rights for an excessive consideration; 
{d) entered into or varied any agreement so 8S to require an fOX-. 
cBl!.8in c:onaideration to be paid or given by the company;" ... 
(0) entered into any otber transaction of fluch an onerous nll·ture 
all to cause a loss toO or impose a liability on the company exceeding 
Any benefit accruing to the company; or 
(I) sold or otherwise transferred any, aircraft, equipment, machi-
nery or other property of book \1&'lue exceeding rupees ten thousand; 
and thB payment, .. Ie, disposal, acquisition, agreement or ,'ariation there· 
of, or other transsction or transfer, was not reasonably necessary for the 
purpClfe8 of the company or was made with an unreasonr.:ble lack of pro-
dene'e on the part of the company, regard being had in either case to the • 
oircumAtKllcefi at the t·ime, 
(9) .l!:ither of the Corporation. may, ·in the case of any such existing air 
oompany as ill refeued to in sub·seotion (1) the undertaking of whioh has 
vested in the COrpol"ation under this Aot, at any t.ime within six montbs 
fror1' tLe appointed date, apply for relief to the Tribunal in respect' of any 
transaction to whiClh in the opinion of the Corporation this section appliesj .. 
and all parties to the trans~tion shall, unlees the Tribunal otherwise "-
directs, be made par\ies to the application. 
(1) Where the Tribunal is satisfied that a transaotion in respeot of 
35 which an application is me.de is a tra~action to which this section applies, 
then, l)fllp-ss the Tribunl!J. i. also satisfied that the transaction was a proper 
trnnsllCtion I;nade in the ordinary course of busine6B regard being hai to the 
circuIDstc.ncell at the time a.nd was not; in anyway connacteci with any 
prllvisioll made by this A~t or with any anticipation of the making of any 
~ such provision, the Tribunal shall make such order against any of the • 
parties to the application \18 the Tribune.1 thinks just having regard to the 
ext.ent to which those parties were respectively responsible for the tr~na.o-
tion or b'3npfited from it and all the circumstance" of the case, • 
(4) Where an application is made to the Tribunal ullder this section in 
respect of any transaction and the applioation is det~"?in~d. in favour of 
the (1orporatIOIl. the Tribunal shall h&'Ve exolusive l~rlsdlctl0n to deter-
mine any claim!! out.anding in respect of the transactIon. 

11 
26. OGmpeuatloD &0 be line for oompal.lory aoqWlltion of under-
taJdng.-(1) Where tile uciertaldng of aar of the e.tiDe air oompaD1e.iw 
ve.ted in either of the OorporaUons under \his Act, compenaat1on ah&ll be 
liven by the CorporatiOD to that company in the maDDer apecUled 1n sec-
tion 2'T and the amOUnt ot ItIch compenaaticm Ihan be 4Nrm1Ded in tC- 5 
cordance with the principles apecUled in the Sahedule to this Act. 
(2) IotwttbltaadiJlC that uparak valuatlOllll lUe calcuJ.aHd in re8pdct 
of airframeli, aero-engine& and other pAyslc&l III&Y of the undertaking 
under the prlnclples apecUled. in the said Schedule, the amount of com-
pensatiOn to be given sh&1l be deemed to be a lilllie oompensation to be 10 
given for the undertaJdng u a whG1e. 
(3) The amount of the compensation to be given In accOrdance with tile 
aforesaid principles inay be determined by agreement between the Oorpl)o. 
ration &ad the -m.tiDC air cOmpany 00D0era.1Cl bat 11 there II DO .1ICh ~ee­
ment, the mat.ter IItal\ be referred to a trlbuul coutttuted for thII pur- 15 
poll by lb.e Gentral GoyelllDlent. 
2'. OonBtttutlOD of special trlbanal to 4eterlD1De. "campensatian.-(l) 
'fhe Tribunal to be coustituted undt'r sectien 26 shall consist of three mem-
bers appoillh~d by the CE'ntral Government, one of whom shall be a judge 
of (I High Court. iO 
!9) The Tribunal may for the purpose of deciding any matter under this 
Act Clhl)o!lfl olle or more persons pORRessing special knowledlle of any matter 
rell1t.ing to the cusp. under inquiry to /lBsist it in determininll any compen-
sation which is to hfl given under this Act 
(.1) The Tribunal shall have the powers of a civil court while t17ing a 25 
8uij under tbf1 Code of Civil Procedure. 1008 (Act V of 10(8) in respect of 
the followiuv ml.ottera:-
(a) t!ummoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him all oatb; 
(b) requiring the diBCovery and production of documents; 
(c) receivl1lg evidence on affidavits: 
(II) illluing commissions for the examination of witneaaes or'docu-
montR. 
30 
(4) 'l'he 'J'rihunflJ shall by B majority of its number regulate its own pro-
Ct!dure snd decide Bny m .... tter within its competence and may review its 35 
decision in the event of there being a mistake on the face of the record or 
• correct folly arithmotical or clerical error therein but subject thereto the 
decision of the 'l'ribunal on any matter within its jurisdiction shall be final 
and shall Bot be called in question in any court. 
Sl'1. Jlod€ of glv1ng OQIDpeDI&tlon.-(1) When t.b.e amount of compeDl&- 4.0 
UQU to be giveD under t.J:IJ8 Aot to &Il uIItln1 &1r company hu been deter-
mlDed under scctlon 23, the OorpOratiOll Ihall give to the oompauy one or 
more bondl of the face value of the amount Of compeuatiml 10 determlDed 
10SI luch pOl'tlon thereof u 18 payable In caah under WI section • 
.. 

10 
12 
(2) Out of the compeDlation to be given to each of the ezllting &lr 
companies under t.h11 Act, there Ibal1 be paid in caah-· 
(a) ten per cent, ot the amount of compeDlation payable to each 
of IDch companiel (which percentage shall be uniformly appHcable to 
all existing air companies) i or 
(b) the amount borrowed by' any luch company from any bank and 
outsLanding on the 31at day of December, 19&2, 01' on the appointed 
date, whlohever amount II Ie .. ; or 
(0) an amount equal to the cash of any ncb company which hu 
vested in the OorporatIon under thls Act i 
whichever of the amounts specUled in clauses (a), (b) and (c) II the 
greatdlt. 
~3) The bOnds afOresaid sha.ll btl luued by the Corporation with the pre-
viOUI approval 01 the Central Government and shall be negotIable and shall 
15 be redeemed at their face vaIue by the Oorporatlon concemed on the de-
mand of the holder within one hundred eighty days after the expiry 01 
flve years from the date of their Issue and the redt!mptlon or thS- bonda 
and payment of all interelt thereon sh&l1 be guaranteed by the Oentral 
Government. 
20 (') If within the expiry 01 the aaid period of one hundred and eighty 
days, the holder of any bond falls to reqUire payment of Its tace vallIe 
frOm the Corporation concemed, the bond shan cease to be redeemable at 
the option of the holder: 
Provided that in any case the Corporation may by notice require the 
26 holder of the bond to accept its face vaIue in caah at any time whether 
before or after the expiry of the period of flve years aforementioned, 
(IS) The holder of the bond shall be entitled to receive from the Oorpo-
ration interest on the bond at three-and-a-half per cent. per annum at luch 
intena18 al may be preSCribed, with effect from the appointed date and 
30 until the bond is duly redeemed. 
(6) Bonaa issued under this lectiOn shall, for the purpose of redemption 
and of computing interest be deemed to have been lIaned on the appoblted 
datt!o 
(7) by bond iJlued under the provtstoDl of thla section shall be deamed 
~ to be a security in which a trultee may innlt trust mODies ....;thln the 
mell.tlng of 8ectton 20 of the Indian TrUsts Act, 1882 (U of 1882). 
28. Winding up of emting company whOle undertaking hy been ao-
qu1red.-(l) The Central Government may, by order in writing, authorise 
aI1y eJ'isting uir C',ompany the undertr.'king of which has vested in either of 
40 the UOl'pOrntiollB, to be wound up voluntarily in accordance with the pl'O-
visione of the Indian Companies Act, 1915 (VII of HnS) relating to volun-
tary winding up: 
Provided thnt-
. (a) the winding up of the company Bhall commence on the day 
('n which tbe Central Government authorises the winding up withou. 
the pRs~ing by the company of any specir.l or other resolution for 
winding up; and 

13 
(h) the directors oi the existing compapy shall not be under un 
obligation to make any such statutory declaration as is required by 
8MtiClu 207 of the Iudian Companies Act, HH3 (VII of 1918); a.nd 
(c) the winding up of the company shall be continued by the direc-
tors of the existlt1g company in office at the time the Central Govern- I 
ment Rut,boriscs its winding up and they shall be deemed to be joint 
liqllidut0rs for the purpose of the said winning up with power to &ct 
by 8 majority of their number. 
(e) I-'or the pwposes of windiug up its affairs and for any other purpose 
neIJessary for t:nabling it to give effect to the provisions of this Act, an 10 
existillg air comp:\n~' may, after the Central Government he.s authorised 
its winding lip, retain temporarily for its own use slIch offices, books, BC-
counts and document~ and the services of such officer and other employ(,es 
on such terms lind <)onditions as may be agreed between the Corporation 
in which tbn undbrtaking has vested and the existing air compr.ny, or 16 
failing agreement, HS may be detennined by the Central Government. 
CHAPTER V 
AIR TRANSPORT COUNCIL 
29. OonatltutiOn of Air TraD8port OOUDCI1.-.&I lOOn .. may be after 
tile commencement of tb.II A.c~ the Oentrll Government may 0&1118 to be JO 
aonltttuted an Air Transport UOUIlCU CODIlstlllg of a Ohaifman and allch 
other num~r of members not ezceecUng eleven as the Oen~ Gewel'll-
ment may appoint thereto: 
Provided that amongst the members to be 10 appomted there IIhaU at 
leut be one person With experience In banclal matters and one periOD 25 
with experience in labour matters. 
30. l'unctlODl of the AIr Tr&naport OoIlncll.-(l) It shall be the duty 
of the Air Transport Council to consider-
(a) fit the request of either of the CorporatioIl.s any matter of the 
ki lid l'efeJT~'d to ill £Iection 86; and 30 
(t.) an~ D1!\.tter of importance which may be referred to it by the 
. Director Ol"n('r'll of Civil A viat.ion or the Director General of Posts 
and 'l'elt'graphs relating to matters of common interest, betwl!~n 
either of the Corporations and the Director General of Civil Aviation, 
or a8 the case may be, the Director General of Posts and 'l'elegraphq, 36 
ipclllding rates for the carriage of postal articles by ail'. !llid to ma.ke 
recommendations thereon to the Central Government. 
(2) At. the request of the Ct'ntral Government, the Air TransportCouTlcil 
shall investigate any matter relating to the fares, freight rates or other 
oharges levied by either Corporation in respeot of any service or facility pro- 40 
vided by the Corporation and of the adequacy or efficiency of such service or 
facility und shull tnnke' recommendations thereon to the Central GOVl"ro· 
meut. 
(3) The Council shall, if so required by the Central Government, tender 
advice to that Government in regHrd to financial and economic analysis, 46 
&Ccounting, costing and statistioal techniques and financial reporting relating 
to f.ir trl!DllfJort and, ill partic\llllr, IIdviRB in regard to the matters specified 
in the proviso to sub.sectiQ"n (2) of section 33. 

1-1 
(4). The Central Government, after taking any recommendation made by 
the Air Transport Council under this section into consideration, may issue 
such diTectiollS ill the matter as it thinks fit and such directions shall be 
bindit'g OIl the Corporation concerned. 
6 81. Std of the Ooandl.-'rhe Council shall have a Secretary and such 
other employees &8 t.he Central Government may appoint, and the expendi-
ture on the staff and other charges of the Council shall be borne by the Cen-
tral Government. 
82. ProceedlDp of the 00uDIU..-(1) The Council shall'regulate its own 
It procedure. 
(9) No proceeding of the Council shall be deemed to be in'V'alid by reaaoo 
merely of any "£\Oaney in, or any defect in the const.it.ution of, the Council., 
CHAPTER VI 
CONTROL 01' CKNTRAL GOVBRNDNT 
16 88. Power of Oentral Gonmmea.1 to give, d1l"ectiOlll.-(l) The Central 
GOVf'rnment may give to either of the Corporations directions &s to the 
exercise and performance by the Corporation of its functions, and the Cor--
poration shall be bound to give effect to any such directions. 
(.8) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient 
10 in the national intt'J'est 80 to do, after consultation with the OorporaiiOD 
concerned, direct eitber of t.he Corporations-
(a) to undertake any air transport service or other activity whl~ 
the Corporation bos power to undertake; 
(b) to discontinue or tnake any change in any scheduled air tra.Jlloo 
16 port Elervice or other activity which it is operating or can-ying oni' 
C c) not to undertake any act.ivity which it proposes to do: 
.Provided that, if, at the direction of the Central Government, the rJorpo.-
ratioll t'stt,blisheq. »Iterl"' or continues to maintain an air transport service or 
other activity and satisfies the Central Government that during the releva.n. 
30 financial yeur the Corporation has suffered an over-all loss in respect of the 
operation of all its air transport services and of all its other activities and 
also tlrat the service or activity so established, altered or continued to. be 
maintained in compliance with Lhe ciirections of the Central Government as 
aforesaid has- been operated at a l08S in any financial year, then the Central 
S8 Governme~lt shall reimburse the Corporation to the extent of the loss rdat-
able to the operation of that particular service or activity. 
34. PrIor approval of Oentr&l Government n8Ceuary in cert&1D C&tel.-
~either Uorporatiot! !hr.n, without the pre"iolls approval of the Central 
Uovernment--
(a) undertake any capital expenditure for the purchase or acquisi-
tion of any immovable property or aircraft or any other thing at a cos. 
exceeding rupees fifteen lakhs ; 
(b) enter into a lease of any immovable property for Q. period exceed-
ing five years; or 
(c) in any manner dispose of any property, right or privilege having 
an original or book value ex::eeding rupees ten lakhs. 

15 
85. Subml8a1on of prop-amm. of work for each y8&1'.-(1) Each of the 
~orpor&.tionll shall prepare and submit to the Central Government, not Ie .. 
tJ!'sn three months before the commencement of the finanoial ye&l' of the 
Corporation a siatplllent showing the programme of operation and develop-
ment of air transport services to be operated by the Corporation snd its 6 
I associRtrs during tht! forthcoming financial year and its other activities a. 
i well as its fin&ncilll estimates in respect thereof, including any proposed 
I investment of capital and increase in the strength of its total statl. 
(2) If, during any financial year, 'either of the Corporations engages or 
proposes to engage in any air tre.nsport servioe or ancUlary activity in addition 10 
to those specified in the programme previously submitted under sub-seotion 
(1) and a substantial alteration of the financial estimates is likely to be in-
volved tb~reby, th'1 Corpore.tion shall SUbmit to the Central Government for 
apprOTal e. supplement&ry programme of such service or activity e.nd a sup-
plementary estimate of the expenditure nnd revenue to be incurred and 1~ 
received by the Corporation in respect thereof during the remainder of that 
period: 
Provided that, to meet any l1ne!.'Pected tmffic demand or other speoial 
tt. Illation, either of the two Corporations may undertake any e.dditional ser-
! ~Cfl or other nncillhfY uctivity not specified in the programme submitted 20 
i under sub-section (1) or sub-section (9) and subsequently submit a report 
on the me.tber to the Central Government in the prescribed manner. 
nHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
38. 00rp0r&t10D8 to act la mutual conaultattOD.-It shall be the duty ~ 16 
r each of th~ Corpor:.t,jol1l) to enter into consultations with the other in matters 
. of common interest to the two Corporations including, in particular, the 
! operation of scheduled air transport services, the routes on which such ser-
. vicos should b.~ opernted hy each of the Corporations, the frequency of such 
services, the passenger fares and freight rates to be charged, the measures 30 
of economy to b~ adopted, the provision of any services in regard to over-
he.ul Bnd maintenance of aircrnft or any other matter falling within the 
scope of the functions of either of the Corporations, and. generally, in 
regard to ensurini the fullest co-operation and co-ordination in respect of 
('oIl such matters. , I 
• 87. Tr&Dlller of scheduled air transport ,emcee or· _ta frOm one oar-
poratiOll to th8 otJaer.-The Central Government ma.y, for t,he purpose of 
improving the air transport services provided by either of the Corporations 
36 
or for effecting better co-ordination in respect of such servioes, direct that 
with effect from such date as may be specified in the direction and subject 40 
to such oc.orlitioIlS as may be similarly specified,-
(a) any scheduled air transport service operated by one Corporation 
shall m longAr be operated I'y that Corporation but shall be operated 
by the other Corporation. and 
(b) any property belonging to one Corporation shall be transferred 46 
to the other Corpora.tion. 
88. Corporationa may delegate their powers.-(l) Each of the Cor-
porations may appoint a Committ.ee or Committees oonsisting of some or 
any of its members with or without the addition of any officer or employee 

10 
16 
20 
80 
36 
16 
of the UorporB~iun and deiegate any of the fun~tions and powers of the 
Corporation to such Committee or Committees and may limit the· exercisif' 
of IUch delegated authority to any specified area. 
(9) ~ither of thll Corporations may, in relation to a.ny particular hlatt':lr 
or class of matter. or to any partioular area, by general or special order, 
direct that any of its officers or other employees may also exercise all or 
~y of its powers under this Act (except the powers given to it by this sec~ 
tIon) to the extent to which the Corporation deems it necessary for the 
efficient running of its day to day administration. . 
89. AdvSaory and Labour Jl,elatlODl Oomm1t~ •• --(l) Each of t.he Cor-
pora.tions may, for the purpose of advibing it in respect of any matter re-
l&,tin~ t,(, the affairs of the Corporation appoint an Advisory Committee 
consisting of such number of persons 8S it may think fit to appoint. 
(2) Ea.ch of the. Corporations shall constitute in the prescribed me.nner 
a Labour Uelations Committee cOllsisting of represElntatives of the Corpo-
ration and of ita employees, so however that the number of representatives 
of the employees on the Committe shall not be less than the raumber o~ 
representatives of the Corpora.tion, and it shall be the duty of the LaboUr 
Relations Committee to advise the Corporation on matters which relate to 
the welfare of the employees or which are likely to promote and secure 
amity and good relations between the two. 
to. Jleetblp of the Oorpon.tiOn.-(l) Meetings . of the Corporation· 
shall be held at such times and pla.ces and, subject to sub-stlctioJls (2) and 
(3), the proceedings of the Corpol'ation shall be conducted in suoh manner 
as may be provided by the regulations. 
(2) The Chairman or in his absence any person chosen by the members 
present from amongst themselves shall preside at the meeting. 
(3) At a meeting of the Corporation all questions shall be decided by • 
majority of votes of the members present. !lnd for this purpose, each mem-
ber shall have one vote and in the case of equality of votes the Chairman 
or, in his absence, the person presiding at the meeting shall have a second 
or casting vote. 
,1. -Power \0 make rulel.-{l) The Central Government may, by notifl'.. 
cation in the Official Gazette, m~ke rules to give effect to the provisions of 
this Act_ 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the hre-
going power. such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters. 
namely:-
(/I) the terms and conditi&ns of service of the General Managers oJ 
the two Corporations; and such other categories of officers as may be 
specified from time to time under sub-section (1) of section 8. 
(b) the form in which the budget of the two Corporatiors shall ue 
prepared and submitted to the Central Government; and the form and 
t,h., manner in which the accounts of the two Corporations shan l">e 
maintained and in which anv returns or statistics shall be furnil!lhed or 
IlUbmitted; -

• u 
(0) the reports which shouid be submitted by the CorporatioDl and 
the intervals within which they shoulcJ bt: so submitted j 
(d) the maintenance of books of account; 
(6) the establishment and maintenr.nce of a fund by each of the 
two Corporations for meeting any liability arising out of any act or I 
omission in respect of which the Corporation may incur any liability to 
auy third party; 
(f) the provision of depreciation, reserve and other funds; 
(g) the prohibition of persons who are directly or indirectly in· 
teresttld ill any subsisting contract with either of the two Corporations 10 
from becoming or being employees of the Corporation; 
(h) the powers whioh may be exercised by either of the two I~or· 
porations to facilitate the acquisition of any undertaking; 
\J CJ) the training of the employees of either of the two Corpora. 
to meet any compensation payable by it under this Aot; 15 
(j) thl' trailJing of the employees of either of the two Corpor~· 
tions or other persons and the fees which may in its discretion be 
charged therefor; 
(k) the prohibition of any interference with any air transport 
service or with any property of the Corporation or of BBy interf~renoe 20 
with or ob£trllction of ally officer or employee of the Corporation in 
tho performance of his duty ~ 
(l) the punishment which shall not exceed imJ>risonment f~ 
three months or fine of rupees one thousand but whIch may consi.t 
of hoth such imprisonment and fine, in respect of any contravention Jl) 
of the provisions of any rules made under this sectlion. 
O. Powor of Oorporations to make repl&&1oa8.-(1) Each of the two 
Corporations may, with the previous approval of the Centra) Govern-
.ent, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not 
tiiconsistent with this Act or the rules made thereunder for the adminis- 30 
rtration of the affairs of the Corporation and for carrying out its functions. 
(9) In particular and withou~ prejudicte to the generality of the for&-
going power, any such regulations may p!Xlvide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely;-
(a) tbtl tirrJe &:Ild place of the meetings of the Corporation aud 3ti 
the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at such 
meetings; 
(b) the oorms and conditions of service of officers and other 
employ'3t.S of the Corporation other than the General Manager and 
officers of any ether categories referred to in section 41; ~ 
(,c) the issue of passes by the Corpora.tion . to its offiCel'B and 
other employees either free of cost or at conC8BBIonal rates for tnvel 
on its air services and the conditions relating thereto; 
.. Cd) the authentication of orders and decisions of ~ Corporation 
and the instruments executed by it; 40G 

1e 
(s) the grant of refund in re,!pect of any unused tic~ts and the 
issue of conoessional paaaea; . . 
(f) the period after ~e expiry of which uncle.imed ROods may 
be disposed of and the manner. of their dispoaal; 
5 (P). thl3 co~#i9.n~ goy~g. ~~ .ca¢Age of Pel'.liOIlS or, goods on 
ita. &eJ'(~~ .. 
-

19 
THE SCtHEDlJUll 
(Bee sectian 25) 
PalMCIPLES FOR DBTEBJ(ININOdoMPBNSATION otDBR TnIS A(lT 
.' Pdraqraph l.-T?e co~pensation which aball be given by .A~ Indi.& 
InternatIonal or Indian Alrhnes, BS the CBse may be, to any "xIsttng aIr 
company in respect of the vesiUlg,.in aaootdmce ,,"til the provisioDs of 
this Act, of the undertaking of such OOIIIPany in that Corporll.tiou "hall 
be, tllf~ sum "f the amounts computed in accordance with the proViJiODS 
of paragraph 1I, less the sum of the amounts computed in accordanoe 
with the provisions of paragraph nl. 
Atlragr4p'h Il.-(a) The aggregate written down value of ail uirfr:lmes 
of aircraft in respect of whioh there are certificates of airworthiness in 
force or which can be rendered fit for certificates of airworthiness if the 
r.?rpOrntion concerned were to incur ex:(>enditure within th~'lormal rates 
for rendering the airframes airworthy, plul-
10 
us 
A sum of Rs. 12,000/- in l'espect of each airlrame of a nakotR air-
craft and a sum of Re. 24,000/- in respect of eooh tdrfrarne of Ii Vildng 
aircraft in any case where the existing air company had obtained a cer-
tificate of airworthiness io respeot of it witbbl ninety days illlmtidiatt!ly 20 
preceding the appointed date or if a oertlhte of airworthiness had not 
actually been obtained within that period but the exfstiDg. air com-
pany had incurred expenditure within that period or the purpOfl~ of 
rendering that airframe airworthy, the v.alue of, t~e spare paris used 
for the purpose subject to a maximum of ,Ra .. 12,600/- jn the caOie of 25 
each airframe of a Dakota aircraft and B.a. 24,000/- in 'tie CBse of 
each airframe of B Viking aircraft .. 
Hou.-In ~ia S'ohedule, the expreBSion "a.irframe n luel'lldel! alap the 
equipment of the aircraft, whether fixed or removable. 
(b) the Ilggt'e~Qtewrltt~n down .. value,of. aU $U~~ ,.vower plants, ,,,,ro. 30 
en~neB, air screws, 8~are .Bero-e,n~mes, aD~, sp~e BJf, screws ~Illl or~hich 
are mtMs Schedule collectIvely referred to as power plants) as are su:tl!ohle 
for use In the airframes mentioned insub-claus~ Ca). and 88 are of II.n apprQv-
ed standard or can be re'naered fit to be or an apl)l'o'Ved lta'ldard jf the 
Corporation conoerned were to incur expenditure within the normal rates 36 
for such purposes, pluB, the fonowing, namely:-, 
(i). B su~ of RiI.6,'Ooo/-,I,n re'l!Ipec~ o~ eaoh~n~ o.f apakotB: air-
craft and a sum of lts. 12,00!)/- tn fe8})eot of etaali eDgIne of a V~kfng 
aircraft in any case where the msiing aircorripaiiy had made it an 
approved engine within a period of ninety d~s .. immed~~·IJ,J»:eoe<\i,ng ~ 
the· appointed date or if the engine had no. heen made corupletely fit 
to be an approved engine within that period but the existing air company 
had incurred expenditure within the said period for 'hep~ti of m'liking 
t.bat engine an approved engine, tlien, the valUe of the spar~ pnl'tl llsed 
for that purpose subject to B maximum of Be,' 6;OOOr In 'the MBe of ~3 
each engine of a Dakota airoraft and Rs. 19,000/- In thtl cgse of e8~h 
engine of a Viking eJrcraft; and 

10 
20 
(il) a sum of Re. 2,fXX)/-in respeot of the air screws Bnd accessories 
of the power plant of & Dakota aircraft and a sum of Rs. 4,000/- in 
respect of the air screws and acoessories of the power plant of a Viking 
aircraft in any case where the air screws and accessories had been ~'ender­
ed completely fit for the approved standa.rd within a pel'iocl of nillety 
days immediately preceding the appointed date or if the same hud lJI')t 
been rendered completely fit for that standard within that period Lut 
the existing air company had incurred expenditure withb that pcriod 
for the purpose of rendering the same fit for the approval standard, 
then, the value of the spare pa.rts used for that purpose SUbject to a 
muimum of RI. 'J,OlYJ/-in the case of air screws and acoessories of a 
Dakota aircraft and Re. 4,(0)/- in the case of air screws aud acces-
sories of a Viking aircraft. 
Note.-In this Schedule, the expression "approved standard" ,means 
16 .mch condition of efficiency of the power plant as satisfies the requirements 
laid down in Section E of SchC'dule III to the Indian Aircraft Rules, 
1987. 
(0) the coat of purchaBe of all such serviceable general stores and all such 
oth .. serviceable Btores and spare parts (all of which are in this Schedule 
20 collectively referred to as stores and spare parts) belonging to the t'xisting 
air company as are suitable for use in respect of the aircraft or power plants 
referred to in Bub-clauses (a) and (b), ,educed in each CRse oy 20 per cent. 
of such coat of purchase:, .. 
Provided that the reduotion shall be lOpe, cent. in the case of stores 
26 and spare parts pertaining" to Constellation and Skymaster aircraft. 
Note.-In this Schedule, stores shall be deemed to be semcnaHe 
only if they are IUob a8 to satisfy the requirements laid down in Section 
E of Schedule ill to the Indian Aircraft Rules, 1987; 
(d) the aggregate actual COBt to the existing air company of all lands 
30 other than lease-holds; 
(e) the total amount of the premiums paid by the company in respect 
of alI lease-holds reduced in the case of each such premium by an amount 
which bears to such premium the same proportion 88 the (·xpired tt.rm 
on the appointed date of the lease in respect of which such premium shall 
36 have been paid bears to the total term of the lease; 
(f) the scrap value of all such aircraft, power plants, propellt'l!'S and other 
accessories, spare parts and stores, not falling within any of th~ precedfI'g 
sub-clauses, and aU properties as have become obsolete on the nppointflCl 
date, the scrap value for the purposes of this Act being one per cent. 01 the 
40 book value of the relevant item of property; 
(g) ~he price paid by the existing air company for any trustee Becurity held 
by it; . 
(II) the value of any shares held by any existing air company In any (iher 
existing air company, the value being calculated on the basis of the valuation 
" of the air transport undertaking of that other company in accordsn(',8 with 
the l>rovisiona of thi. Sohedule; 

21 
(11 the market value on the appointed date or the purchase, price, 
whiohever is less, of any other investments held by any existing air compan;1 
in any concern other than another existing air company which, subject to 
the provisions of section 22, have vested in the Corporation; 
m the amount of cash held by any existing air company on the appoint-
ed date whether the deposit with a bank or otherwise; . 
(k) the amount of debts other than bad debts due to allY f·xisting air 
company, to the extent to which they are reasonably considered to be 
recoverable, less the amount of the debts, if any, excluded from the 
transfer to the Corporation concerned under the provisions of !:'..lction 22; 10 
(I) the aggregate cost of all licence fees paid by the company undt'r 
clause (0) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 154 of the Indian Aircraft Rult's, lQS7, in 
respect of the licences granted to it for the operation of any scheduled air 
J transport services and held by it on the appointed dnte Rnd which but for 
I the provisions of section 19 would continue to remain valid plus a sum ]6 
of RB. 100/- for each sllch licence: provided that the fees puid fur each 
such licence shall be reduced by an amount which bears to such fees the 
same proportion as the ppriod of the licence which shall have expired 
on the appointed dAte bORl'S to the total period of the licence; 
(m) the aggregate written down value of all tangible assets other than 20 
those falling within- the preceding clauses; 
(n) an amount Dot exceeding ten thousand rupees as may be ar:;.eed 
upon between the Corporation and the existing air company concerned or, 
failing agreement, which may ba assessed by the Tribunal, in respect of 
all such assets, intangible or otherwise, n8 do not fall within nny of the 25 
preceding sub-clauses and in respect of the loss of any future profits '" hich 
the existing air company might have earned but for the pas8in~ of tl1is Act: 
Provided that in assessing any amount under this clause regard shall 
~ be had to the following circumstances, namely:-
(i) the profits, if any, eamed by it annual1ydurin~ thf) six years 
immediately preceding the appointed date on whiph mcome-tax has 30 
been paid, 
(;,) the subsidies, if any, given to that company by the central 
Oovemmen~ during such period. ana 
(i~i) the probability or otherwise of the company :earning future 
protif.S if it wer~ allowed to continue its scheduled air transport services 3lS 
for the l'emaining period of the licence held by it after having due re-
gard to the fact that the licences held by it did not confer any mono-
poly upon it in re!lpf~ct of the routes concerned and the fact that no 
subsidy would bavp- be~n payable by the Central OQvemment after the 
Slst day of .lJecl1mber, 1952. .. 40 
B:r:pltJnafion A.-Fo1' the purposes of this Schedule, t,be written down 
• value in respect of f'Roh olnds of "saats means the aotual, cost to the existing 

~ 
.~J*ft" .:of 'iuo!1'1Uilt&t8't'9peGtively. 'IBi~ t.he total 'dep~lrl/\ti"n c..'tl1cu-
I~W 'fit 'the N!MI ''liM 'lfn ttbe '1n8ftfte1' iollowing. rta;mely'-' 
(i) in ·relifleM 0( eaoh airframe. depreciation shall be calculated at 
15 per cent per annum for Constellation and Skymaster aircraft and 18 
I per cen~ .. per annum for other aircraft from the dde on which the air-
oi'lift concemed Will fint used in revenue opera~ions by the oompany 
till the 81st day of December, 1952, the rates being applied as follows :-
fer 1Ihe itfttt year, on tbe 1icirual cost Of .aquiaition; 
torthe'seconcl year, on nn amount obtained by reducing 'from 
10 the actual eost of 8Qquisi.ion the amount of depreciation calculated 
Itt; aforesaid fIJr 'the 'Brst year; 
'tbt'ttNo1h!ft'l 'jtlitr, ~ an a'tnount obtainM by reduoiug 'from the 
,.~.'ObfiIlt 'ot "~Itftio'n lthe aggNig'llte amount df . de'pw\oiation 
~at.ea tl'I a~t8t1a for' the preceding two years: 
16 .. lOeB; 
26 
30 
"til) in rMJYect 'Of tiOwsrp'&i\ts, the depreciation shall be oalculated 
a"~ tyet c~t.' pP.t 'arinlitn for 'Coti&tenation and Sky'rn6Bt~f airdl'aft and 
.t"" f1M' 'c6k!. ~et antl\Jr.t bother aircraft from the date on ""ich thA 
power }'Ibm. 'cOt\trer'i'ltld WRiJ ~t used in revenue operations by the 
f'.IODlpany tm th" Sist dll:Y of December. 1952. the rates being applied 
as tDtlowt: "- . 
for the first year, on the actual cost of acquisition; 
for t~ ~'4 y\''ni', on 1m amouht 6btained by redwcing trom 
'\he acstMt ''8O«t Of aoqti~ition the amount of depreciation cllouta-
W 8'8 atootM'id fdttbe first yeBf; 
fw ·the ,.IHN ~at', Oft an 8m~nt oi!)teined by red'neiDf{ from 
!tIte ...... ' eo.tof Mquitition the aggregate amount of deprecia-
tion oaloulated as aforepaid for the preceding two years: 
and so on~ 
(iii) in retpeCJi of all '~e MlJetsfalling witlhiJ.\ cl&tfre (m) of 
Paragraph II. depreciation shall be calculoted at the normal annual 
tate. 'for "biola provW .. m is me,de in the Indian Income-tax Aot. 1922 
(n ell~ Imi itt the manner provided therein. but exoluding initial 
or other speoiRI depredation, from the date such 8ssets were aGquired 
or oreated by i be existing air company until the 31st day of December, 
1_: 
Provided that in respect of My '!!Ilion aSBet for which no pro-
vition has been ,nade in the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, the rat.e of 
de,te6MhMt ~htRl he to 1Wr ~.. per anntrm: 
.0 Pro>ftletl 'fttfIbIP 'thafl In ~ect of "ny tIIueb .Met S1tu.te Ofi 11!Mebold 
land MhB .. t1l. Mtt ttH1W dY\ a monthly bulB from' GbvemID~nt, the' de-
pretriatlob ...... ~ ....... 
(a) &I provided in the preceding promions of this olause, or 
(b) equivalent to an amount whioh bears the Bame ratio to the 
taW eeft of aaquilltlen ell' meaMn of the stilet (tltuate on leaseltdld 
lutl} as the fI_,"_ !pOrtion of the lease 'on the a'ppoitlted date bears. 
ta tM total poriod of the lease ourrently running, whiohever is greater. ~ 

t3 
Explanation, JJ".,-For; th~_ PUWPS~~I .tllj,J ~): .tJt.. actual cost 
shall include. in the case of airframes, in addition to the cost of purchlise 
or acqWsition.-
(i) th!} actullJ eXJwndiiure if any. inoV1'J,'~. J.>y the exiAAiU8 air 
compaily for recollvt'Tsioll or reconstruction of the aidr&Dl~ in order. IS 
to reuder it fit lor civil air transport before it was first used in .revenUA 
Q,Jerllijona by th~ COlHPt4nb',_ plUf . 
(ii) the actual expcudilure incul'J.'ed in, making ~e a4'fraQle air-
worthy before j" first use in rev,enue alterations. -
Explana.·tion C.-In the case of power plante, the actual-cost sholl in- )0 
ol~de. in audition to the co:>t of puro.1e.se or acq~~,_·th~!~ Wepl'l!ed 
by th~. cOJP.P'~I\y tor cOIlvcrsioll ur l~econd~tio~g, repairiqg,o,r- oVfi\rh,auHag. 
the power, ptant, in ord,~r to r~,(lt,r it fit £Pr the p'\1lP,08e~- oia, Qed;ifi*(\ 
under paragra.ph 4 of Sectic;m E. of Soh~dule, III to tp.e~tiilon Ajrcral~ 15 
Ru.1es, 1937, before the dat~ of its flrst Ul\e .in rev,enu~'QJl~atiQQ" 
PaTGf.TGph III.-Subjecfl to the pl'OvisioDS of eecUens • and- ~3;- aU' 
lueh liabi)ities as have been declared' by the existing air. company under 
the provisions of sectillu 22: 
Provided, that if any liability 80 d~- bal been under-st&W, the 
Corporation may recover the addiWonai amwnt froJq _, OOJDpaQy. 20 

M 
STATEMENT OF OBJEOTS AND REAEONS 
rho Gov6l'll.Olent f~r some time past have been considering the 
question as to the best manner in which the existin~ air services in 
llidia could be co-ordinated and rationalized with a View to improving 
air transport facilities. 
2. This question WQS examined by the Planning Commission in MaI, 
195~J when it, was agreed that under the present conditions of traffio 
load and intensity of operation, development of the air transpOrt indua-
trj' on an economic basis Could be achieVed only if there was a single 
agencI in charge of all scheduled air transport operations. 
8. The recommendation of the Pla.nning {;ommission has been further 
elCamined in detail. It is now proposed to acquire the undertakings of 
all the existing airt1"ansport companies and to establish two Corpora-
tions, one for the operation of long-distance international air services and 
the other for domestic air services and for services to neighbouring 
countries, such 88 Pakistan, Ceylon, Iran, Afghanistan and Burma. It 
is proposed that the undertakings of the Air-India International, Limited, 
should be acquired and the relevant air services operated by a Corpora-
tion wholly owned and managed by the State but bearin, the same 
name, viz.. Air-India Internationul. The undertaking of the other air 
compani8ll would be acquired by another State Corporation called 
. 'Indian Airline.". 
4. The two Air Corporations will take over the undertaJdngs of aU 
existing air companies as going concerns and all the jelsonnel of those 
companies who were employed by them on the 80th une, 1952, would 
be transferred to the two Corporations and their terms and conditions 
of service, unless altered by the Corporations, will continue to be the 
same. Employees appointed bonafide after that date and Jlrior to the 
date of taking over may also be taken over by the Corporat4ons. 
5. The oompensation to be paid to existing air companies for the 
acquisition of their undertakings will be based on the valuation of their 
assets after making duo allowance for all liabilities. The assets will be 
valued with reference to the cost which eaoh oompany incurred when it 
acquired a particular asset and provisiou for depreciation is made some-
what on the lines of the provisions contained in the Indian Income-tax 
Act., 1922. There are minor variations with respect to certain items of 
8ssets vi"., airoraft, aero-engines, etc. The principles of oompensation 
ar", detailed in the Schedule appended to the Bill and the amount of 
compensat.ion in the case of each company is .to be settled in agreement 
with the company on the basis of those prinCIples. In the absence of 
agreement, the sssessment of compensation would be made bS a Tribunal 
for the constitution of whif.lh provision is made in the Bill. The Tribunal 
will consist of three members appointed by the Central Government one 
of whom will be II. Judge of a High Court. 
6. For the purpose of aScertaining what liabilities actually vest in 
the two Corporations, the Bill requires existing air companies to furnish 
particulars of all their liabilities and obligations within a specified time 
and incidentally power is given to the two Oorporations to challenge 
before Tribunal any p8.rticular transaction involvin, liability if the 
tranSRCtion had not been entered into in good faith or if it was conal-
dered imprudent. 

"25 
7. Once the undertakings of the existing air Companies vest in the 
two Corporations, the operation of scheduled air transport services will 
become a monopoly of the two Corporations. 
8. It shall be the duty of each of t.he two Corporations to provide 
ufe, efficient, adequate, economical and pl'operly co-ol'dinated air trans-
port services at reaaonable charges both intemaJ and international and 
the Bill contains adequate provisions for the exercise of suitable control 
hy the Central Government on the activitie& of the two Corporations, 
which include power to issue directions. 
9. The Bill also makes the provisions for certain incidental matters 
like the setting up of an Air Transport Council to which may be referred 
matters of common interest to the two Corporations, and a Labour 
Relations Committee for promoting and securing amity and good rela-
1iioas between employers and employees. 
JAGJIV AN RAM. 
NEW DEl.HI; 
The 10th MaToh, ]953. 

26 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
'Ehe Bill involves nOll·recuuiQi aDd. reourrina 89E!Dditure to the Cell-
tral Government on the following items:-
L NOft.-ffOum"ll .~p.ftditu,.e.-(i} Payment of compenaation Va exist. 
q Air 'l'ransport Companiee-vide clauses 2ts and ~ of the Bill and 
the Schedule to the bill. The detailed ealculatioDS will ue mude 011 ~6 
bula of the principles laid doWl'\ In the Schedule. 111 is N1dmtl~d that .. 
sum not exceeding Rs. 480 lakhs may beaome payable on thfs aooount. 
Of this, about 10 per cent. is proposed to be paid in c"'1h nml, for 4.be 
balance, the CorpomtioIl8 will issue bonds bearing interests at :Si per cent. 
per &DDlUll and redeemable at par r.:t the end of five years. Both the 
intere.t and the redemption of the bonds are to be guarant~ed by the 
Ventral Uovernment. 
(ii) Administration of the Air Corporation Aot-TribuDal etc. and pro-
vision for unforeseen requirementr-Rs. 50 lakhs. 
(iii) After the C0rt.orations come in~ being. it may be DF;cessary for 
the Central Government to advance loans to finance any appfO'fed ioC!hemee 
of major re-equipment or other capital outlay. Theta will "e Il1bmitted 
to .Parliament in the normal course 8S budget demands ("ide clause 10 of 
the Bill). 
II. Recurring czpendituT6.-(I) Clause 29 of the Bill provides for the 
setting up of an Air Transport Council. The recurring exponditure on the 
Council and the stall, roughly 8!!timated at Rs. 1 lakh per annum, ~'iIl 
be met by th,~ Central Government. 
(ii) Dul'illg the initial pellod, it may be iound neoessa.ry Inr the Centrlll 
Government j;o assis~ the Corporations by means of repayable advances 
to cover the excess of expendit·ure over income. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide fer the establishment of Air Corpor8otions, to f8ooili-
tate the acquisition by the Air Oorporations of under-
takings belonging to certain existing air compani68 and 
generally to maka further and better provisions fot the 
operation of air transport services. 
The President has, in pursu80nce of olauses (1) and (3) of 
. article 117 of the Consti tiution of India., reoommended to the 
House of the People the introduction 80nd oonsider8otion of the 
Bill. 
---
(Sh,ri Jagjivan Bam, 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
M lnlster for Oommv,nfcatioM) 
GlPD-LAD-IJ6J PS-JO·S·IIS-1.7150 